UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

RECORDS

216gth

MEETING:

NEW

UN
p&4
D’.”

YEAR

1 NOVEMBER

1979

J Ui\l

3 ‘1%

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2169/Rev.l) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 31 October 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13595) .

1
1
1
1

uPV.2169

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OJiciaiRecordr of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Re’solutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2169th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 1 November 1979, at 4.30 p.m.
Presidenr:

Mr. Sergio PALACIOS

de VIZZIO

(Bolivia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2169/Rev.l)
1. Adoption
2.

I

Costa (Brazil), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba) and Mr. Tubman (Liberia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from’ Spanish): The
Council is meeting today in response to a request froni the
Permanent Representative of Angola contained in document S/13595. Members have before them also document
S/13599, containing the text of a note verbale dated 31
October from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the Secretary-General.

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 31 October 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13595)
l’2e meeting was called to order at 4.40 pm

Expression of tbanks to tbe retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: (interpretation from Spanish): As I
assume the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November, I have the honour, on behalf of the
members of the Council, of paying a tribute to my predecessor, Mr. Khwaja Mohammed Kaiser, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh. In fulfilling his duties as President of
the Council, Ambassador Kaiser earned our deep appreciation for his diplomatic talents and the tact and skill with
which he conducted the work of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 31 October 1979 from tbe Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressedto
the President of the Security Council (S/13595)
2. The PRESIDENT: (interpretation from Spanish): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Angola, Brazil, Cuba and
Liberia in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item Qn the agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Corr$a da

4. The first speaker is the representative of Angola. I now
call on him.
5. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of November.
6. Why was the United Nations created? Why was the
Security Council established? Why are Council resolutions
supposed to be mandatory? Why does the international
community gather here year after year? Why? To provide a
forum for diplomats? To provide an opportunity for politicians eager to rise in domestic politics? To provide the
occasion for speeches intended for home consumption? No,
it was not for this that the United Nations was Greated. It
was formed so that our hopes, our wants, our needs, even
our follies and our wars could all find a forum for debate,
dialogue and eventual resolution.
7. But what should I, as Permanent Representative of the
People’s Republic of Angola to the United Nations, tell the
mother of a ten-year-old child whose corpse she holds in her
arms? What should I tell the countless victims of the innumerable South African attacks?
8. I come here with a heart full of bitterness and a mind
full of rage: bitterness at the seeming or deliberate impotence of the international community to prevent the wholesale and brutal slaughter of my people and the violation of
the territorial integrity of my country; rage at the regular
attacks carried out by the racist South African vandals,
carried out with impunity, carried out with total disregard
for the opinions of this august body, carried out without
thought to the various resolutions of the Council.
9. Why is the racist butcher regime of South Africa
allowed to get away, literally, with murder? Why does the
Fascist minority Government run by Botha blithely disregard the norms of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations? What makes .the butchers and vandals of
.Pretoria so confident not only that they will not be con-

-.

-. .- _.. __ __ ..__. ___ _. ...._..

victed by this court, not only that they will be acquitted by
this jury, but that they will be exonerated? What do they
know that we do not know? Do they know that even after
the most flagrant attack on Angolan sovereignty, in the first
few days after our independence in November 1975, even
after the most brutal massacres, such as that at Cassinga in
May 1978, even after the massive aerial and ground shelling
and bombardment of our territory and our people-even
after all these invasions and acts of aggression, they will be
allowed to get away with nothing more than a gentle slap on
the wrist in the form of a mild resolution adopted by the
Security Council and thereafter consigned to oblivion in the
archives of the United Nations?

14. The timing of this attack further confirms the use of
the Cassinga tactics by the racist imperialist armed forces of’
South Africa. Whenever the international community has
appeared to be close to a negotiated settlement of the issue
of the decolonization of Namibia, South Africa has staged a
massive armed attack against Angola to try to sabotage the
process of settlement. Prior to his untimely and unfortunate
death, our beloved leader, President Agostinho Neto, the
founder of our nation, outlined a series of proposals
designed to break the deadlock on the Namibian issue. The
international community hailed these proposals and set to
work on their further clarification and eventual implementation; our new leader, President Jo& Eduardo dos Santos,
has reaffirmed Angola’s commitment to these proposals.

10. But the people of Angola will not relegate the bodies
of our best and bravest to obscurity. Their names will be
written in blood on our rolls of honour, to act as a reminder
and as encouragement to the Angolan nation to continue to
resist racism, imperialism and colonialism so long as the last
racist, the last imperialist, the last colon is alive.

15. Caught in a vice of its own racist imperialist contradictions, South Africa has resorted once more to the use of
massive military force to subvert any progress on the
Namibian question. The Pretoria junta hopes to buy more
time to establish a few more faits accomplis inside the
occupied Territory of Namibia in order more firmly to
establish the puppet group that they brought to power last
year in bogus elections. In this manner, South Africa hopes
to implement its scheme to rule over a constellation of
subservient States of which Pretoria would be the kingpin,
controlling defence and foreign affairs. A pliant Assembly
in Namibia and another at Salisbury are vital to this design.
This is why Botha declared that South Africa would be
prepared to intervene militarily even in Zimbabwe.

11. My complaint before the Council is not new; nor is the
story of the Angolan struggle to bring liberation to southern
Africa. Ever since the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to the United Nations on 1 December 1976, Angola
has raised its voice about every instance of imperialist
aggression in the third world. Guided by the Central Committee of the MPLA-Workers’ Party, the Angolan nation
has considered all anti-imperialist and anti-racist struggles
to be an extension of their own revolution. That is why the
racist minority junta at Pretoria considers the People’s
Republic of Angola such a threat to its apartheid existence.
It has quite correctly identified Angola as one of the spearheads of change in the vast ocean of imperialism that southem Africa once was. And it has further sensed that we
Angolans consider liberation and revolutionary change
indivisible: we shall none of us be free until all of us are free.

16. On 27 July this year the Secretary-General submitted
to the Security Council information compiled by my
Government on the human casualties and material and
other damage resulting from repeated acts of aggression by
South Africa against the territorial integrity of Angola from
27 March 1976 to 11 June 1979 [S/134731. In fact, from
November 1975 to the present the racist South African
armed forces have maintained constant military pressure on
our sovereign border, characterized by violations and air
bombing, landing of troops by helicopter, border provocations, infantry attacks supported by armoured car units,
artillery shelling and the mining of agricultural fields,
bridges and highways, in addition to the looting of various
kinds of equipment and means of production. The loss of
human lives, the death of Angolan children, civilians and
refugees and of our brave FAPLA soldiers, cannot be measured in statistics. Our losses in financial terms alone total
approximately $393 million. In fact, the South African
reaction to Security Council meetings on the present issue
has been most explicit and unequivocal. For example, on 28
March 1979 the Council adopted resolution 447 (1979). On
29 March two South African Mirage-III aircraft bombed
Angolan territory with napalm bombs.

12. The South African attacks in the past few days against
Angola are nothing new. We have long been subjected to
these attacks-indeed since 1975. However, the extent of
these armed attacks and the damage they have inflicted
necessitated my requesting an urgent meeting of the Security Council.
13. In this latest series of armed attacks, 19 Puma helicopters landed racist South African troops in Angola. A massive airborne and ground-troop assault was launched on 28
October on the southern provincial towns of Port0 Alexandre,Mo@medes and Lubango, which left 18 civilians and
two soldiers of FAPLA [PopularArmedForcesfor
thefiberation of Angola] dead. The South African armed forces
aimed at the destruction of vital economic sites at Leba,
where they attacked and destroyed railroad tracks, blockading others at Moclmedes. The tunnel leading to railways at
Leba, four bridges, five automobiles and one bus in the
MocAmedes area were destroyed. At Port0 Alexandre, 11
Puma helicopters landed close to 150 soldiers of South
African special troops, who carried out acts of sabotage,
blockading main highways and subjecting the unarmed
population to criminal acts of intimidation. Railway tracks
adjoining Lubango, Covango and Tengo were also destroyed, and mines were planted in highways through
Lubango, Jamba and Tchamutete.

17. According to the South African White Paper on
defence released in March 1979, Pretoria’s defence strategy
is to prepare for total war-yes, for total war-against the
people and territory of Angola, against the people of Namibia and the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO), the liberation movement, against the possibility
of majority rule in Zimbabwe and the victory of the Patriotic Front: in short, against black Africa and African plans
for the liberation of our entire continent.
2

18. South Africa’s racist imperial& actions are predicated
on its diplomatic, political, military and economic ties with
the Western Powers. Without the latter’s active participation and assistance, South Africa’s minority r&ime and
upmheid structure could not survive, let alone be militarily
powerful enough to attack the free and sovereign States
surrounding it. On every appropriate occasion my delegation has presented evidence to the international community
on the economic ties between South Africa and the industrialized Western countries and how those economic links
allow South Africa to perpetuate the inhuman apartheid
system, deny to its majority inhabitants their human and
national rights and expand its military activities beyond its
borders. The participation of foreign economic interests in
the apartheid system in South Africa and in Namibia and
the direct connexion of those economic interests and activities with the denial of human rights in South Africa and
Namibia have been amply documented.

for the enrichment of uranium perfected by a West German
scientist, Mr. Erwin W. Becker, at the nuclear research
centre of the Federal Republic of Germany located at Karlsruhe. At Koeberg in Duynefontein in the Western Cape a
2,000-megawatt power station is under construction, to be
completed by 1984-a sinister date. This $2 billion project
consists of two l,OOO-megawatt nuclear-power reactors
which are being built by a French consortium,
FRAMATOME.

19. South Africa’s nuclear capability is no secret. Jt is
immaterial whether the nuclear explosion of last week was
by South Africa or by some other State. What is undeniable
is that South Africa does have the nuclear capability and
has acquired it from the West. There is evidence of Western
collaboration, specifically with the United States, the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Belgium and Israel,
in the following ways: the training of, and exchanges with,
South African scientists involved in the nuclear sector, and
the granting of visas to them; the conclusion of contracts
and agreements concerning uranium extraction and pro
cessing in South Africa; the importing of South African
and/or Namibian uranium; the reprocessing of South Afiita’s nuclear fuel, and particularly the provision of plutomum for it; the provision of financial, economic and other
forms of support for South Africa’s nuclear, ancillary and
related industries; the transfer of technology and the provision of equipment and financial support for South Africa’s
uranium enrichment programme, including the separation
of isotopes. In fact, the Seminar held inlondon in February
1979* concluded that

23. None of the foregoing would have been possible without the substantial collaboration of the West, although this
was disguised as “peaceful” development of nuclear power.
How does one explain “peaceful” development to the victims of a nuclear attack?

22. South Africa’s uranium resources, including those illegally exploited in Namibia, not only feed Pretoria’s engines
but also are a vital link in its ties to the West. South Africa
already has available nuclear delivery systems in the form of
aircraft and short-range missiles and rockets which can
cover substantial portions of southern Africa. Already in
1977 it was clear that South Africa had constructed a
nuclear explosion test facility in the Kalahari Desert.

24. The credibility of those countries which are actively
involved in the search for a negotiated settlement in southem Africa is rendered suspect by the existence of this
nuclear collaboration. This is also one explanation of the
inordinate attention given to the nuclear plans of such
countries as Brazil and Pakistan, while disapproval of the
rapid nuclear build-up in South Africa has been muted.
25. I have devoted all this time to South Africa’s nuclear
threat to Africa because Pretoria’s nuclear capability will
play an increasingly major role in its efforts to stave off
change, to protect its apartheid system and minority rule, to
threaten sovereign States and genuine liberation movements and prevent them from dismantling the racist and
imperialist structure of the Broederbond and the Botha
regime.

“In view of ,the nature and record of the apartheid
regime, no international or bilateral safeguards, including the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguard
system and the system of control of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons . . . are adequate.” [See S/13157, para. 203, point IO.]

26. In addition to the military and political clout that its
nuclear power gives it, South Africa gains a number of
tactical and strategic options in its war against independent
neighbouring States and liberation movements. For example, as part of its “forward defence” military strategy, South
Africa is poised to deploy tactical nuclear weapons of certain varieties. Further, the more South Africa feels engulfed
and threatened by the tide of liberation and change sweeping southern Africa the more it will be tempted to use a
nuclear response.

20. I should like at this point to elaborate a little on South
Africa’s nuclear activities. Its main such facility is at Pelindaba, which contains various plants, in addition to the
nuclear power station under construction at Duynefontein.
21. South Africa has two nuclear reactors: Safari-I. a
20-megawatt unit which utilizes highly enriched uranium,
more than 90 per cent U-235, and which has been in operation since 1965, and Pelindaba Zero, which went critical in
1967. The first nuclear reactor was provided by the United
States; the second was manufactured in South Africa. South
Africa has a pilot uranium hexafluoride plant as well as a
pilot uranium enrichment plant. At the latter, South Africa
developed its own application of the jet-nozzle technique
1 United
Africa.

Nations

Seminar

on Nuclear

Coliaboration

with

27. This hydra-headed monster has to be effectively combated. We have the means, the tools and even the political
will of the majority of the Security Council’s members.
However, according to the rules of the game, we need a
unanimous vote, a mandatory resolution without abstentions, without a veto, that will force South Africa to abandon its military adventurism and acts of aggression in
southern Africa. The Council must call for total sanctions
against Pretoria and we must have an effective mechanism
which will monitor the application and implementation of
those sanctions.

South

3

28. I speak in sorrow and in anger-sorrow
for the thousands who suffer under the apartheid system and who die in
racist attacks, sorrow for the sabotage of the national reconstruction activities of our young Republic, sorrow for the
civilian refugees massacred in camps and schoolrooms, and
anger at the tacit permission enjoyed by South Africa, by
default or otherwise, to pursue its imperialist and racist
policies, anger at Western connivance in South Africa’s
adventurism, with no regard for the movements and causes
which are Africa’s own, and anger over the annual dividends and profit sheets which appear to dictate so much of
the West’s policies.

once again concerning South Africa’s aggression against
Angola. We are confident that, under your leadership and
through your wisdom, justice will prevail in the outcome of
our deliberations and will enable positive actions to be
taken.
35. Africa appreciates the speed with which the Council
has moved in order to be able to hold this meeting this
afternoon. If there were any who doubted Africa’s and the
third world’s faith and trust in the United Nations in general
and in the Security Council in particular, the recent and still
unfinished elections in the General Assembly to fill a seat on
the Council show clearly that, for the third world, the moral
and legal authority of this great Organization remains as
high and as important as ever.

29. Mr. President, through you I should like to tell the
Western collaborators of South Africa that they are sadly
out of touch with Africa. If and when any of the third-world
continents explodes into war, annual dividends will not save
the Western transnational corporations; in fact South
Africa will not be able to save its Western friends from the
holocaust that will ensue. The tragedy is that neither you
nor I, neither we nor they, will survive.

36. The Security Council is the most prestigious and
authoritative of the organs of the United Nations, entrusted
as rt 1sby the Charter with the authority to take mandatory
decisions. But our esteem for the Council derives not only
from the binding character of its authority but also from the
moral and ethical foundations on which its decisions must
rest. Nothing less than the highest morality can give to this
or any other body the authority to determine a question so
grave as whether a breach of or threat to the peace of the
world has occurred. Because we respect the Security Council so much, we would be the first to say and agree that it is
not to be approached lightly or upon the slightest disturbance or provocation.

30. To prevent that Armageddon, we have to take effective action now, in the form of a resolution asking for total
sanctions, as envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Pretoria’s policies and actions are a threat not to southern
Africa alone but to the entire continent and hence to the
international community. Such a resolution may be an
answer, partial and perhaps not entirely satisfactory, to
those hundreds of bereaved mothers and those thousands of
newly-orphaned
whom my Government must face in
Angola. That may also be an answer that the movement of
non-aligned countries seeks in its attempt to solve globai
and regional issues; it may be an answer that the Organization of African Unity seeks as it faces imperialist, racist and
neo-colonialist activity in its continent; and it may be an
answer to the third world, of which both you and I are
members, Mr. President, as it faces situations imposed on it
by Western economic and military imperialism.

37. I am speaking in this manner because, in the course of
this year alone, Angola has more than once been compelled
to lodge grave complaints against South Africa before the
Council regarding flagrant armed attacks against its territory and the barbaric killing of scores of defenceless innocent Angolan citizens. Those complaints, let me stress, are
not prompted by separate and isolated occurrences; they
are caused by continuing outrages by South Africa against
not only Angola and other front-line ,States but all the
independent States of Africa. Only last month, for the first
time, one of Angola’s provincial capitals was savagely
bombed and many people were killed; and now, just four
days ago, according to reports from Angola, about 19
helicopters landed South African troops on Angolan soil
and a massive assault by airborne and ground troops was
launched in the southern provincial towns of Port0 Alexandre, Mo@medes and Lubango. This.left 18 civilians and
two soldiers of FAPLA dead. South ,African forces destroyed railroad tracks and blockaded other tracks in the
region. They destroyed the tunnel leading to the railways at
Leba, four bridges, five automobiles and one bus. At Port0
Alexandre the South African troops carried out acts of
sabotage, blockading main highways and subjecting the
unarmed civilian population to criminal acts of intimidation. Numerous other acts of vandalism and destruction
were carried out.

31. I bring my country’s complaint before the Security
Council, but we are not part of the problem; we are part of
the solution of the issues that plague southern Africa.
32. Finally, if I may quote Burke, “The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do
nothing”- and we are all of us good men, I hope. Until final
victory-and
may it not be a final nuclear holocaust
unleashed by South Africa-a
hta continua.
33. The PRESIDENT (interpretution~om
Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Liberia, who wishes to
be allowed to speak on behalf of the current President of the
Organixation of African Unity. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
34. Mr. TUBMAN (Liberia): Mr. President, my delegation would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. It is
most appropriate that your country, a member of the nonaligned movement with which Africa is so closely identified,
should be presiding over the deliberations of the Council at
this time when Angola and, indeed, all members of the
Organization of African Unity are approaching the Council

38. The serious nature of those attacks derives not only
from the savagery and suddenness .with which they were
carried out, or from the fact that they have been repeated
and intensified; those acts are particularly serious and of
grave concern to Africa because their timing indicates that
they are aimed at intimidating not only the brave Angolan
people but also the Governments of all the front-line States,
4

SO as unjustly to intensify the pressure upon the Patriotic
Front negotiators at the constitutional taiks in London and
upon the leaders of SWAP0 in the talks-which
are stalemated, though not through any action of theirs-that
form
part of the ongoing attempts to implement the United
Nations plan for the peaceful transition of Namibia to
independence.

rest of the country. We do not know exactly the extent of the
damage to the homeland of President Agostinho Neto-of ’
undying memory-nor
do we know for a fact whether the
South African bandits have withdrawn from the territory of
that fraternal country. But there can be no doubt about how
these international criminals were received: they were met
with determined and heroic resistance.

39. But South Africa’s acts of savagery will not intimidate
the freedom fighters in southern Africa or cause them to
surrender; nor will those acts oblige the front-line States to
abandon the freedom fighters. Africa, for its part, will stand
united in the struggle for the total liberation of southern
Africa, and we appeal to all nations to support the causes of
right and justice which are at stake in that unhappy portion
of our continent today, as never before. We call upon those
who are aiding South Africa to murder innocent Africans to
listen to their conscience while there is still time.

45. It is now common knowledge that the southern African racist regimes are surviving thanks solely to the economic, financial, military, diplomatic, technological and
other forms of support given them by certain Western
Powers. And the latter in turn are benefiting from the
exploitation by the white minority regimes at Salisbury and
Pretoria of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa itself. The entire strategy is aimed at maintaining
imperialist and neo-colonialist dominion over the States of
southern Africa and the territories that they illegally
occupy, against the will of the international community and
the expressed decision of their inhabitants.

40. Finally, we call upon the Security Council to discharge
its duty under the Charter and to history by taking decisive
actions, including actions provided for under Chapter VII
of the Charter, to end once and for all the growing and
serious threats which the apartheid regime continues to pose
to the peace of southern Africa, the African continent and
the entire international community.

46. It is impossible not to be suspicious at the coincidence
of this latest aggression against Zambia and Angola, and
holding of negotiations in London on Zimbabwe and the
forthcoming consultations on the socalled United Nations
plan for Namibia. That coincidence should come as no
surprise to us. Whenever there seems to be the possibility of
a peaceful negotiated settlement of the questions of Zimbabwe and Namibia, the racist regimes and their allies find a
way of torpedoing that possibility, managing in one way or
another to make it impossible for the people in those countries to exercise their inalienable rights to self-determination
and independence.

41. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba, who will be
speaking as Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of the
nonaligned countries. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
42. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanikh): Mr. President, first of all, I wish to present to you our
compliments as you assume the presidency of the Security
Council. May I thank also you and the other members of
the Council for allowing me to speak in my capacity as
Chairman of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the non-aligned
countries.

47. With a rapacity worthy of a Hitler, Vorster, Smith and
company have sucked the blood of the front-line countries
with impunity, but those countries, heedless of the odds
against them and willing to make any sacrifice, have never
hesitated to offer asylum in their countries to the refugees
from Namibia and Zimbabwe and material and political
assistance to the fighters of SWAP0 and the Patriotic Front
in their just struggle against colonial oppression and
apartheid.

43. This is not the first time that the Council has had to
take up a complaint by an African country regarding military aggression by the racist Government of South Africa.
Over the last few years we have seen how the South African
and Rhodesian racists, like thieves in the night, have
stepped up their incursions into the front-line countries, and
in particular into Angola, Mozambique and Zambia. Not
so very long ago, the plenary meeting of Permanent Representatives of the non-aligned countries to the United
Nations unequivocally condemned the cunning attack of
the South African and Rhodesian troops against Zambia.
Today the representative of the People’s Republic of
Angola has summoned us as a matter of urgency to consider
the complaint of his Government regarding the new violation of Angola’s territorial integrity by the Fascist army of
Pretoria.

48. One cannot be misled. This new, reprehensible and
cowardly attack by South Africa against Angola is no
isolated event with the sole object of shedding innocent
blood and destroying the property so selflessly created by
the Angolan people. It is part and parcel of an over-all plan
aimed at preventing the liberation of Namibia, Zimbabwe
and the African people of South Africa and hindering the
independence of Angola, Mozambique, Tanzania, Botswana and Zambia, in order to guarantee the racist and
neo-colonial domination of South Africa in the southern
part of the continent.
49. Sinister proof of this policy was provided by the report
regarding the possible explosion by South Africa of a
nuclear device towards the end of last September. Whether
it is true or not-and we are not convinced by the denials of
Pretoria and its imperialist allies-it is obvious to everyone
that the Pretoria regime, with the assistance of well-known
Western Powers and Israel, has acquired the necessary
technological capability to produce nuclear weapons. That

44. According to news from the international agencies,
South African troops, which had been transported by
helicopter, invaded the Angolan provincial towns of
Moclmedes, Port0 Alexandre and Lubango on 28 October,
causing serious loss of life and material damage. They
destroyed four bridges and cut off communications with the
5

in itself constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security.

to intimidate the Angolan Government, whose people so
gallantly and at the cost of immense sacrifice has sought to
build its economy after centuries of colonial rule.

50. The facts presented to the Council for its consideration cannot fail to arouse serious concern on the part of the
international community. The members of the Council
have a grave responsibility. Once again they must confront.
the naked truth of death and destruction caused by a
Government whose racist policy and practices have been
repeatedly condemned by the General Assembly and by the
Council itself, without its being possible to implement the
sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter or to
establish an effective cordon sanitaire, notwithstanding the
demands of the international community. But it is possible
for the Council to put an end to all the aggression, degrading treatment and various crimes perpetrated by the racist
minorities of Salisbury and Pretoria against the peoples of
Africa and, indeed, against every honourable human being.

58. The news that reached us indicates an unprecedented
military escalation of South Africa’s armed f&es, which
have caused more destruction and the death of innocent
people. According to the official reports, vital economic
sites at Leba, Mo@medes, Lubango, Covango and Tengo
have suffered heavily from the consequencesof this intrusion.
59. How much longer will the international community
allow this situation to continue and permit the racist authorities of Pretoria to carry out a policy of defiance of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations? How much
longer, in other words, is the Security Council prepared to
condone aggression without resorting to coercive measures
as provided for in Chapter VII and which, time and again,
have been called for by the General Assembly7

5 1. The non-aligned countries, which represent the will of
the overwhelming majority of States Members of the
Organization, hope that the members of the Council will
punish the perpetrators of this new crime against the Pee
ple’s Republic of Angola and will apply, strictly and justly,
the legal instruments provided for in the Charter.

60. The condoning of such acts of aggression by the United Nations, without the adoption of the options provided
for in the Charter, will encourage the Pretoria regime to
continue in its complete disregard of world public opinion,
thus severely undermining the prestige and credibility of the
United Nations. The paralysis of the Security Council, we
have no doubt, will certainly aggravate the instability and
insecurity that loom in that part of Africa and invite outside
interference, adding an extremely dangerous threat to international peace and security.

52. It is time to move from words to deeds. The very
prestige and credibility of the United Nations are at stake.
53. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Brazil, whom I invite to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

61. Brazil wishes to add its voice to the voices of those who
in the Security Council and elsewhere have espoused the
need for new and decisive action beyond resolution 418
(1977), which has proved insufficient against South Africa.

54. Mr. CORNEA da COSTA (Brazil): It is especially
gratifying for me to address the Security Council under
your presidency, Sir, as the representative of Bolivia, a sister
nation with which my country has the closest relations.
Your talents and well-known proficiency are the best guarantees of the successof the Council’s business during the
month of November.

62. It is all the more regrettable that this recent escalation
may severely affect the results of the late President Agostinho Neto’s final efforts to reach a negotiated independence for Namibia. Judging from these unfortunate events,
one is led to believe that the South African Government is
determined to thwart the incessant, repeated attempts made
by the Secretary-General to implement a peaceful plan for
the independence of that Territory.

55. The Security Council has been convened today to
examine another complaint by an African State Member of
the Organization concerning the armed aggression of
another Member State, South Africa, whose policies of
arrogant defiance ofthe Charter and total disregard for the
Organization it is not necessary to recall.

63. To the delicate situation created by the constant acts
of aggression committed by South Africa one should add a
new fact which was recently made public and which, if
confirmed, would corroborate the urgency of new steps to
curb the dangerous policies of the Pretoria authorities. I
refer to the prospective acquisition of a nuclear-weapon
capability by South’ Africa which, in the opinion of my
Government, would be a matter of the utmost concern.

56. It was with indignation that Brazil learned of the latest
action carried out by the racist regime of Pretoria against a
newly independent country, to which we feel closely attached by so many ties of an ethnic, historical and cultural
nature. It would thus be impossible for us to remain silent
while our Angolan brothers are being victimized by a brutal
aggression perpetrated by a regime whose foundations run
contrary to the Brazilian tradition of a multiracial society
that takes pride in its African heritage.

64. The facts exposed by Ambassador de Figueiredo are
clear and simply confirm what, over a number of years, has
become a recognized pattern of behaviour by a country
which has come to be regarded opprobriously by the world
community.

57. We should be neither surprised nor dismayed by the
latest of South Africa’s act. It reflects, in our view, an
additional and deliberate attempt to impose by military
force South Africa’s determination to perpetuate the present illegal occupation of Namibia, to disrupt all efforts to
achieve independence for that Territory by negotiation, and

65. The Brazilian people and Government wish to add
their voice to the demand for the condemnation of South
Africa for this unjustifiable act of aggression and for material compensation for the damage inflicted on Angola. We
6

that have been undertaken have been of considerable scope,
involving regular army detachments and broad use of various types of offensive military technology. There have been
numerous human losses and casualties and a considerable
amount of material damage has been inflicted.

are confident that the Security Council will respond positively to any initiative inspired by the need to provide
Angola with the necessary assurances that the Council will
live up to its responsibilities.
66. Before concluding, let me unequivocally pledge Brazil’s solidarity with the Angolan people whose grief we share
for the blood shed in the defence of their territorial integrity
and independence.

72. In this attack on administrative centres in the’south of
Angola, the South African militarists used 19 military helicopters, various kinds of firearms and mines and about 200
parachutists, who killed 18 peaceful inhabitants and two
soldiers of the Angolan army, destroyed and blew up peaceful targets-bridges,
tunnels, railways, railway carriages,
cars, buses-blocked
the main motorways and mined them
and terrified the defenceless population.

67. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationfiom Russian): First of all, permit
me to congratulate you, Sir, a distinguished diplomat, on
your assumption of the important responsibilities of President of the Security Council for November and express the
hope that, under your skilful leadership, the Council will
adopt effective decisions that will facilitate the strengthening of international peace and security, Permit me also to
express my gratitude to the representative of Bangladesh,
Ambassador Kaiser, for the successful performance of his
duties as President of the Council last month.

73. From the list of these facts it is abundantly clear that
South Africa’s aggression was carried out against peaceful
targets and the civilian population, and not against military
bases or detachments of the regular army.
74. There can be no doubt about the reasons for this act of
aggression by the Pretoria racists against independent
Angola. Whatever trumped-up arguments and pretexts the
Sbuth African authorities might resort to in their attempt to
cover up or to justify it, the true facts underlying their
intrusion into Angola are quite obvious. Worried about the
success of the national liberation movement in southern
Africa, and this includes the activities of the movement in
illegally occupied Namibia, the racist regime is resorting to
the most criminal methods: armed aggression against neighbouring independent African States in an attempt to intimidate them, and to instil in them the idea that they will
continue to be subjected to aggression by the racist State if
they do not refrain from assisting the national liberation
movements in Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa itself.

68. The Security Council has met today to consider the
question of the aggression of South Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola. From the facts set forth here by
the representative of Angola, as well as by other representatives, we can draw an entirely clear and definite conclusion:
what we are faced with here is an unprovoked and naked act
of aggression by the racist r&me of Pretoria against a
young independent State of Africa, Angola.
69. The history of the aggressive acts of South Africa
against that country goes back a long way. During the
period from 1976 to 1979, South African regular troops
killed at least 570 Angolan citizens and wounded 594, most
of whom were peasants. Furthermore,
they killed 198
inhabitants of Zimbabwe and wounded 600, killed 612
Namibians and wounded 611. For the same period South
Africa carried out 193 mining operations, 94 violations of
air space, 21 armed incursions, 21 acts of frontier provocation, 7 artillery bombardments, 25 attacks by army detachments, 24 air raids and one major large-scale combined
operation involving army and air force units. The total
estimated value of the damage and losses inflicted on
Angola for the period under consideration amounts to
aws 293,304,ooo.

75. By their constant armed attacks on Angola the Pretoria authorities hope to undermine the process of social and
economic reform which is evolving so successfully in that
country, so as to complicate its economic situation and
shake the faith of the broad masses of the people in the
possibility of the successful development of the country
through the course of action they have chosen.
76. In this regard, it is worth while recalling that the
Ministry of Defence of the Republic of South Africa, as
reported by the press in African countries, has prepared a
special plan of preventive action against independent African States, and in this regard is effecting major purchases of
modem military technology in Western countries.

70. As we know, the Security Council has repeatedly considered the question of Souih Africa’s aggressive actions
against Angola. In March of this year the Council adopted
resolution 447 (1979), in which it categorically condemned
the racist r@ime of South Africa for its premeditated, persistent and sustained armed invasions of the People’s
Republic of Angola, which constituted, as the resolution
stated, “a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country as well as a serious threat to
international peace and security*‘. In that resolution the
Council also called upon South Africa to “cease immediately its provocative armed invasions against the People’s
Republic of Angola and . . . respect forthwith the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country*‘.

77. It is quite clear that the South African racists would
not be able to carry out such an arrogant aggressive policy if
they did not feel the support of the United States, Britain
and other NATO countries behind them. This support has
even been felt here in the Security Council. For thii reason,
and for this reason alone, the Council has hitherto been
unable to adopt effective measures against the aggression of
the South African racists.
78. The aggressive actions of South Africa against Angola
and other African States represent a serious threat to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of those countries and
to peace and security in southern Africa, and are also aimed

71. The current escalation of armed attacks against
Angola is revealed by the fact that the aggressive actions
7

at preserving the last bastions of colonialism and racism in
that region.

83. I should also like to say that my delegation very much
appreciates the way you conducted the brief consultations
which preceded this formal meeting of the Council. We all
know that in you we have a President who will certainly
discharge successfully the weighty responsibilities of the
Council. Please accept the sincere assurance of my delegation’s w-operation.

79. The present act of aggression in Angola is a link, and a
very important one, in the chain of actions which have
recently been so actively undertaken in the most varied
quarters to halt or slow down the process of the national
liberation of the peoples of southern Africa, or at least to
divert it into a channel which will suit the colonialist and
imperialist forces. This course is manifested in the manoeuvres which are being undertaken with the idea of hindering
the attainment by the people of Namibia of their genuine
freedom and independence. These actions have also found
expression in attempts to impose surrender plans on the
national patriotic forces of the people of Zimbabwe.

[The speaker continued in EngIish]

84. I should like also to express my homage to the previous President of the Council, the representative of Bangladesh, for a presidency that for all of us was an exampleand,
I would venture to add, also a relief.
85. My delegation may return in moredetail to the subject
under discussion at a later stage in this debate. We had no
intention of speaking today, but when we heard from the
representative of Angola of the most recent acts of aggression committed by South Africa against the territory of his
country, those facts by themselves were enough to force us
to express today to the Government and the people of
Angola our solidarity and also our sorrow for the loss of life
and all the suffering inflicted upon the innocent people of
that country. Once again we are therefore bound to express
our strong condemnation of those acts of violence against
the people, the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of an
African country to which we are united by strong bonds of
mutual friendship and respect.

80. The delegation of the Soviet Union reafliis its unreserved support for the People’s Republic of Angola in the
struggle which it is waging against the encroachments by the
racist regime on its sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
Soviet delegation vigorously condemns the armed actions
of the racist regime of South Africa against Angola and
believes that the time has come to implement paragraph 7 of
resolution 447 (1979), which provides that the Council can
“determine the most effective sanctions in accordance
with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations so as to ensure the cessation by South
Africa of its acts of aggression against Angola and other
front-line States*‘.

86. In this spirit, I should like to conclude these very brief
remarks by stating that my delegation will not fail to cooperate with the other members of the Council in their
attempt to formulate an appropriate response to these acts
and to the problems of liberating the southern part of Africa
from the racialism and colonialism which are at their origin.

81. in this regard the delegation of the Soviet Union
believes that the Security Council should not only condemn,
with the utmost vigour the actions of South Africa against a
sovereign State Member of the Organization, namely
Angola, but also provide for the adoption of effective and
concrete measures under Chapter VII of the Charter in
order to call a halt to the actions of the aggressor. As
experience has shown, the Council has no other way of
forcing South Africa to end its aggressive policy with regard
to Angola and to respect the views of the international
community.

87. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): I thank you very sinccreiy
and gratefully for the kindness you showed me in your
opening words, and for the honour you have done to my
country. I thank also my colleagues around this table who
have spoken in a similar vein. I deeply appreciate and
cherish these kind gestures.

82. Mr. PUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, you are assuming the

88. Mr. President, permit me to thank you as President of
the Council, and to thank all my colleagues and the
Secretary-General and his staff for the sincere and unstinted
co-operation extended to me during my term as President.

presidency of the Security Council at a difficult time in the
course of Bolivian affairs. I should like to tell you that my
delegation hopes that the Bolivian family will achieve reconciliation in friendship very soon.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

8

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente
dans
les
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
de votre
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Gen&ve.
IiBAAHIiR

KAK

IIOJIYWfTb

IIsnamn
s*Hax
aaueld
Haqnk.

Ooranrwasaw
06’be&uuiewwx
HauaR
MO~XO
ayna~b
H areHrcraax
so scex
pationax
aaapa.
Hasonare
cnpasaa
amirn~o~
Maras5me
wnf nmu~Te
no anpecy:
Opranasauma
Cexqwfl
no nponazce
HsAaHaR,
HbH)-FIopa
HI~W JKeeeaa.

COMO

CONSEGUIB

PIJBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
pa&es
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OPl’AHU3AIWH

librairies
libraire

DE

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S.

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OlZ’bEAHHEHHhIX

LAS

NACIONES

HAUMII
a KHH~~~.IX
Sara06 HJLI~HHIIX
a
06’beAaneHribzx

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

distributors
Nations,
Sales

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-April

1982-2.250
