S/2013/35

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 January 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 18 January 2013 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 17 January 2013 from the
President of the Commission of the Economic Community of West African States,
Kadré Désiré Ouedraogo (see annex). The letter asks the Secretary-General to provide
“any urgent and concrete measures” to support the deployment of an African-led
International Support Mission in Mali in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2085 (2012).
I should be grateful if you would bring this information to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

13-21103 (E) 210113

*1321103*

S/2013/35

Annex
The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) is seriously
concerned by the situation in Mali, with the recent deterioration in the security
situation due to the attacks perpetrated by extremist groups, despite efforts made to
find political solutions to the crises in Mali.
In these grave circumstances, and further to the welcome response of the French
Government to the request of the Malian Government, the ECOWAS Commission
has taken a number of measures in order to accelerate its support to the Government
and people of Mali to preserve Mali’s territorial integrity and to combat terrorism.
In this context and in conformity with previous decisions of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union and the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of
State and Government on Mali, further to the request of the Malian authorities, and
in accordance with Security Council resolution 2085 (2012) of 20 December 2012,
authorizing the deployment of an African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA), I am pleased to inform you that the deployment of AFISMA is under
way, with the mandate as provided in resolution 2085 (2012), taking into account
the changed context on the ground. I would recall the recent press statement of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union of 14 January 2013, commending
ECOWAS member States that have swiftly deployed troops to Mali as part of
AFISMA.
AFISMA is led by General Shehu Abdelkadir as Force Commander, who
deployed to Mali on 12 January, along with the Deputy Force Commander, the Police
Commissioner and his Deputy. They are initiating the establishment of the force
headquarters, and preparing the ground for the arrival of AFISMA troops and
personnel, amounting to 3,300 elements. Troops will begin to arrive this week from
four troop-contributing countries, namely, Burkina Faso, the Niger, Nigeria and Togo.
Other African countries have also indicated their intention to contribute troops,
and ECOWAS continues to work with the African Union in generating additional
contributions.
These troops will need urgent and significant logistical support and I would
recall our previous request for logistical support for AFISMA. We understand that
you will shortly be submitting a letter to the Council further developing and refining
options for a voluntary and United Nations-funded logistics support package. We
would be happy to provide any information that you would require in this regard.
However, in the spirit of Security Council resolution 2085 (2012) and in the
light of the drastic situation necessitating to urgently respond effectively, we would
be grateful if you could consider providing any urgent and concrete measures to the
initial deployment of AFISMA pending a Security Council decision on a United
Nations logistical support package.
We welcome the continued support the United Nations has been providing for
the planning and preparations for the deployment of AFISMA, further to Security
Council resolutions 2071 (2012) and 2085 (2012), and look forward to our continued
and close cooperation, including in the establishment of a force headquarters in Mali,
as the deployment proceeds.
(Signed) Kadré Désiré Ouedraogo
President of the Commission

2

13-21103
