S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8375th meeting

Thursday, 18 October 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Cordova Soria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Bieke
Ms. Avomo Sima
Mr. Gebru
Mrs. Philippe
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almowaizri
Ms. Algra
Mr. Talavera
Mr. Zawieja
Mrs. Gilmutdinova
Mr. Lundkvist
Ms. Fink
Ms. Sutton

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-32801 (E)
*1832801*

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Costa Rica to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I am addressing the Council today as a main
stakeholder in today’s agenda item, given that the Arab
Syrian Golan is under Israeli occupation. As such, allow
me, Madam President, to deliver my statement in full.
It has been more than seven decades since Israel
occupied the Palestinian territories and unleashed the
tragedy and misery of more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees who have been expelled from their country
and dispossessed of their land, homes and livelihood.
For more than seven decades, some countries, including
members of the Security Council, have been relentlessly
attempting to legitimize the odious Israeli occupation,
which on 5 June 1967 spread to the Syrian Golan.
Those attempts were recently crowned by the launch of
provocative deals and initiatives.
The question we must ask ourselves now is: How
many decades must the Israeli occupation continue
before some finally admit that the Security Council
must take serious action to bring it to an end? How
many more innocent lives must be lost before some
are convinced that the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories is indeed the root cause of instability in our
region? There is a long list of questions I could ask in
this regard.
My Government wishes to reaffirm its consistent
and principled position of support for the Palestinian
people in their aspirations to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent State throughout
the Palestinian territories, with Jerusalem as its capital,
while guaranteeing the right to return of refugees in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 1948. Any measures that will or seek to undermine
2/34

18/10/2018

these rights are null and void. Such measures, including
the apartheid law adopted by Israel known as the
“nation-State law” and the decision of the United States
Government to transfer its Embassy to the occupied city
of Jerusalem and to stop funding the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) threaten peace and security in the
region and throughout the world. All these measures
are null and void and violate the relevant resolutions of
both the Council and the General Assembly.
Israel continues to occupy a cherished part of our
territory in the Syrian Golan. The Syrian people there
continue to suffer from the occupation and its practices
of repression and aggression. Israel, as members know,
has provided protection and logistical and even direct
military to terrorist organizations that have launched
repeated attacks against Syrian territory. In so doing,
they have violated the 1947 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. They have also exposed the forces of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) to grave danger due to the terrorist activities
that the Israeli occupation authority sponsors in the
occupied Syrian Golan.
In this regard, I note that on 8 October, the
occupying authority issued an illegal and unjust verdict
against Syrian activist Sedqi Suleiman Al-Maqet, who
is the Mandela of Syria. Astonishingly, it decided to
imprison him for 11 years. The only reason for this
11-year verdict was because he had documented — using
recordings and photographs — the collaboration of the
Israeli occupation forces with the Al-Nusrah Front in
the disengagement zone of the occupied Golan.
Israeli attacks on scientific and civilian
infrastructure in Syria are irrefutable proof of a new
stage in Israel’s exercise of State terrorism. In terms
of crime, terrorism and killing civilians, Israel is on
its way to compete with Da’esh and Al-Nusrah Front.
In addition, Israel evacuated hundreds of the so-called
White Helmets — a terrorist organization — to their
sponsoring countries to carry out attacks against Syria.
Unfortunately, all of this frenzied escalation has
not been acknowledged in reports issued by senior
United Nations officials. As we heard this morning,
these officials spoke of detecting a kite but they were
unable to record Israel’s collaboration with terrorist
organizations in the disengagement zone in the
occupied Syrian Golan. Such are the reports issued by
the Secretariat.
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In resolution 497 (1981), which was adopted
unanimously, the Council stated that the decision
taken by Israel on 17 December 1981 to impose Israeli
jurisdiction over the occupied Syrian Golan was null
and void and without international legal effect. The
resolution called on Israel, the occupying Power, to
rescind all measures and decisions in the occupied Syrian
Golan immediately. I remind the Council that this took
place in December 1981. Resolution 497 (1981) called on
the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
on the implementation of that resolution within two
weeks of its adoption. Meanwhile, the Council decided
that, if Israel did not comply with resolution 497 (1981),
the Council would hold exceptionally another meeting
no later than 5 January 1982 in order to examine in
depth the necessary measures to be undertaken in line
with the Charter of the United Nations.
Under the principles of international law, I put the
following question to the Council. Thirty-seven years
after the adoption of resolution 497 (1981), what is the
current status of this resolution and why has it not been
implemented? Why has the Council not compelled
Israel to end the occupation of the Syrian Golan? The
Council should have enacted another resolution in
January 1982. We have been waiting 37 years for the
Council to implement resolution 497 (1981). Some
colleagues wonder about the reasons for persisting
conflicts in the Middle East. Why are there wars in the
Middle East? What are the root causes of violence in the
Middle East? They do not know that we are still waiting
for the implementation of a Council resolution adopted
37 years ago to liberate the Golan and Jerusalem from
the Israeli occupation and to create a Palestinian State.
These are the root causes of the war; these are the root
causes of the violence.
The Syrian Government categorically rejects
the decision of Israel, the occupying Power, to hold
elections for so-called local councils in the occupied
Syrian Golan. Residents of the Golan have reiterated
their rejection of all measures of the repressive Israeli
entity seeking to impose its jurisdiction on them,
including the organization of so-called local councils
in October. Mr. Mladenov did not address this issue or
comment on it.
It is unacceptable that the United Nations and
Member States continue to treat this odious occupation
as if it were simply a routine matter, without taking any
serious action leading to tangible results, especially
after the statement made by the Prime Minister of the

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

Israeli entity on 8 October, which proves that Israel has
no interest in the Charter of the United Nations and is
determined to violate Council’s resolutions, including
resolution 497 (1981). The Israeli Prime Minister said:
“Israel on the Golan Heights is a solid reality based
on ancient rights. Israel on the Golan Heights is a fact
that the international community must recognize.”
He also said that “as long as it depends on
me, the Golan Heights will always remain under
Israeli sovereignty.”
Unfortunately, this serious statement and all the
serious developments in the Golan have not attracted
the attention of Mr. Mladenov, who turned a blind eye
to such developments in his briefing. He likewise failed
to mention any of the various and multiple resolutions
of the United Nations that call on the occupying Power
to end the occupation of Arab territories. We regret that
Mr. Mladenov has transformed his important role of
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
into that of a simple journalist.
We recall that General Assembly resolution
3314 (XXIX) qualifies occupation as the top form of
aggression. All those who remain silent on the occupation
are therefore partners in that act of aggression against
our peoples. To those who seek to turn the meetings
of the Council into a media show, simply to prevent
definitive legal measures from being taken to bring
the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories to an
end; to those who vigorously pursue other wars in our
region to deplete the potential of our peoples, we say
that they are responsible for future developments. We
are determined to liberate our territory by all means
available to us under the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and relevant Council resolutions, no
matter how long it takes us. Indeed, we have the right to
do so and the law is on our side.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Ms. Scott (Namibia): I congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October, and I thank you for organizing this debate on
the important topic of the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I would also like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and
Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director of B’Tselem, for their
comprehensive and detailed briefings.

18-328013/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Namibians are deeply concerned by Mr. Mladenov’s
recent report, which states that Israeli settlement
expansion has continued in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. We were informed that plans for some
2,800 units had been proposed, some 900 additional
units were approved, and tenders for over 1,700 housing
units were announced. As reaffirmed in resolution 2334
(2016), those settlements are illegal under international
law, represent a serious impediment to the two-State
solution, and diminish hope for peace. We also note the
ongoing destruction of Palestinian-owned structures
over the past five months by Israeli authorities,
which has led to the displacement of 145 Palestinians,
including 82 children.
Violence represents an impediment to peace. The
Great March of Return protests along the Gaza-Israel
border fence demand that Palestinian refugees and their
descendants be allowed to return to the land from which
they were displaced. Namibia is concerned that since
March, violence along the fence has been frequent, with
dozens killed and injured following the excessive and
disproportionate use of force by Israel. On at least three
occasions, the situation escalated dramatically. We
thank Egypt and the United Nations, which intervened
to de-escalate tensions.
The ongoing violence and tension along the border
fence has further compounded the situation in Gaza,
which remains on the brink of collapse. The overall
humanitarian and economic situation continues to
deteriorate. More than 53 per cent of the population
is unemployed, households receive electricity for
three to four hours per day, access to clean water has
not improved, and major strain is being placed on the
health system.
The situation in Gaza has been exacerbated by
the recent decision taken by the United States to
terminate its funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which is a stabilizing factor across
the region, offering educational, health and social
services — a lifeline for Palestinian refugees. The
recent proposal made by the mayor of Jerusalem to
remove UNRWA-run programmes in the city is a cause
for serious concern. If implemented, it will worsen the
already harsh conditions of the Palestinian refugees.
4/34

18/10/2018

The decision taken by the United States
Administration to stop funding UNRWA follows other
decisions that represent an impediment to peace and
an obstacle to the two-State solution. In December
2017, the United States announced its recognition of
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. In May, the United
States officially transferred its Embassy from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem. That decision was condemned in
General Assembly resolution ES‑10/19 of December
2017, overwhelmingly adopted by Member States. That
resolution notes that “Jerusalem is a final status issue
to be resolved through negotiations in line with relevant
United Nations resolutions”. The decision taken by
the United States in September to close the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) office in Washington,
D.C., under the pretext that the PLO has not taken
steps to advance the start of direct and meaningful
negotiations with Israel is also counterproductive.
What is needed is dialogue, not more alienation.
As a child of the United Nations that fought
tirelessly for its independence, Namibia will always
support Palestine in its fight for self-determination.
During the debate held a few weeks ago, most Heads of
State and Government reaffirmed their strong support
for the Palestinian cause. Support for Palestine was also
demonstrated in its election as Chair of the Group of 77
and China for the year 2019.
In conclusion, we call on the Israeli Government to
end all construction of settlements and the destruction
of Palestinian homes and infrastructure. We call
for Israel’s complete and unconditional withdrawal
from the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem. We urge all parties to return to the
negotiation table to ensure that the Palestinian people
are able to exercise their inalienable rights in an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and as a rightful member of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Bolivian
presidency for organizing this open debate.
We are meeting at a particularly poignant juncture
in the political history of the Middle East. Today, on
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Oslo Accords, the
sense of hope and optimism created by the two-State
solution has given way to despondency and despair. As
the fundamental tenets of the two-State solution are
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

being systematically dismantled in the plain sight of
the international community, it comes as no surprise
that there are few people in the region who believe that
peace can be achieved in their lifetime. Many more
question if peace is at all possible.
An unfortunate sequence of events has exacerbated
that sense of despondency. Long-standing resolutions
of the Security Council on the status of Jerusalem
have been flouted and cast aside. The illegal expansion
of Israeli settlements into the occupied territory
continues with intensity and impunity. The recent
Israeli decision to dismantle the Bedouin community
of Khan Al-Ahmar is only one more manifestation of
the occupying Power’s long-standing policy of forcibly
displacing Palestinians from their lands. That measure
takes fresh aim at the roots of Palestinian identity and
their existence as a people. The killing fields of Gaza
continue to be drenched with the blood of innocent
Palestinians — over 200 civilians have been killed
since peaceful protests began in March, including
another seven on 12 October.
The decision by the United States to cease all
financial support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has not only cast a deep shadow of
uncertainty over the long-term sustainability of many
of its critical activities, including education, health
and social services, it also runs the risk of unravelling
the peace dividend gained through the work of that
important Agency. From its very inception, UNRWA
has served as a vehicle for political stability and social
cohesion in its areas of operation.
The humanitarian needs of the Palestinian refugees
should not be sacrificed at the altar of political
expediency and narrow interests, all the more so when
the prospect for a just settlement of the Palestine
issue remains more distant than ever. As members
of the international community, we must collectively
endeavour to preserve the integrity of the Agency’s
core services to 5.3 million Palestinian refugees.
Pakistan’s commitment to our Palestinian brethren
remains firm and abiding. As an expression of our
solidarity, Pakistan will make an additional contribution
to UNRWA this year. The international community
must also continue to lend its voice in support of a
two-State solution, based on agreed parameters and the
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the capital of
the Palestinian State.

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

As instability and violence continue to ravage many
parts of the Middle East, the imperative for diplomatic
solutions is more urgent than ever. Syrian stakeholders
are working towards the establishment of an inclusive
constitutional committee, and we commend the diligent
efforts over the past five years of the Secretary General’s
outgoing Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, in pursuit
of the goal of a negotiated settlement in Syria.
Pakistan will continue to lend its support to a
negotiated settlement in Yemen, based on agreed
frameworks and through inclusive political engagement.
Immediate measures to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering of the Yemeni people must remain an
equally urgent international priority. The plight of the
Palestinians is as old as the United Nations itself. It is
also intrinsic and integral to lasting peace in the region.
Over the years, as international efforts to bring
an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people have
faltered and failed, the burning cauldron of anger and
pervasive sense of injustice have inescapably sown the
seeds of animosity and violence in the entire region,
fuelling instability and intensifying insecurity across
the Middle East.
If we want to put out these fires of conflict, we
must act decisively against injustice and oppression
across the region and across the world. It is time to
bring an end to the tragedy of Palestine. It is time to
inspire hopes of peace and mutual coexistence for the
entire region.
Despite the heavy odds, our pursuit of this worthy
endeavour should be renewed with even greater resolve
and determination.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam, for the
work you have done as President of the Council this
month and for having convened this important meeting.
I would like also to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his valuable briefing.
Aisha Mohammed was a 45-year-old Palestinian
Arab woman and the mother of eight children. She
was murdered in cold blood by a group of Israeli
settlers last Friday. Hers was a terrible death. She was
stoned to death as she was with her husband, leaving
her children motherless. She was killed just for being

18-328015/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a Palestinian woman. That criminal act is but one of
the many examples of the ongoing violations carried
out by Israeli settlers and soldiers against unarmed
Palestinians. It is not enough that they have occupied
the land; now they are targeting Palestinian lives,
property and holy places.
Among the most heinous Israeli crimes that are
being currently committed is the forced eviction of
Palestinian residents from Khan Al-Ahmar, in the West
Bank, and the unjust blockade that Israel continues
to impose on Gaza. All of this requires us to reiterate
our call on both the international community and the
Security Council to protect the Palestinian people
and to bring pressure to bear on Israel to implement
international resolutions.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns all Israeli
violations and rejects all attempts to undermine the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. It reaffirms
the Arab and Muslim identity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the right of the Palestinian State to exercise its
sovereignty throughout all Palestinian territories
occupied in 1967, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. My
country also condemns Israeli practices in the occupied
Arab Syrian Golan. We reject all illegitimate attempts
by Israel to annex the Golan. The Kingdom underscores
the importance of a lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East, a strategic choice that puts an end to
the Arab-Israeli conflict through the two-State solution
on the basis of the international terms of reference;
the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which stipulates the
creation of a Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967
borders; the return of refugees; and an end to the Israeli
occupation of all Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan and Lebanese territory.
The fraternal Syrian people continue to endure the
horrors of the violations and crimes against humanity
perpetrated by a regime that has lost its legitimacy and
sense of humanity. I will limit myself to what I said
yesterday in the Council (see S/PV.8373) and stress the
importance of urgently establishing a constitutional
committee so that it can begin its work of drafting a
new national Syrian constitution. This would be a
turning point in the Syrian political process and would
put an end to hostilities by all parties, bringing about a
peaceful transition of power to the representatives of the
Syrian people, on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
6/34

18/10/2018

My country denounces the Iranian Government’s
persistent occupation of the three United Arab Emirates
islands — Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa, in
the Arab Gulf — as well as violations of the sovereignty
of the United Arab Emirates, which undermine security
and stability in the region and threaten international
peace and security. We reaffirm the full sovereignty
of the United Arab Emirates over their three islands
and support all peaceful measures undertaken by
that country to recover their sovereignty over those
occupied islands.
Many States have suffered, and continue to suffer,
as a result of Iran’s aggressive and flagrant interventions
in their domestic affairs, which have destabilized the
region. These include its support for the coup militias
in Yemen and its lack of respect for international
resolutions, especially resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231
(2015). It also threatens continually to block maritime
traffic, in particular the Strait of Hormuz. It carries
out manoeuvres around Bab Al-Mandab and maintains
a presence south of the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea
through its vessels and ships.
Perhaps the Council is aware of the fact that a
commercially registered vessel, 150 metres long,
equipped with machine guns and military boats as
well as espionage equipment, is travelling south of the
Red Sea. It receives and sends speedboats carrying
equipment and material that is clearly not commercial.
This Iranian vessel, the Saviz, is a military operational
centre that jeopardizes the security and safety of
international maritime transit. In addition, Iran
continuously supports armed terrorist groups that are
destabilizing security and stability in the region and
throughout the world, such as the terrorist Hizbullah.
The evidence of this revolutionary regime’s
interference in the internal affairs of States of the region
and worldwide, as well as its support for terrorism, is
clear and striking. As noted in paragraph 10 of the
twenty-second report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (see S/2018/705), submitted
pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities:
“Al-Qaida leaders in the Islamic Republic of Iran
have grown more prominent, working with Ayman
al-Zawahiri and projecting his authority more
effectively than he could previously. They have
influenced events in the Syrian Arab Republic,
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

countering the authority of Abu Mohammed
al-Jawlani and causing formations, breakaways
and mergers of various Al-Qaida-aligned groups
in Idlib.”
In Yemen, the Houthi coup militias, supported by
Iran, continue to turn a deaf ear to the calls made by
the international community and the United Nations.
Their intractable stance makes it clear that they want to
prolong the crisis in Yemen. They did not take seriously
the invitation made by the United Nations Envoy
during the Yemeni peace negotiations held in Geneva
last September. They continue to hinder the delivery
of humanitarian assistance convoys and loot them,
lay mines and cut off roads. The coup militias have
launched more than 200 rockets targeting residential
areas of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Those rockets
were manufactured in Iran and brought from Iran. The
rocket-launcher operators were also trained in Iran, in
breach of all relevant provisions of international law.
My country, on the other hand, has been generously
delivering assistance to the sisterly Republic of Yemen
since 2012 — more than $13 billion so far in all areas,
to save lives and maintain the security and prosperity
of the people of Yemen.
My country is playing a crucial role in peacefully
resolving regional and international crises, in keeping
with international conventions and treaties. My country
seeks to uphold the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes and undertakes initiatives aimed at the
peaceful resolution of conflicts.
A few weeks ago, we witnessed the historic
signing of a peace agreement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea in the city of Jeddah in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, sponsored by the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and in
the presence of Secretary-General António Guterres.
We also witnessed the beginning of a reconciliation
process between Djibouti and Eritrea, with a historic
summit held between the Presidents of the two
countries in Jeddah. We hope that the summit will
lead to reconciliation between the two neighbouring
countries. The Kingdom will continue to work towards
maintaining security in the Red Sea basin, enabling it
to transform into an oasis of peace, cooperation and
prosperity among Arab and African States bordering
the basin.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): There was a moment in
history when we were all hopeful that there would be
peace in Israel and Palestine. That is no longer the case.
The hope for a just and lasting settlement has never
been lower. However, this gloomy picture could have
been avoided. It was not inevitable and is the result of
deliberate steps.
We are seeing increasing pressure on the daily lives
of Palestinians. Gaza is still under a blockade. Israeli
security forces use increasingly excessive force against
Palestinian civilians. There are restrictions for the
Muslims who want to visit Haram al-Sharif. Recently,
we have seen the displacement of Bedouins from
Khan Al-Ahmar and the introduction of the Jewish
nation-State law, which disregard the basic rights of
the Palestinian people. The aim of such measures is to
pressure Palestinians into accepting the status quo by
enforcing hardship and humiliation.
We are also witnessing systematic efforts to
undermine the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. That is an attempt to change the terms of
reference of the Middle East conflict and destroy the
hope for a two-State solution. We are entitled to our
own views but not to our own facts. According to
international law, the Palestinians have the right to
their own State based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. That cannot be changed.
According to United Nations resolutions, Palestinians
have the right to return to their homeland. That cannot
be withheld. The refugee status of the people of
Palestine is a legitimate right and cannot be used as a
bargaining chip. The Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories are illegal and cannot be ignored. Those are
facts and are based on international law.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is the
most recent target of the efforts to collectively punish
the Palestinians. The services provided by UNRWA are
vital to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian refugees
and to show that they are not forgotten. The Agency
also plays a critical role in the stability of the region.
Last month, schools for hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian children across Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon
and Syria were reopened. Who is going to benefit if the
Palestinians are subjected to more difficulty?
As Chair of the UNRWA Advisory Commission
and the Working Group on the Financing of UNRWA,
Turkey is proud to support the Agency’s work and

18-328017/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

has increased its annual contribution. We have
also requested traditional donors to increase their
contributions, and we have been working to expand the
donor base of UNRWA. During the high-level week,
we co-hosted a landmark meeting, during which we
mobilized $122 million. We expect all countries to step
up and help UNRWA.
It is high time to stand for justice and the protection
of the established parameters for a lasting peace in
Palestine. The international community must fulfil its
moral responsibility. Turkey is ready to do its part.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate, and I thank the briefers
for their briefings.
Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State
solution. We continue to believe that the most realistic
solution to the conflict is two sovereign States living
side by side within secure and recognized borders.
Lasting peace and security can be achieved only through
negotiations between the parties. However, at present,
there is little trust between the parties and we do not see
momentum towards renewed direct negotiations. Each
of us has a role to play in overcoming that impasse.
For our part, Japan is committed to continuing
its unique confidence-building measures to create an
atmosphere conducive to meaningful negotiations.
The role of the United States remains important. The
international community must engage with the parties
to bring about meaningful peace negotiations towards
a solution in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the internationally agreed parameters.
Progress will require leadership by both parties. At the
same time, we must work to maintain people’s faith in
the possibility of a political settlement. I would like to
highlight three points.
First, the serious economic and humanitarian
situation in Gaza needs to be urgently addressed.
Japan commends the efforts of Special Coordinator
Mladenov and his team in defusing violence and
providing economic and humanitarian interventions.
We are committed to supporting the implementation of
the package agreed at the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians. We ask for the support of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to ensure that the people in
8/34

18/10/2018

Gaza will benefit from the package. The return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza is crucial.
Secondly, the continued settlement activities
and the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures
deprive the Palestinian people of hope and undermine
the viability of a two-State solution. Japan once again
strongly urges Israel to cease those activities.
Thirdly, we believe that investment in the next
generation is important. As Prime Minister Abe
mentioned in the general debate last month, we will
start a new programme to invite elementary and junior
high school teachers from Gaza to Japan each year.
With regard to investment in the next generation, the
role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains
important. We are pleased with the tangible outcome
of the ministerial meeting held on 27 September,
which Foreign Minister Kono co-chaired. During the
meeting, Japan announced new assistance to UNRWA
of $4.5 million to help with the electricity shortfalls in
Gaza, in addition to the assistance already committed
to and dispersed this year. Japan is also continuing
its long-standing Israel-Palestine youth invitation
programme, which marks its twentieth anniversary
this year. The international community must stand
united to maintain the viability of a long-term political
settlement. Japan is ready to enhance its political
engagement with both parties.
In Syria, the agreement between Russia and
Turkey has brought about a provisional ceasefire in
Idlib, which must be made permanent given the threat
facing its more than 3 million civilians. Advancement
of the political process is fundamental. Japan therefore
strongly supports the efforts made by Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General De Mistura over the years,
especially for the establishment of the constitutional
committee. Japan will continue to deliver humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians facing difficulties, no matter
who controls the area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madam President, and
your country for the efforts undertaken during your
presidency of the Security Council in safeguarding
its pivotal role in maintaining international peace
and security.
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing and for his efforts to achieve
progress in the region’s peace process.
The Palestinian people continue to suffer as a result
of the ongoing Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories and the lack of a political vision for a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution. Their human
rights continue to be systematically violated and they
are deprived of their fundamental rights, in conjunction
with dire economic and social conditions, particularly
in the Gaza Strip. That has led to a substantial increase
in poverty and the denial of the most basic human
rights. It highlights the magnitude of the historical
injustice being suffered by those people and requires
positive international action to end the tragedy.
Jordan underscores the centrality of the Palestinian
question and the need to find a just and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and suffering,
which would allow the Palestinian people to enjoy
their right to live in freedom and dignity within their
own State. Our position on the Palestinian question is
resolute and steadfast. Our message to the world is that
the injustices suffered by the Palestinians must come
to an end so that the brotherly Palestinian people can
establish an independent and sovereign State. The twoState solution, in accordance with international law,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative, is the only way to end the conflict
by establishing an independent, sovereign and viable
Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Hashemite custodianship of Jerusalem’s Muslim
and Christian holy sites is a solemn responsibility that
Jordan is proud to shoulder. My country will spare
no effort in withstanding any attempts to change the
historical Arab, Islamic and Christian identity of the
holy city. The Kingdom condemns in the strongest
terms the ongoing Israeli violations and provocations
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Haram al-Sharif. We
particularly condemn the provocative incursions by
Israeli extremists and settlers into the courtyards of
Haram al-Sharif, which are systematically carried out
under the protection of the Israeli police. Such actions
are condemned and rejected. They violate the sanctity
of that sacred place and upsets worshippers and
Muslims all over the world. They also violate Israel’s
obligations as an occupying Power under international
law and international humanitarian law, as well as all

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

international conventions and norms that emphasize
the need to respect places of worship for all religions.
My country condemns the forced displacement
and deportation of the inhabitants of Khan Al-Ahmar
as part of an expansionist settlement policy that Israel
uses to impose a fait accompli and to undermine the
two-State solution, threatening further instability in
the region.
The serious financial deficit of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is hampering its ability to provide
basic services to millions of refugees and poses a threat
to the stability of host communities. That leaves us with
two options — either to nurture a positive generation
of young people or to leave them prey to the forces of
extremism and despair.
Despite the efforts of the international community
to reduce the deficit, which stood at $446 million at the
beginning of this year and now stands at $64 million,
we continue to face that problem at the beginning of
each year. We must therefore come up with innovative
ideas and constructive initiatives to ensure predictable
and sustainable funding for UNRWA so that it can
carry out its United Nations mandate, respect the rights
of refugees to live in dignity, guarantee the rights of
more than 500,000 refugee children to go to school
and continue to provide them and their families with
vital services.
The Syrian crisis is now entering its eighth year.
A political solution remains the only feasible way to
guarantee peace and stability in Syria and to maintain
its territorial integrity. A political solution must be
acceptable to the brotherly Syrian people and meet their
aspirations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We
commend the key role of the United Nations in making
progress towards a political solution to the crisis in
Syria. We refer, in particular, to the statement issued by
the small group of the global coalition on Syria, which
underscores the importance of forming a constitutional
committee without delay and enabling it to start its
work on the political process, with the participation of
all Syrian stakeholders and under the auspices of the
United Nations.
I would also like to congratulate the State of brotherly
Iraq on the success of its parliamentary elections and
the recent selection of the three presidencies, benefiting
Iraq and the region as a whole. I emphasize our

18-328019/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

commitment to continuing to cooperate with the new
Iraqi Government. My country stood by Iraq as it faced
the scourge of terrorism and will continue to do so as
the country seeks to rebuild itself, based on our firm
belief that the success of Iraq is a success for all and
that a united, democratic, safe and secure Iraq is in the
interests of its people, the entire region and the world.
The absence of a just solution to the Palestinian
question and the continuation of the crisis in Syria,
as well as the challenges facing some countries in the
region as they seek to consolidate security, stability
and reconstruction, are issues that compel us to work
harder and to stand unified in order to overcome
those difficulties and challenges. Those exceptional
circumstances call for a unified strategic vision and the
strengthening of our capacity to preserve international
peace and security by institutionalizing joint action and
translating it into reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson: The situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory continues to deteriorate and the
prospect of a two-State solution for Israel and Palestine
continues to be dismantled piece by piece, as mentioned
by High Representative Federica Mogherini at the third
Regional Forum of the Union for the Mediterranean
in Barcelona on 8 October. The European Union (EU)
is deeply concerned by the situation in Gaza. Gaza is
home to 2 million people who struggle to access basic
services, sufficient water and electricity supplies.
In the past few weeks, as living conditions continue
to worsen, the ongoing protests and violence at the
Gaza border fence, fuelled by Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, have intensified and expanded in nature.
They have further worsened the already volatile
situation in and around the Gaza Strip. The launching
of incendiary kites and balloons has now continued for
more than half a year. It has caused severe damage in
Israeli communities near Gaza and must stop. During
the same period, more than 200 Palestinians have been
killed and over 21,000 have been injured, most injuries
coming from live ammunition and gas inhalation. That
raises serious questions about the proportionate use of
force, which must be addressed through independent
and transparent investigations.
We expect the de facto authorities in Gaza to do
their utmost to prevent further escalation. The EU urges
all actors concerned to act with the utmost restraint
10/34

18/10/2018

to avoid further loss of life, prevent any escalation,
discourage recourse to violence and not exploit the
demonstrations for other means. While recalling Israel’s
right to self-defence, we expect the Israeli authorities to
respect the principle of necessity and proportionality
in its use of force. Serious questions have arisen about
the proportionate use of force, which must be addressed
through independent and transparent investigations.
The European Union takes note of the fact-finding
assessment mechanism established by the Israel Defense
Forces to review its own actions and specific incidents
that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza border since
30 March. The facts must also be established regarding
reports about violent attacks against Israel under the
guise of the protests.
The European Union will continue its support for
the work undertaken by Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov. We
commend his efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza, including the fuel-delivery deal reached
last week thanks to his engagement. We call on the
parties to cooperate with the Special Coordinator and
the wider international community to support him in
the operationalization of the proposed humanitarian
and economic interventions for Gaza, in continued
close coordination with the Palestinian Authority, in
order to secure and coordinate, among other things, the
provision of lifesaving health care, increase access to
clean water and energy supplies, improve the overall
economic conditions and promote conditions that enable
intra-Palestinian unity. The immediate priority must be
to reduce tensions and avoid another conflict in Gaza.
The return of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip
is indispensable if we wish to improve the conditions
and humanitarian situation in a sustainable manner.
Additional financial efforts by the international
community are needed. But in order to ensure lasting
results, a fundamental change in the situation in Gaza
is critical. That should include an end to the closure and
the full opening of crossing points, while addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. In that light, we
welcome the continued opening of the Rafah crossing.
In the meantime, the EU will continue to support United
Nations and Egyptian efforts towards the reunification
of Gaza and the West Bank under one single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority. The EU will continue
to work towards that end with our partners, the Israelis
and the Palestinians, regional actors and our partners
within the Middle East Quartet. We hope that the
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United States peace plan for the Middle East will
provide another contribution in that regard.
Indispensable humanitarian assistance must
overcome political divisions. Stopping the important
activities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) could well cause instability and create a
vacuum that would only serve the extremists. That is
why the EU and its member States have collectively
been the largest contributors to UNRWA’s budget.
We are and will continue to be strong, reliable and
predictable supporters of the Agency. Just a few weeks
ago the EU increased its financial support to UNRWA
by €40 million, raising the total contribution to the
Agency to €146 million since the beginning of this year.
In the ministerial meeting that the EU co-chaired
along with two EU member States, Sweden and Germany,
and other partners on 27 September, participants
underlined the importance of fully supporting the
ability of UNRWA to implement its mandate effectively,
namely, to assist and protect Palestine refugees, while
continuing to ensure transparency and accountability
in its programmes. Next year will be an even tougher
year for UNRWA. In that context we need to stress once
again the crucial importance for UNRWA and donors to
intensify efforts to put the Agency on a stable financial
footing while maintaining a focus on its mandate. We
will continue to do our utmost to ensure that UNRWA
and its dedicated staff continue to operate until a
just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the plight of
Palestine refugees is finally reached.
Twenty-five years after the signing of the Oslo
Accords, a just and lasting peace among Israelis and
Palestinians is still sorely missing. While the Oslo
Accords have not accomplished their overall goal, one of
their major achievements is that Palestinian institutions
are in place. It is in the interests of both the Palestinians
and the Israelis that their stability be preserved.
The EU will continue to urge both parties to refrain
from unilateral actions that undermine the relaunching
of the negotiations or imperil the viability of the twoState solution. There is no justification for incitement
and violence. We follow with great concern the situation
on the ground, in particular the pending demolition of
the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar, including its
school, in a location of strategic interest for preserving
the contiguity of a future Palestinian State, as well as
the decision taken last Sunday by the Israeli authorities

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

to move forward plans for settlement expansion in
Hebron. The EU has repeatedly urged Israel not to
execute its decision to demolish the Khan Al-Ahmar
community or displace its citizens and today reiterates
its strong opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and
actions taken in that context, including demolitions and
confiscation ─ including some EU-funded projects ─
evictions and forced transfers. Settlements are illegal
under international law, constitute an obstacle to peace,
and threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.
We must work together to reverse the current
negative developments on the ground, which are
leading us away from a negotiated two-State solution
with Jerusalem as the future capital of both States. A
two-State solution based on the 1967 borders that meets
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the
occupation, and resolves all final-status issues remains
the only viable and realistic way to end the conflict and
achieve just and lasting peace. The EU will continue to
work towards that end with both parties and its regional
and international partners, starting with the Middle
East Quartet.
The conflict in Syria has continued for more than
seven years and has caused immense suffering. Millions
of people have been forced to find refuge in other
countries or have faced starvation, sieges and armed
offensives within their country, along with blatant and
ongoing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, in particular by the Syrian regime. The
Syrian regime bears the overwhelming responsibility
for the catastrophic humanitarian situation and the
suffering of the Syrian people.
The EU acknowledges the signing of the
memorandum to establish a ceasefire in Idlib and calls
on the Astana guarantors to ensure that that ceasefire is
upheld and to safeguard the last remaining de-escalation
zone in Syria. The EU expects that they will follow
through on their commitment and also guarantee the
protection of civilian lives and infrastructure, as well
as safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access
across Syria.
The EU expresses its full support for the mandate
and efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for
Syria aimed at establishing a constitutional committee
that will serve as the first step towards an inclusive,
credible and sustainable political solution in Syria, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva

18-3280111/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). The EU commits
itself to remain at the forefront of international efforts
for accountability and justice in Syria. All those
responsible for breaches of international law and human
rights law, some of which may constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity, must be held accountable.
We reiterate our condemnation of the repeated use of
chemical weapons in Syria by the Syrian regime and
Da’esh, as confirmed by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. We are deeply
concerned by continuing reports by the OPCW Factfinding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic pointing
to the use of chemical weapons in various locations in
Syria in recent months.
The EU welcomes the recent decision by the
Conference of States Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction to enhance the OPCW’s capacity to
identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. The EU has imposed restrictive measures
on Syrian high-level officials and scientists and has
adopted a new global sanctions regime for the use of
chemical weapons.
In the meantime, we reiterate our calls upon all the
parties to the conflict and those actors with influence
over them, especially the Syrian regime and its allies,
to ensure unhindered sustained humanitarian access
and medical evacuations for all Syrians in need. The
situation in Rukban camp is particularly appalling. The
EU calls on all stakeholders to facilitate immediate
humanitarian access.
The EU supports the rights of Syrians to return to
their homes voluntarily and in safety and dignity, in line
with international humanitarian law, when conditions
allow. The EU calls for safe and equal access to civil
documentation on housing and property rights so as to
ensure that the rights of Syrians are preserved and that
those displaced are provided with the basic conditions
to be able to return to their homes in a dignified, safe
and voluntary way when conditions allow.
However, the EU agrees with the assessment of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) that conditions for non-coercive
and safe repatriation are not yet in place. It is critical
that work undertaken to build those conditions be
well coordinated with all relevant actors, in particular
12/34

18/10/2018

UNHCR. The EU will organize a third Brussels
conference on supporting the future of Syria and the
region in the last week of March 2019, so as to support
the United Nations-led political process for a solution
to the conflict, provide a platform for the voices of
Syrian civil society, and seek pledges by EU member
States and international donors.
Finally, the EU reiterates that it will be ready
to assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when
a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political
transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties to the
conflict, on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communiqué, is firmly under way.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Brazil reiterates its longstanding support for the implementation of the twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized and
mutually agreed borders based on the 1967 lines, in
accordance with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations, the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the established guidelines of the peace process. At
the heart of that formula is the need to work towards
the end of the occupation and the establishment of a
Palestinian State that is fully sovereign, economically
viable and territorially contiguous, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
In that regard, the expansion of Israeli settlements
in Palestine, which are illegal under international law,
as well as the incitement and inflammatory rhetoric on
both sides, continues to hinder the achievement of a
lasting peace in the region. The Brazilian Government
maintains its understanding that the final status of the
city of Jerusalem should be defined in negotiations
between Israel and Palestine on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolutions 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016).
Brazil remains deeply concerned with the dire
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The escalation
of violence over the past few months underscores the
urgent need for a political solution to the conflict,
which includes inter-Palestinian reconciliation.
The critical financial situation of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the effect
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that the recurrent underfunding of the Agency has on
its ability to address the needs of Palestinian refugees
is yet another worrying development in the region. As
a member of the Advisory Commission of UNRWA, we
underline the vital role the Agency plays in ensuring
health, education and other basic services for almost
5.3 million refugees. We call on all parties to abstain
from any actions that may jeopardize UNRWA’s
capacity to fulfil its purpose.
Brazil remains deeply worried about the situation
in Syria and welcomes the agreement reached to
create a demilitarized zone between opposition and
Government forces in the Idlib governorate. We urge all
relevant parties to fully comply with this agreement. We
also wish to reiterate our full support for the efforts of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the intra-Syrian
political negotiations in Geneva. We look forward to
the establishment of a constitutional committee in line
with the agreements reached in Sochi and reaffirm our
support for an inclusive political solution to the Syrian
crisis based on the parameters set forth in the relevant
Security Council resolutions, namely, resolution 2254
(2015), and taking full advantage of the conditions
created by the Astana process. We renew our hope that
a political process, mediated by the United Nations and
led by the Syrian people, will bring about the end of the
war and a peaceful solution to the conflict.
With regard to Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s
decision to step down at the end of November, Brazil
wishes to thank him for his tireless efforts aimed at
promoting conditions for an inclusive and credible
political solution to this long-lasting conflict.
The civil war in Yemen, which has entered its
fourth year, is currently the largest humanitarian crisis
in the world. The Brazilian Government is alarmed
by repeated allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law in Yemen. Brazil remains gravely
concerned about the situation in the port city of
Hodeidah and calls on all parties to ensure that the
port remains fully operational in order to avoid further
humanitarian consequences for the people of Yemen.
The only viable path for the future of the country is
through a negotiated settlement. Brazil expresses its
full support for the plan put forward by Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths to relaunch political negotiations and
implement confidence-building measures. We urge all
parties to fully engage in efforts towards a negotiated
solution for the conflict.

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the Plurinational Republic of Bolivia and its presidency
of the Security Council for convening today’s open
debate on a topic that brings us back to the early days
of the United Nations, specifically when, by resolution
181 (II) of 1947, the mandated territory of Palestine was
divided into two States, one Jewish, the other Arab. For
some 70 years, the Palestinian question has been the
topic of a great many reports, debates and resolutions
in the Security Council Chamber and in other United
Nations organs.
The Holy See has supported the two-State solution
from the very beginning, and my delegation reaffirms
once again the Holy See’s unwavering view that the
two-State Solution as the only viable way of fulfilling
the aspirations for peaceful coexistence among Israelis
and Palestinians alike and the only feasible peace plan
that would allow both nations to live side by side within
secure and internationally recognized borders.
The facts on the ground, as presented to the Security
Council on a monthly basis by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, are a source of
persistent grave concern. Leaders on both sides bear
the heaviest responsibility in guiding their people in the
direction of a mutually agreed resolution to the conflict,
rather than leading them into deeper conflict. The Holy
See calls on both Israel and Palestine to demonstrate
wisdom, responsibility and the political will needed to
reach a historic peace agreement that would meet the
legitimate aspirations of both peoples. Undertaking
dialogue with perseverance and good will must replace
inflammatory rhetoric, violence and conflict. Innocent
civilians must never be the target of terror or inordinate
military actions.
The Israeli-Palestinian discord and the intra­
Palestinian divisions have also been exacerbated by
external forces and the geopolitical interests of other
countries. The Holy See therefore wishes to exhort
neighbours in the region and other concerned States
from outside the region to facilitate and sustain the
peace process, instead of obstructing or scuttling it for
their own interests.
The Holy See wishes to reaffirm the historic status
quo of Jerusalem, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and rejects any unilateral

18-3280113/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

measure aimed at changing it. At the same time, it calls
upon the United Nations to carefully consider the status
of Jerusalem as recommended by General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 1947. My delegation believes that
the Holy City should be a place of convergence and
peace and that the followers of the three monotheistic
religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam should
be guaranteed free and unhindered access to its
holy places. Accordingly, the initial proposal of an
international status guaranteed by the United Nations
remains of great importance in fulfilling the City’s
singular calling. Indeed, the Holy City of Jerusalem
undoubtedly holds a very special place not only in the
hearts of the inhabitants of the city, but also for the
followers throughout the world of the three monotheistic
religions. May it become truly what its name means:
City of Peace.
My delegation notes with great concern the dire
humanitarian situation that the Palestine refugees
and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
are facing. The Agency provides a range of essential
support for some 5.6 million registered Palestine
refugees, supplying the most basic human needs from
housing to education, health care and social services. In
a situation that shows no sign of being resolved quickly,
a fully functional UNRWA remains the best means to
prevent the situation in the region from worsening in
a way that would bring both greater cost and likely
greater expenditures to the international community.
Like UNRWA, various charitable action groups
and organizations of the Catholic Church provide
education, health care and social services to Palestine
refugees and to Palestinians in general. The Holy
See hopes and prays that, sooner rather than later,
a fair and durable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict may be reached through the resumption of
final-status negotiations aimed at reaching a two-State
solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State living side
by side in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): As it appears
that today’s open debate on Palestine may be the last
in the Security Council for this year, I wish to take
this opportunity to express the appreciation of the
Government of Indonesia to the delegation of Bolivia
14/34

18/10/2018

for its sincere and consistent support for the Palestinian
cause during its tenure.
Regrettably, rather than advancing our understanding
or making contributions to achieving peace and
resolution, this quarterly debate on the Middle East
has become a showcase for the occupying Power’s
illegal activities and violence towards the territory it
occupies and the people there, including women and
children. We seem to be mere spectators of a series of
increasingly disturbing tragedies, without the capacity
or perhaps even the conscience to stop them. It seems
that we are becoming indifferent and emotionless, ready
to treat the situation as commonplace. It seems that at
every meeting now we are learning of new and more
ambitious illegal settlements, the demolition of houses
and property, restrictions and blockades. We hear of the
excessive use of force, of arbitrary detentions and other
illegalities, which also look like what we have seen
in previous reports. The report before us (S/2018/614)
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) is yet
another. But the truth is that those reports are about
people, families and communities. They are about
human lives and human beings like us, whose only
desire is for a normal, peaceful life, but who are facing
those violent acts and denials of their rights every day.
Indonesia must repeat what it has been saying for
a long time, which is that the issue of the occupation
of Palestine has lasted too long. The responsibility
for it belongs to the Council, and we object to any
attempts to divert attention from it at this critical time.
While we are certainly aware that the Charter of the
United Nations does not provide the Council with an
enforcement mechanism for ensuring that its decisions
are honoured, we are hopeful that the Council realizes
that the Palestinians also deserve to live in peace, and
that this organ can do far more than it has done so far
in that regard.
We reaffirm the principles of the Charter, which
set clear parameters for the Council in areas such as
the equal rights of States, self-determination, respect
for human rights, the non-use of force and territorial
integrity. As a strong proponent of multilateralism,
Indonesia reiterates that the Council was and is meant
to be the main organ not simply for maintaining the
principle of world peace, but for preventing the
unilateral use of violence by any State against civilians
or other States. In effect, it is meant to be a force for
peace in the world by being a safeguard against injustice
and impunity anywhere in the world.
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Indonesia wants to place on the record the
continuing carnage by Israeli forces since the Great
March of Return protests began in May. At least 198
Palestinians, including 31 children, three people with
disabilities, three paramedics and two journalists,
have been killed. In addition, more than 20,000
have been injured, some of them with life-changing
and paralysing injuries. On 28 September, seven
Palestinians, including two children, were killed in
one day during the demonstrations, and hundreds were
injured. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, those numbers represent the
highest fatality toll in a single day since 14 May, when
42 Palestinians were killed. We condemn that senseless
violence and support the call for the protection of the
Palestinian people, including through the dispatch of an
international protection force.
On the question of Syria, we welcome the creation
of a demilitarized buffer zone in the governorate of
Idlib. It is proof that diplomacy has produced positive
progress in the effort to avoid civilian casualties. The
protection of civilians must be an absolute priority for
all stakeholders, and Indonesia believes that a political
settlement through dialogue and negotiation is the
best solution.
Finally, with regard to Yemen, Indonesia is
concerned about the serious deterioration in the
humanitarian situation, and we call on the international
community to take swift and concerted action to
prevent widespread famine. Steps must be taken to
resume a dialogue between the parties to address
urgent concerns and make progress towards a political
settlement of the conflict.
Let me end by calling on both parties in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict to refrain from provocative
actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, as
mandated by resolution 2334 (2016). In our view, that
call should also be addressed to other Member States.
We need to remind ourselves that our provocative
statements or actions will contribute nothing but an
escalation of the situation on the ground. We call on
Member States to create the conditions necessary for
promoting peace and rebuilding trust and confidence.
We also hope that the Council will refrain from
any double-standard practices that could erode its
credibility and authority. We call on it to implement its
binding resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
which is crucial to the advancement of peace.

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Cheikh Niang, Chair of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
Mr. Niang (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to commend Bolivia for the efficacy with which it
is guiding the work of the Security Council this month,
and for its unwavering support to the Palestinian cause
and a two-State solution, as demonstrated throughout
its term on the Council and by its recognition of the
State of Palestine in 2010.
Today’s open debate gives us an opportunity,
on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to appeal
once more to this organ charged with the maintenance
of international peace and security to act and redress the
ever-deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. That is all the more
urgent because, 70 years after the Arab-Israeli war and
51 years into the Israeli occupation, we still do not have
a clear political horizon for achieving a just, lasting and
peaceful solution to the conflict.
The expansion of Israeli settlements, in violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), undermines not only the
contiguity of Palestinian territory but also the Palestinian
people’s basic rights. In addition, the occupying Power
has also persisted in its attempts to forcibly displace
Palestinian civilians and seize their land. In that
regard, we deplore the plans to demolish the Bedouin
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, a violation of international
humanitarian law that has rightly been condemned by
major sections of the international community. The
Committee also deplores unilateral measures likely to
undermine the international consensus on final status
issues, including that of Jerusalem.
In a recent report, the World Bank declared the
socioeconomic situation on the Gaza Strip to be in “free
fall”, and that does not take into account the ongoing
deterioration of the situation on the humanitarian
front, all of which are factors that risk provoking a new
military escalation. The Committee therefore calls on
all sides to exercise restraint and de-escalate tensions.
In that context, while supporting the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and its staff, who are often exposed to
serious threats, the Committee renews its urgent call
to all Member States to continue and step up their

18-3280115/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support to the Agency in order to ensure that it has the
sufficient, predictable and lasting resources it needs to
guarantee the continuity of the vital services it provides
to Palestine refugees. The Committee also urges Israel
to lift its 11-year blockade of Gaza, and calls for a
reconciliation between Palestine’s politicians with a
view to reunifying their people.
While the international community remains
paralysed, the current demonstrations have resulted in
many civilian casualties among Palestinians, including
children, particularly in Jerusalem and at the Gaza
fence. Because we continue to believe firmly that
violence can never resolve this conflict, the Committee
supports efforts to create an expanded multilateral
framework aimed at reviving the peace process on a
basis of the long-standing platforms in this area, with a
view to arriving at a two-State solution. The Committee
believes that as an international community, we must
reconsider the way in which we collectively assume
our responsibilities with regard to the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, the daily violations of
the 86 Security Council and 705 General Assembly
resolutions represent a threat to the credibility of the
United Nations and the rule of law.
The high-level week of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session presented a majority of
the world’s leaders with an opportunity to reaffirm
their commitment to multilateralism and to stress the
central role of the United Nations in resolving the
Palestinian question. We are pleased to note that, today,
139 Member States have officially recognized the State
of Palestine. The Committee encourages those who have
not yet done so, in particular members of the European
Union, to follow that trend in order to demonstrate, as
they did with the State of Israel, their commitment to
international legitimacy and the two-State solution.
The Committee welcomes the adoption of
resolution 73/5 by a significant majority of the
General Assembly. The resolution provides temporary
additional prerogatives to the State of Palestine, which
will assume the annual chairmanship of the Group
of 77 and China beginning in January 2019. The
chairmanship of the Group, which includes of 134
member States, is a further noteworthy testimony to the
growing confidence that the international community
places in Palestine.
If we want to safeguard our collective action, then
we must put our money where our mouth is and put an
16/34

18/10/2018

end to the historic injustice suffered by the Palestinian
people and promote the two-State solution, based on
the pre-June 1967 borders, in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Molefe (South Africa): South Africa would like
to thank Bolivia for organizing this important quarterly
open debate on the situation in the Middle East with
a particular focus on the Palestinian/Israeli situation.
We would also like to extend our appreciation to the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
for his informative briefing.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating situation in Palestine, which has been
allowed to grow worse as a result of the complete lack
of progress in the peace process. At the heart of finding
a genuine resolution to the conflict is the need for the
parties to come together to decide the most contentious
issues between them. That can only be achieved
after a process of trust has been built and a genuine
commitment to peace has been shown. A resolution on
final status issues, including the status of Jerusalem,
the fate of Palestinian refugees and Israeli settlements,
as well borders and security issues, cannot be imposed
by external parties. Peace negotiations are delicate
and challenging processes that require that trust and
goodwill be developed between the parties in order to
be successful. We stress that the fate of the parties to
such processes cannot be decided by external actors.
Unfortunately, the expansion of Israeli settlements
and the continued military belligerence on the part of
the Israeli Defence Force does nothing to create the
trust and goodwill needed to move the process forward.
It only furthers the negative externalities, such as the
perpetuation of the Palestinian refugee crisis.
In that regard, we wish to once again recognize the
importance of the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which has provided crucial socioeconomic
assistance to Palestinian refugees for decades. Cuts
in the budget of UNRWA threaten the lives of many
vulnerable people and undermine any confidence
in achieving a resolution to the conflict. Punishing
civilians by cutting off humanitarian funding cannot
in any way be conceived as moving the peace process
forward. By reducing funding, it is almost as if we
were insinuating that people chose to live in conditions
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

such as those. South Africa welcomes recent pledges
made to support UNRWA, and it affirms that such
humanitarian support creates the conditions that could
one day assist the full-fledged self-determination and
ultimate prosperity of the Palestinian people.
The vast majority of Palestine’s population have
lived their entire lifetime under Israeli occupation.
For over half a decade, Palestinians have been denied
their dignity and fundamental rights to free movement,
education, health care and even the right to life. The
longer we proceed without progress in the Middle East
peace process, the more unmanageable the negative
impacts will be, not only for the people of Palestine,
but also for the region and the world.
The people of Palestine continue to look to the
international community, in particular the United
Nations, to help them realize their right to selfdetermination. After all, we, the United Nations,
agreed in 1947 to establish two independent States, the
independent State of Israel and the free and independent
State of Palestine, living side by side. The State of Israel
was established, but 71 years later the Palestinian State
is just a dream. We must do all we can to consolidate
our solidarity and work towards a just and sustainable
solution for the Palestinian people.

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

However, we should also acknowledge that the situation
cannot continue as usual and that a much needed impetus
is required to get the peace process back on track.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that
dialogue and negotiation remain the only way to find
a lasting solution in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Furthermore, I would like to reiterate my delegation’s
commitment to continuing to work on this matter within
the United Nations and other multilateral forums to
seek ways of countering in a fair and equitable manner
the threat posed to international peace and security by
this conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I am honoured to
address the Security Council on behalf of the member
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
for which the Palestinian question has been and remains
an issue of foremost concern. It demands priority
collective action, including by the Security Council,
in accordance with international law, the Charter and
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and the
fundamental principles of justice and humankind.

South Africa wishes to emphasize the importance
of the greater inclusion of women in the peace process,
because there is a growing recognition that the activism
of women and their leadership accelerate initial peace
efforts and that marginalizing women only weakens the
prospects for peace. We also acknowledge the role of
women’s non-violent activism for peace in both societies
and believe that those initiatives should be drawn on to
create the much needed good will and commitment to
boosting the prospects for peace.

This open debate is being held at a critical juncture
for the Palestinian cause, which is experiencing
unprecedented and existential challenges, particularly
owing to the absence of any serious political and legal
actions by this body to enforce its standing resolutions
aimed at ending Israel’s illegal, decades-long foreign
occupation and its violations of the human rights
of the Palestinian people. The absence of serious
accountability and action has deepened the political
impasse, exacerbated the humanitarian suffering of the
Palestinian people, and created an unsustainable and
highly volatile situation.

It is clear that peace and security throughout the
Middle East will not be attained without peace between
Israel and Palestine, as it remains a central source of discord
and conflict among the diverse peoples of the region.
We reaffirm that the responsibility for attaining
peace is primarily in the hands of the people of
Palestine and Israel. We, as part of the international
community, should support and encourage the parties
in that endeavour. The international legal framework
for those negotiations has been set. They include the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, to name but a few.

The OIC cautions that the current political
stalemate is neither acceptable nor viable. We believe
that the Security Council should not remain an
observer while this already fragile situation continues
to deteriorate and further destabilize as Israel persists
with its unlawful and destructive occupation policies,
which are undermining the contiguity and viability of
the State of Palestine and jeopardizing the prospects
for realizing the two-State solution based on the pre1967 borders, let alone the fact that Israel’s policies
and measures constitute flagrant violations of United
Nations resolutions and Palestinians’ legitimate rights
and in many cases amount to war crimes.

18-3280117/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Palestinian question remains a litmus test
for our collective resolve to help restore confidence
in international law, the international system and the
potential to realize peace and justice. The multilateral
engagement of the international community, as per the
relevant resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
is needed now more than ever to salvage the two-State
solution and revive the deadlocked peace process, with
a view to achieving a comprehensive solution based on
the internationally agreed parameters, including United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
The OIC has repeatedly drawn the international
community’s attention to Israel’s colonial policies in
occupied East Jerusalem, which continue to illegally
alter the character, status and demographic composition
of the city and isolate it from its natural Palestinian
environs. By the same token, the frequent assaults at
Al-Aqsa Mosque and upon Muslim worshippers by
Israeli police and settlers continue to aggravate tensions,
threatening far-reaching and devastating consequences
that would further undermine peace prospects and risk
making Jerusalem the capital of hatred, fanaticism and
violence instead of the capital of tolerance, coexistence
and peace that it must be.
Meanwhile, atrocities and civilian causalities
tragically continue to mount as a result of an ongoing
brutal Israeli military offensive against the Palestinian
people on the besieged Gaza Strip. Attacks on
peaceful protesters, including children, continue to
be perpetrated before the eyes of the international
community. We reiterate our call on the Council to act
responsibly to address the crisis and demand the lifting
of the illegal Israeli blockade. It is urgent that action be
taken to uphold its obligation to ensure the protection
of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem and the besieged
Gaza Strip.
It is painful to observe millions of Palestinian
refugees enduring decades of displacement and
injustice as Israel continues its denial of their legitimate
rights. Their situation is tragically worsening as the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) experiences
an unprecedented funding crisis that is putting at
risk the Agency’s indispensable humanitarian and
development assistance for the refugees, including
its vital education, health, relief and social services
18/34

18/10/2018

programmes, causing deep anxiety and worry and
threatening further instability.
We assert, in that regard, that support for UNRWA
at this difficult juncture on the part of all international
actors is imperative to conveying a message of hope
and collective political commitment to the rights and
aspirations of Palestine refugees, so as to ensure that
their growing needs are adequately met and their right
to return, consistent with the relevant resolutions, in
particular General Assembly resolution 194 (III), is
preserved and respected.
On behalf of the OIC, I reiterate once again our
collective call on the international community to render
further support for the resilience of the Palestinian
people and to act forthwith on the basis of our clear
political, legal and moral obligations to redress their
plight and enable them to achieve their rights and
legitimate national aspirations, including to selfdetermination and the independence of their sovereign
and viable State of Palestine, within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to take the floor
on behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries at today’s debate.
The situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
critical and clearly unsustainable. In that regard, the
States members of the Movement reiterate that the
current Israeli occupation and the entire PalestinianIsraeli conflict remain a serious threat to international
peace and security and require urgent attention and
resolution, in accordance with international law,
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Charter of the
United Nations, of course, as well as the tools provided
by multilateral diplomacy. The Security Council has a
clear responsibility. It must uphold its obligations under
the Charter and enforce its own resolutions, which
are not only the basis for a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the conflict, but are legally binding on all
States Members of the Organization.
We also remain committed to contributing to the
achievement of a peaceful, just and lasting solution
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the conflict, as reiterated on 26 September, when
the Movement’s Ministerial Committee on Palestine
adopted a public statement on the issue that was
unanimously supported by the membership. We also
take this opportunity to call for the requisite efforts to
be taken and stepped up at the regional and international
levels in support of such objectives, the ultimate aim of
which is to end the injustice; more than 51 years of the
Israeli foreign occupation of Palestine, including East
Jerusalem; more than 70 years of the Nakba, which
we must remember in all its human dimensions — the
disaster and tragedy that befell the Palestinian people
in 1948, during which they lost their homeland and the
majority of Palestinians were forcibly uprooted from
their homes and displaced, becoming refugees. Their
suffering continues to this day.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries still
considers resolution 2334 (2016) to be the most
viable path to peace. It establishes the fundamental
requirements and parameters for a just solution, through
which the two-State solution would be achieved on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions; the Madrid principles,
including the land for peace principle; the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, with a view to
ensuring that the Palestinian people are able to enjoy
their inalienable rights. The Security Council must insist
that resolution 2334 (2016) be respected, in particular by
the occupying Power. Similarly, the States members of
the Movement reiterate their call for full respect for and
the implementation of all other relevant resolutions in
that regard, as they will create the necessary conditions
to end the occupation, justly resolve the conflict in
all its aspects, and make Palestinian-Israeli peace and
security possible.
We take this opportunity to note the current deepseated funding crisis of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and to stress the urgency of providing
UNRWA with sustained, predictable and uninterrupted
support, in particular following the punitive and
unjustified decision of the Government of the United
States of America to end its contributions to the Agency.
That not only affects the most vulnerable segment of the
Palestinian population and undermines the provision of
humanitarian assistance and vital development, but also
threatens the stability of the entire region. Similarly, we
echo UNRWA’s statements in expressing concern about
the recent and irresponsible announcements made by

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

Israeli authorities about the closure of the Agency’s
offices in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The situatopm in Gaza remains of great concern
to the Movement, in particular the grave humanitarian
situation that regrettably, continues to deteriorate on
a daily basis. In that regard, we reiterate our call for
the complete lifting of the Israeli blockade on the Gaza
Strip, which continues to impose untold economic,
social and humanitarian suffering on more than
2 million Palestinian children, women and men. It must
be emphasized once again that the crisis in Gaza should
be addressed in a comprehensive manner, in accordance
with international law, including humanitarian law
and human rights law, as well as the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Bearing in mind that Israel has clearly renounced
its obligations as an occupying Power to protect the
Palestinian civilian population, in compliance with
the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
the Movement calls on the international community
to ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians on
the Gaza Strip and throughout the entire occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, so as to
address the deplorable lack of security for the occupied
population and prevent the loss of more innocent lives.
In that regard, the States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement reiterate their deep concern
at the lack of accountability for all of the violations
committed by Israel, which fosters impunity and
destabilizes the situation on the ground, while reducing
the prospects for peace. That is why we reiterate our call
for international action, in particular that of the Security
Council, in order to ensure that those responsible are
brought to justice for their actions and that the violations
committed by the occupying Power cease. Israel must
fulfil its obligations and responsibilities within the
framework of international law.
We stress that failure to provide protection to the
Palestinian people will only lead to further escalation
of the violence, which will result, tragically, in
additional bloodshed, as demonstrated by the numerous
deaths and injuries of Palestinian civilians, including
children, in recent weeks. We also reiterate our concern
that the Security Council has long been unable to fulfil
its mandate on this very important issue because of the
use of the veto by one of its permanent members.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, we reaffirm that all measures and actions that

18-3280119/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel, the occupying Power, has taken or may take,
such as the illegal decision of 14 December 1981, which
sought to change the legal status, physical character
and demographic composition of the occupied Syrian
Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
Israeli measures to implement its jurisdiction and
administration in that area, are null and void, without
validity or legal effect. In that regard and in line with
our principled positions, we demand once again that
Israel comply with resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines
of 4 June 1967, pursuant to resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms its permanent solidarity with the Palestinian
people to promote a just, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful solution on the basis of General Assembly
resolution 194 (III). We also reaffirm our support for
the heroic Palestinian people in their quest for justice
and for the achievement of their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations, including the right to
self-determination, freedom and independence in their
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of the pre1967 borders.
The President (spoken in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to thank you for convening
this meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I further thank
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his valuable briefing on
this topic.
I am pleased at the outset to begin my statement
on an optimistic note by congratulating the Palestinian
delegation on having been selected by acclamation, at
the ministerial meeting of the Group of 77 in September,
to preside over the Group. In addition, the Palestinian
delegation was granted the necessary authorization by
the General Assembly to represent the Group and speak
on its behalf. We hope that that action is a positive
omen for the creation of a Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem, as its capital within 4 June 1967 borders,
20/34

18/10/2018

living side by side with Israel in peace, harmony
and coexistence.
However, successive events, tensions and upheavals
in the Middle East undermine our optimism. The dire
circumstances facing the Palestinian question paint
a grim picture. The situation in occupied Palestine is
deteriorating day by day because of the Judaization,
settlement
and
repression
policies
practiced
systematically against the Palestinian people by the
occupying Power. That will lead to an implosion and
to the exacerbation of tye situation. In addition, those
actions pose an obstacle to easing the tension and
relaunching the peace process, which has been stalled
for four years.
The use of force against unarmed civilians has
never led to peace, and the sustained settlement policy,
in violation of United Nations resolutions, particularly
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), has never led
to a resumption of the political process. On the contrary,
it has been a source of provocation for Palestinians
and the international community. Moreover, the lack
of decent living conditions has never helped to create
an atmosphere of trust or an environment conducive to
relaunching the peace process.
Undermining the recognized legal and historical
status of Jerusalem will only push the Palestinian
question into the labyrinth of religious conflict.
Jerusalem has a special place not only for the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, but also for believers of the three
monotheistic religions. Jerusalem is the first Qibla and
the third holy place for more than 1.5 billion Muslims.
The city’s legal status is inviolable and cannot be
modified by any means, pursuant to Security Council
resolutions and the international legitimacy.
That is why the Kingdom of Morocco, whose
King Mohammed VI is the President of the
Al-Quds Committee, underscores the importance of
safeguarding the historic, legal and political status of
Jerusalem, while reminding the permanent members of
the Security Council and the Quartet of their obligation
to assume their responsibilities fully in order to prevent
any action that could undermine the status of the city
or block international efforts aimed settling the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
His Majesty has therefore, on several occasions,
called for the avoidance of any action that could
modify the political status of Jerusalem, in particular
because it is a final-status issue. The international
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community must shoulder its full responsibilities and
encourage the parties to return to the negotiating table
and relaunch the peace process based on the two-State
solution. Otherwise, that solution will remain empty
words that can only lead to the spread of violence and
hatred. That is what His Majesty said in his message
to the participants in the fifth International Conference
on Jerusalem, hosted in Rabat from 26 to 28 June
under the theme “The Palestinian question after 50
years of occupation and 25 years of Oslo Accord”. His
Majesty said:
“The international community must make
every effort to pool efforts in order to ensure
that the fair and just settlement of the Palestinian
question stays at the negotiation table in line with
a realistic vision and a clear timetable, based on
the existing terms of reference and where the two
parties will seriously engage in it and shoulder
their responsibilities.
Our support for the Palestinian question is
unconditional and ongoing. That was also underlined
by His Majesty in his message:
“We reiterate our commitment to the Palestinian
question. Our support is continuous and absolute.
It shows solidarity and an irreversible commitment
until the Palestinian people are able to recover all
their inalienable rights, because those rights are
legitimate under international law, where land and
history bear witness to that.”
To conclude, the position of the Kingdom of
Morocco on this conflict remains unchanged. It is based
on the Arab Peace Initiative and on the principles and
terms of reference with regard to achieving peace on
the basis of creating an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the 4 June
1967 borders, living side by side with Israel in peace,
security and harmony.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We endorse the statement made by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Cuba regrets that since, the last open debate on this
issue (see S/PV.8244), there has been no progress in
promoting the just cause of the Palestinian people. On
the contrary, the situation on the ground continues to

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

deteriorate, with arbitrary decisions being made, such
as one Member State’s decision to stop funding the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. It is deplorable that owing
to the repeated obstruction of one of its members, the
Security Council has not even condemned the escalation
of violence and the tragic events in the Gaza Strip since
30 March.
Cuba reiterates in the strongest terms its rejection
of Israel’s use of disproportionate and indiscriminate
force against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territory, including East Jerusalem and particularly
the Gaza Strip, in gross and flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law. We once again condemn the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the demolition
and seizure of Palestinian property. All such measures,
together with the blockade of the Gaza Strip, violate
the Fourth Geneva Convention and erode the viability
of a two-State solution. Cuba urgently reiterates its
call on the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council must demand that
Israel immediately end its occupation of Palestinian
territories and its aggressive colonization policies and
practices, as well as abide by the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our unreserved support for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, based on the establishment of two
States and enabling the Palestinian people to exercise
their right to self-determination and an independent
and sovereign State, within in the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the right of
return of refugees. We reject the unilateral action of the
United States establishing its diplomatic representation
in the city of Jerusalem, which only exacerbates
tensions in the region. We call for support to President
Mahmoud Abbas’s proposal (see S/PV.8183) to hold
an international peace conference, based on agreed
parameters and terms of reference. We want to express to
the Palestinian Government and people our unwavering
solidarity and support for Palestine’s admission to the
United Nations as a full Member.
Cuba once again calls for Israel’s total and
unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and

18-3280121/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all occupied Arab territories. We want to point out that
any measure or action designed to change the legal,
physical and demographic status and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israel’s measures to exercise its jurisdiction and govern
that territory, violates international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
Lastly, we call for respect for multilateralism and
for the Charter. We call for an end to interference in
the internal affairs of others, to foreign aggression and
support for terrorist groups to promote instability and
conflicts in the Middle East, as well as to the invention
of pretexts and theories in the Council in an attempt
to legitimize the unilateral use of force and aggression
against sovereign States.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
Bolivia’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for October, and to wish you every success
in your work. We appreciate the holding of this open
debate, and we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing. We also thank Mr. Hagai
El-Ad for his participation in the meeting this morning.
The unresolved conflicts in the Middle East
continue to ensure that the situation there remains
critical and unstable. If we do not rely on wisdom and
reason and commit to respecting international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, we will put peace
and security in the region in jeopardy. Those challenges
require an environment conducive to addressing them,
including the united efforts of all concerned to fight
violent extremism and terrorism and tackle their root
causes while examining their cultural, social and
political backgrounds.
The Palestinian question has been on the agenda
of the Security Council for decades, and yet the
international community has been unable to settle it.
The achievement of such a settlement would have a
positive impact on the stability of the region as a whole
and on international peace and security. The Palestinian
question is the central issue for Arab and Islamic
nations. A lasting, just and comprehensive, peace must
be based on international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international legitimacy
22/34

18/10/2018

regarding self-determination and the inadmissibility
of the annexation of territory by force. That requires
meaningful negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli parties to reach agreement on issues pertaining
to a final settlement, based on agreed-on terms of
reference, including the Arab Peace Initiative, for the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State along the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; ending
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan and the Lebanese occupied territory;
immediately ceasing all settlement activities; on the
return of refugees; acknowledging the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, and not changing the status
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and other Islamic and Christian
holy sites, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque. That would
ensure that both parties could live side by side in peace
and security.
The unjust blockade of Gaza has entered its
eleventh year. The people of Gaza are enduring an
agony of suffering from the humanitarian crisis. Based
on instructions from His Highness Sheikh Tamim
bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, we
have provided them with $150 million in humanitarian
assistance. We have also provided the Gaza Strip with
fuel for generating electricity. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) recently celebrated the opening
of the new scholastic year, and the State of Qatar has
contributed $50 million to the UNRWA educational
programme, helping its schools to open on schedule.
Those efforts are part of our positive role to foster the
stability that peace requires.
The crisis in Syria is having serious repercussions
and demands an urgent political settlement based on
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2254 (2015), with the full participation of
the Syrian people, in order to meet their legitimate
aspirations while maintaining Syria’s national unity,
sovereignty and independence. Until a political
transition and national reconciliation are achieved, there
must be accountability for crimes under international
law and international humanitarian law. We underscore
the importance of supporting the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011.
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is nearly a year and four months since the illegal
blockade was imposed on my country, the State of
Qatar, in a contrived crisis that seeks to control its will
and invalidate its political decisions on fabricated and
farcical grounds. That contrived crisis only undermines
the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf
(GCC). For more than three decades, that regional
entity has been able to maintain its unity. In the light
of the crises in the region that require collective action,
we must preserve the GCC.
The countries imposing the blockade have not been
successful. The State of Qatar has been able to deal
with the unprecedented crisis in the Arab Gulf wisely,
through an ongoing policy of openness and building
bilateral and multilateral partnerships in different
areas, despite the campaigns of hatred and deception by
the countries of the blockade, which seek to justify their
irresponsible actions against the people and residents of
the State of Qatar.
Since the beginning of the crisis, the State of Qatar
has underscored its commitment to dealing with it in
accordance with international law and the relevant
existing bilateral and international conventions and
agreements on conflict resolution. The State of Qatar
therefore reiterates its commitment to the mediation
led by His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, Emir of the sisterly State of Kuwait. We are
grateful to the States that have supported us during
the mediation to resolve the crisis. We are ready to
negotiate without preconditions and in full respect for
our sovereignty, as we have reaffirmed time and again
in various forums.
In order to find solutions to that contrived crisis,
which causes legal and social problems pertaining to
family fragmentation and the deprivation of students
from the right to study as a result of the unilateral
measures imposed by the countries of the blockade,
the State of Qatar resorted to the International Court of
Justice, which, on 23 July, issued a ruling by adopting
provisional measures in favour of the State of Qatar
against the United Arab Emirates for violating the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination. The ruling included provisions that
requested the United Arab Emirates to ensure that
families were reunited and that the affected Qatari
students were given the right to finish their studies in the
United Arab Emirates and to receive their educational
records. It also gave the affected Qatari citizens access

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

to the judiciary in the United Arab Emirates. That
proves the sound legal position of my country.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm that the State of Qatar will continue its
foreign policy based on international law, friendly
relations and constructive cooperation within the
multilateral system. We believe that such an approach
is the best way to end all international crises, including
those in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): This meeting
is being held at a critical time. The credibility of the
multilateral system is at stake, particularly that of the
Security Council as it addresses flagrant violations
of international legitimacy and defends the firm and
established foundations of the peace process in the
Middle East, which is subjected to fierce attack.
The League of Arab States warns against the grave
threat to the main principles of the United Nations
peace process, in particular the two-State solution,
the principle of land for peace and the five final-status
issues. All those principles are under fierce attack by
unilateral, irresponsible decisions that seek to change
the facts on the ground through unilateral actions,
without negotiation, in contradiction to established
international legitimacy. Such actions attempt to settle
the issue of Jerusalem, the most critical final-status
issue, in favour of Israel by means of an illegal
acknowledgement of Jerusalem as the capital of the
State of Israel and the transfer of the United States
Embassy to that city. Another example is the ending
of funding to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
is an attempt to undermine the will of the defenceless
Palestinian refugees to exercise their inalienable right of
return to their occupied territories, while resolving the
matter of the refugees, which is the second final-status
issue, in favour of Israel.
That fierce attack has been exacerbated by the Israeli
inhumane practices against the defenceless Palestinian
demonstrators since the beginning of the Great March
of Return this year, when more than 200 people were
martyred and nearly 5,000 injured. Most recently, an
Israeli attack claimed the lives of seven martyrs east of
Bureij camp in the Gaza Strip. Such practices require
decisive action by the Security Council, the Human

18-3280123/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Rights Council and the International Criminal Court
so as to end Israel’s violation of its commitments as
the occupying Power in line with the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
We call on the Council to take action in order to
implement the Fourth Geneva Convention and the new
internationally agreed humanitarian concepts in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly those of the
responsibility to protect and human security, which
are established foundations for the protection of the
Palestinian people from a reckless occupying Power
that violates all their rights, including their right to
peacefully demonstrate against occupation.
In that regard, the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted at the request of the resumed tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly
includes alternatives for action. It is a solid foundation
for the Security Council to regain the initiative on that
important issue and to work with the General Assembly
to adopt an effective mechanism that will provide
protection in all its forms: physical protection from
armed aggression against the defenceless Palestinian
people; legal protection in the face of the nation-State
law of the Jewish people, which denies the Palestinian
people any connection to their historic land; and the
protection of Palestinian territory against settlements
that contravene resolution 2334 (2016). Israel’s action
to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar village and other Bedouin
communities in order to establish geographic contiguity
between East Jerusalem, the capital of the State of
Palestine, and the neighbouring Israeli settlements
is unacceptable. Holy sites should be protected by
addressing attempts by Israel to enact a law that permits
Jewish worshippers to pray at the Holy Mosque, which
is a flagrant violation of the status of Jerusalem as a
symbol of coexistence among faiths.
There is also the issue of providing protection for
the Palestinian people in Gaza against the destructive
impact of Israel’s blockade of the Gaza Strip, which
undermines Egypt’s tireless efforts to achieve the
desired Palestinian reconciliation.
On 20 February, Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas presented to the Council a practical plan for
peace through direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine, based on the two-State solution, the principle
of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and other
terms of reference that would lead to the establishment
24/34

18/10/2018

of an independent Palestinian State along the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, before
the beginning of next year. That should be achieved
through negotiations on all final-status issues without
exception and without biased external intervention.
He reaffirmed the elements of that plan in his speech
before the General assembly at the beginning of its
seventy-third session.
The League of Arab States looks forward to the
Security Council and the General Assembly supporting
that plan so that we see the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I would first like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, and Mr. Hagai El-Ad,
Executive Director of B’Tselem, for their contributions.
We are deeply concerned about the military
escalation in Gaza. We condemn the firing of rockets
from Gaza towards Israel. All the parties must show
restraint and avoid provocations in order to prevent
any further escalation of violence. We are also very
concerned about the recent attempts we have seen
to delay and undermine the speedy and unimpeded
implementation of the United Nations package
of humanitarian interventions to Gaza, which is
important for the people of Gaza and for regional
stability. Norway chaired a ministerial meeting in
New York on 27 September of the international donor
group to Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians (AHLC), which welcomed the United
Nations humanitarian package for Gaza and called
for its implementation as a matter of urgency, in
coordination with the Palestinian Authority. Norway
strongly supports those efforts and will provide
additional assistance to the United Nations.
Gaza is on the brink of economic, humanitarian
and social collapse. There is an urgent need for
improved access to clean water and energy, and for job
creation and the freer movement of people and goods
into and out of Gaza. Norway will continue to work
closely with the United Nations, the European Union
and key donors to ensure the full implementation of all
the elements of the humanitarian package. To succeed
in those joint endeavours, we urge all the parties to
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

do their utmost to support the international efforts. In
that regard, it is crucial for the Palestine Liberation
Organization to cooperate with the United Nations and
the international community.
Hamas bears a major share of the responsibility for
the dire situation in Gaza and must end its provocations
and politicking. It is the Palestinian Authority and the
international community, not Hamas, that are providing
assistance to the people of Gaza. Furthermore, the
Palestinian Authority should reinstate its governance
in Gaza and reunite Palestine under one authority.
In the meantime, however, it is counterproductive to
stop supporting Gaza financially and thereby further
impoverish the population. For its part, Israel should
restart fuel supplies to Gaza, expand the fishing zone
and abandon its system of extensive restrictions on the
movement of people and goods into and out of Gaza.
The AHLC meeting also called for urgent action
to mitigate the risks to the Palestinian economy. A
combination of major reductions in donor contributions,
significant revenue losses due to fiscal leakage and
continued restrictions on Palestinian access and
movement has led to a serious decline in the Palestinian
economy in 2018. There is a risk of a financial
breakdown next year unless we take concerted action
to address the fiscal issues, including between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel. A viable Palestinian
economy is a vital precondition for a two-State
solution, and donors must increase their contributions.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains
indispensable. The Agency provides essential services
to the most vulnerable Palestinian refugees and
contributes to regional stability. It is vital that donors
remain committed to supporting it.
Recent developments in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank, including the decision to demolish the
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, are very worrying. The
location of Khan Al-Ahmar is strategically important
to the preservation of the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State. Norway has been a consistent partner
in promoting peace and security in the Middle East for
decades. Our long-standing commitment to helping
to resolve the conflict between Israel and Palestine is
based on our firm support for a negotiated two-State
solution, even though today the hurdles seem more
difficult to overcome than ever.

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
sincerely grateful to the Bolivian presidency of the
Council for convening this meeting and would like
to warmly congratulate it on Bolivia’s exemplary
leadership of the Council. I also want to thank
today’s briefers.
I align myself with the statements delivered earlier
by the representatives of Venezuela, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and Bangladesh,
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The situation in Palestine continues to deteriorate.
In the wake of new Israeli crimes, the number of
Palestinian protesters killed is more than 200 and the
number of injured more than 22,000. Why are they
protesting? They are protesting the systematic violation
of their inalienable rights over the past 70 years, the
occupation of their land, the decade-long inhumane
siege of Gaza, the recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’s
capital by the United States, the racism shown towards
them and its recent legalization in Israeli law, the
demolition of their homes and the construction of
Israeli settlements.
They want to return to their ancestral lands, their
own homes, villages and cities, and to establish their
own State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. But
why is Israel killing them? It is killing them merely
because they are Palestinians, whether they are children,
women, farmers or fishermen. Because in Israel’s view,
Palestinians have no rights — no right to assembly,
to expression, to protest, to return, to establish their
own State or even to life, and because Israel is addicted
to cruelty, crime, death and destruction. With those
realities before us, let us review what the Council has
done to protect the rights and lives of Palestinians.
During the past seven decades, it has adopted more
than 300 resolutions on the Israeli-Palestinian crisis
and related issues, the most recent being resolution
2334 (2016). In previous meetings, almost all Council
members have said that Israel has violated that
resolution. Of course, that is only one of the more than
300 Council resolutions that Israel has violated, and it
is the symbol of an international outlaw.
The United States unconditionally shields Israel
against any of the Council’s measures. One example of
that is its veto of 44 of the Council’s draft resolutions

18-3280125/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on Israel. In practice, the United States has rendered the
Council completely ineffective with respect to Israel,
which has therefore been emboldened to commit all
four of the core international crimes, wage more than
15 wars, occupy Arab countries’ territory, invade all of
its neighbours without exception, attack other countries
in the region and beyond and possess every kind of
weapons of mass destruction. The list goes on. The
question that is now before us is whether there is any
option, besides taking international action, for holding
both the United States and Israel accountable for all of
their wrongdoing and for depriving Palestinians of their
inalienable rights. That is why we believe that the world
should continue to support the realization of Palestinian
rights and reject any further occupation, aggression,
oppression or intimidation.
In order to comply with this meeting’s agenda, I
have been focusing only on the question of Palestine.
We will make a further statement later to respond to the
irrelevant claims of the United States representative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I would like to thank
Bolivia for convening today’s open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
It has been more than half a century since the General
Assembly recommended a two-State solution with
clearly defined borders between the State of Palestine
and Israel.
The Council, through resolutions 476 (1980) and
478 (1980) declared the Israeli occupation of Palestine to
be illegal;, the annexation of the holy city of Jerusalem
to be illegal; and the shifting of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem to be illegal. The Council also declared it
illegal for any country to recognize Jerusalem as
Israel’s capital, and therefore any move of its embassy
to Jerusalem to be illegal. Through resolution 2334
(2016), the Council called upon Member States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the
territory of the State of Israel and the territories of
Palestine, occupied since 1967, and reaffirmed the
illegality of Israeli occupation and settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
And yet, the question of Palestine remains
unsettled. As responsible members of the international
community, all Member States, especially the key
players in the conflict, must uphold the letter and spirit
of relevant Council resolutions. The legitimacy of the
26/34

18/10/2018

Council is fundamental to the credibility of the United
Nations and the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Just last month, Israel’s High Court of Justice
rejected a petition to prevent the demolition of a village
in the West Bank, which would result in the displacement
of hundreds of people, leaving them homeless, without
a livelihood, without a school for their children and
without access to basic health care.
As the people of Palestine continue to live in
unjust conditions in their own homes, we have on many
occasions heard the international community call upon
the people of Palestine to be resilient. If we continue
to merely express sentiments instead of holding
accountable those responsible for multiple breaches of
international law and international humanitarian law,
we are masking our own failures and abandoning our
own responsibility to the people we claim to help.
The Maldives has always believed that an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, based on the 1967 borders, living side by
side and in peace and harmony with Israel, is the best
and only solution to the conflict. We call on Israel to
fully implement the Council’s resolutions and to respect
its legal obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations. We all must act in good faith and respect the
international norms that we have forged to sustain
peace in the Middle East.
In Syria, we are approaching the end of the seventh
year in the conflict and one of the crucial moments in
Syria’s north-western Idlib province, where an outbreak
of conflict would result in the worst humanitarian
catastrophe of this century. In such an event, more than
3 million people would be displaced with nowhere to
seek shelter or find food or access health care. It is
our view that all actors involved in the conflict should
prioritize the fundamental human rights of the people
affected over and above anything else, and to allow
humanitarian relief to reach those who need it most.
The already complex conflicts in the Middle
East are being worsened by terrorist groups that are
inflicting destruction and tearing the social fabric of
society in the process. They do not recognize borders,
distinguish between young and old or women and
men, or respect any religion or culture. We must tackle
the factors enabling terrorism through international
cooperation, information-sharing and strategies that
focus on combating violent extremism.
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Security Council can and should act to address
the conflicts in the Middle East. We urge the Council to
use the tools and mechanisms that are already in place
within the United Nations system to pursue dialogue
and to resolve those conflicts. The Government and the
people of the Maldives will always support a peaceful
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine and the
conflicts in the Middle East.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Uruguay attaches great importance to
the various situations in the Middle East on the
Council’s agenda.
We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
informative briefing and, as we have highlighted so
many times, for his ongoing dedicated work. He can
count on Uruguay’s support.
Despite the many multilateral, regional and
unilateral initiatives to try to end to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict, we are still far from reaching a
peaceful and mutually acceptable solution. The twoState solution remains the only viable option. There
is no plan B to replace it. We must return as soon as
possible to direct negotiations that can elucidate the
outstanding issues. We recognize that this may take
time, but it would be worse to remain bogged down in
the current paralysis and stagnation. To achieve that
goal, the current trends on the ground must be reversed.
Otherwise, it will be extremely difficult for Palestine to
consolidate its State territory.
Uruguay has strong ties of friendship with both
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We once
again reaffirm the right of Israel and Palestine to live in
peace within secure and recognized borders in a spirit
of renewed cooperation and free from any threat or
action that undermines peace. We could dwell on the
most recent events — the firing of rockets from the
Gaza Strip towards Israel and the repression to which
it leads or the imminent demolition of the village of
Khan Al-Ahmar. We prefer instead to focus today on
asking both parties to adopt measures and gestures that
would help to de-escalate and alleviate tensions, albeit
gradually. In Uruguay’s view, such measures include
the following.
First, the launching of industrial or homemade
rockets from the Gaza Strip must cease, along with
any action that can be deemed terrorism against Israeli
targets. Second, restraint must be exercised so as to

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

prevent disproportionate repression of demonstrations
or protests taking place in the Gaza Strip. Third, the
settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territories
must be suspended because settlements are illegal
under international law. Fourth, demolition orders
for Palestinian homes in the West Bank and in east
Jerusalem must be suspended. Fifth, the State of Israel
must be fully recognized and the blockade of Gaza
must end. Sixth, military and civilian prisoners or
their remains must be returned to their relatives as a
minimum show of humanity in the conflict. Seventh,
reconciliation agreements between Fatah and Hamas
must be consolidated for the sake of Palestinian unity.
Eight and no less important, beyond activism, both sides
must be sensitive to the general and urgent needs of
the civilian population. Palestinian and Israeli civilians
are the majority and they want peace. Unfortunately,
political leaders tend to lose sight of that fact. Ninth,
the historical, cultural and religious heritage must be
preserved in an atmosphere of coexistence. If tolerance
reigns, there is room for everyone. Finally, we must
work to develop the economic potential of the region
and solid avenues of cooperation once the conflict
is over.
In conclusion, it is time to begin to move beyond
hatred and its incitement, disillusionment, despondency
and frustration. Seventy years ago, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 181 (II). It can be said that, thanks to
the impetus provided by that international legal action
emanating from this Organization, Israel and Palestine
have consolidated their identity, rights and obligations
as States and as recognized legal entities.
Today as 70 years ago, the international community,
which was sensitive and backed that solution, is still
eagerly waiting. It is harmful and unhealthy for the
leaders to refuse to accept the path that the international
community has selected and backed in good faith. Any
territorial gain or exercise of misunderstood sovereignty
is moot if it is at the expense of peace and prolongs the
misery of the peoples who inhabit that region.
Before concluding, I would like to add a brief
comment on Syria. Uruguay continues to support the
work of the Special Envoy, Mr. Steffan de Mistura, a
tireless negotiator who has acted on behalf of all of us.
After so many years of a conflict of rare intensity that
has brought nothing but death, physical destruction
and damage to the social fabric of Syria, the least we
can aspire to is the formation of a balanced, inclusive
and credible constitutional committee that will lay the

18-3280127/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

foundation for a new constitution for Syria, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, my delegation aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and welcomes the fact that, by a majority vote,
Palestine will have the technical capacities to exercise
the chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China, for the
benefit of not only that consensus-seeking group but of
the entire membership.
We thank you, Madam President, for convening
this debate. The Security Council’s regular meetings
on this matter illustrates the importance of keeping this
issue on the agendas of the Council and the General
Assembly. It also demonstrates the importance that the
international community attaches to it and the need to
find solutions, for the question of Palestine is a pending
responsibility of the international community.
Our delegation thanks the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his briefing. We commend his invaluable
efforts in the work carried out with all the parties
concerned, in particular with the Palestinian Authority,
Egypt and Israel, to avoid escalation in Gaza, support
reconciliation among Palestinians and address all
humanitarian problems.
Likewise, we express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his report entitled “Protection
of the Palestinian civilian population” (A/ES-10/794),
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20, of the same title and adopted by the General
Assembly in June by an affirmative vote of 120 States. It
is worrisome to note that the many protection initiatives
that the United Nations is implementing are not enough
to address the concerns regarding the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population under Israeli occupation
mentioned in Assembly resolution ES-10/20.
Three months ago, during the Council’s third
quarterly debate on this issue (see S/PV.8316), most
Member States expressed deep concern about the grave
situation in the Middle East — in particular in the Gaza
Strip, which could result in another escalation — and
about the need for preventive diplomacy and a peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine, a need that Member
States reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution
28/34

18/10/2018

72/14, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine”, which highlights the urgency of salvaging
the prospects for realizing the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security within recognized borders, based on the pre1967 borders. In that regard, Ecuador again urges that
we should make tangible progress in advancing a final
and just political solution for the parties in the region,
based on the existence of two States, Palestine and
Israel, as the only way to achieve peace and stability in
the Middle East.
A humanitarian snapshot of Palestinian victims in
the besieged Gaza Strip covering the period 30 March
to 4 October and published by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
asserts that Gaza
“has witnessed significant increase in Palestinian
casualties in the context of mass demonstrations
taking place along Israel’s perimeter fence with
Gaza and in the context of hostilities. The large
number of casualties among unarmed Palestinian
demonstrators, including a high percentage
of demonstrators hit by live ammunition, has
raised concerns about excessive use of force by
Israeli troops.”
On 2 October, Michael Lynk, an independent
human rights expert and Special Rapporteur appointed
by the Human Rights Council to monitor and report on
the human rights situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, announced that while protests continue at
the Gaza border against Israeli policies, so do deaths
and injuries among Palestinian protesters, including
children, by Israeli security forces. In that regard, we
trust that the independent international commission of
inquiry initiated in May by the Human Rights Council
will be able to conduct a thorough investigation into the
deaths and injuries in Gaza during the past six months.
Year after year the facts do not change: the
humanitarian crisis worsens, food insecurity increases,
the destruction of infrastructure continues and living
conditions deteriorate. The Security Council meets
routinely to gain awareness about the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. Each
meeting highlights the worsening of the humanitarian
situation due to violations of human rights, international
humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Child. Palestinian children are particularly affected
by the arrests and actions to which they are subjected,
in contravention of the latter. Israel’s adoption of new
exclusionary and discriminatory legislation and its
continuation of settlement activity allow for a dangerous
continuation and increase of this ever-present latent
threat to international peace and security.
Ecuador once again reiterates its full adherence to
the letter and spirit of the resolutions of the General
Assembly that have consistently affirmed the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and the Assembly’s
determination that any actions taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration on the Holy City of Jerusalem are
illegal, and therefore null and void and have no validity
whatsoever, while also reiterating the Council’s call
on Israel, the occupying Power, in its resolution 1322
(2000) to abide scrupulously by its obligations and
responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War.
Israel’s continued expansion into Palestinian
territory puts at risk international peace and security as
well as the two-State solution, to which the Council is
committed. We reiterate that it is imperative and urgent
that the Council no longer remain indifferent and that
it fulfil its responsibility and work to implement the
necessary measures to comply with its own resolutions.
In conclusion, Ecuador stresses the fundamental
need to combat impunity for violence in time of conflict
in an independent, impartial and effective manner.
Even more important, however, is combating the causes
of conflicts themselves, for therein lies the possibility
for building genuine peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to congratulate the State of
Bolivia on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October, and we thank the
presidency for organizing this debate. We also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his valuable briefing.
Iraq aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Iraq supports efforts to achieve peace and stability
in the Middle East. All stakeholders must play a

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

constructive role in order to resolve differences through
negotiations and refrain from taking any unilateral or
provocative measures that lead to fuelling violence,
religious intolerance and racism. Achieving peace and
stability in the Middle East requires a comprehensive
policy to address the political, economic and social
causes of conflicts through a bold, comprehensive and
diplomatic policy to avert ominous predictions of a
possible catastrophe in the Middle East.
Iraq has always supported the cause of the Palestinian
people and their just struggle for their legitimate rights,
and we renew our consistent position vis-à-vis a just
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
which will be possible only through the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State that enjoys full
rights, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with
the Arab Peace Initiative and international legitimacy.
We support the peace plan that President Mahmoud
Abbas presented in the Security Council on 20 February
(see S/PV.8183), wherein he called on international
actors to establish a multilateral international
mechanism under the umbrella of the United Nations
to sponsor the peace process, and to convene an
international conference to relaunch a credible and
time-bound peace process.
We welcome the General Assembly resolution on
the protection of the Palestinian civilian population
(resolution ES-10/20) and the latest report (A/ES-10/794)
of the Secretary-General on the subject, which includes
enforceable options to protect Palestinian civilians.
We urge all States and international organizations to
participate in the protection of Palestinian civilians
and the establishment of a practical and effective
mechanism to implement the resolution.
We call on the international community and the
members of the Security Council to guarantee real
protection for Palestinian civilians and to implement
the relevant international resolutions, in particular
resolutions 605 (1987) and 904 (1994), which stipulate
that the Fourth Geneva Convention is to be applied to
the occupied Palestinian territory and that international
protection is to be provided to the unarmed Palestinian
people. We call on all States parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to shoulder their responsibilities
in honouring and implementing the Convention in the
occupied State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem,
by putting an end to Israeli violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

18-3280129/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We renew our call to Member States that have
not yet recognized the State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital to do so as soon as possible in
order to invest in peace. Such a practical step would be
in line with the long-standing international consensus
and the declared commitment of the international
community in that regard.
We would like to express our grave concern about
recent developments regarding the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). We reaffirm the need to ensure
the Agency’s mandate. We appreciate the positions
taken by the international community in support of
UNRWA’s work and thank the countries that have
provided financial support to compensate for its deficit.
We also appreciate the efforts of countries that host
refugees, especially Lebanon and Jordan.
In conclusion, my Government values the efforts of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator Nikolay
Mladenov, as well as those Member States seeking to
launch comprehensive and lasting peace initiatives. We
urge international actors to engage in the peace talks,
accelerate the peace process and remove any obstacles
hindering a just and comprehensive solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this very important debate. I also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the ongoing
complicated situation in the Middle East, particularly
the long-protracted conflict between Israel and
Palestine, and the situations in Syria, Yemen, Iraq
and Afghanistan. We share other Member States’
great concern regarding the escalation of tensions two
days ago and the deterioration of the humanitarian
and economic situation in Gaza. Cycles of negative
developments have once again been hampering hopes
for peaceful solutions to the conflicts in the region.
We recognize the tireless efforts of the international
community, including those of the United Nations, but
30/34

18/10/2018

we believe that much greater efforts are needed now.
We therefore support all efforts by the United Nations,
the Middle East Quartet, the League of Arab States
and countries of the region to push forward the peace
process for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict with a view
to achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
that ensures the legitimate interests of all the parties
concerned, as well as peace and security for the Middle
East. Concerted actions are now needed to resume direct
and constructive talks between Israel and Palestine.
Viet Nam reaffirms its unwavering support for
the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people for
their inalienable rights, including the right to selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State. We firmly believe that the only
viable solution is to establish a Palestinian State on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, living side by side with the
Israeli State in peace, security and mutual recognition.
We urge all the parties concerned to strictly
comply with international law, exercise maximum selfrestraint, refrain from violence and foster a favourable
environment for dialogue. We call on Israel to halt
all settlement construction and take action to protect
civilians and improve the living conditions of the
Palestinian people in Gaza. The relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular Security Council resolutions
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), must be fully implemented.
With regard to the Syrian situation, Viet Nam
welcomes recent positive developments, including the
agreement by Israel, Syria and the United Nations to
reopen the Quneitra crossing in the Golan Heights and
the cooperation between Jordan and Syria to reopen
the Jaber-Nasib border crossing. However, we remain
concerned about tensions in Syria and call upon all
parties to settle disputes through peaceful means. We
support efforts to find a political solution in Syria
based on the fundamental principles of international
laws and the Charter of the United Nations, including
the principle of respect for the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.
The Security Council, with its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
should take prompt and effective action to seek peaceful
and comprehensive solutions to the conflicts across the
region. As a partner for sustainable peace, Viet Nam
will continue its efforts to contribute to lasting peace
and security in the Middle East.
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Aini Atan (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important open debate, which allows non-members
of the Security Council to express their views on an
important issue that currently warrants the urgent
attention of the United Nations. I also wish to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, as well as Mr. Hagai
El-Ad, Executive Director of B’Tselem, for their earlier
briefings to the Security Council.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The situation in Palestine remains dire. A peaceful
resolution otothe longest man-made conflict remains
elusive. Malaysia condemns, in the strongest terms,
the various instances of the excessive, disproportionate
and indiscriminate use of force by Israeli forces against
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem and in particular in
the Gaza Strip. If left unaddressed, the growing tension
in the Gaza Strip in recent weeks could certainly lead
to greater chaos and turmoil in the region. In that
regard, Malaysia calls on the parties concerned in the
region to exercise restraint and make every effort to
de-escalate tensions.
Malaysia also calls on all delegations here in the
Council Chamber today, as well as the international
community at large, to demand that Israel stop all
violations and illegal activities and fully comply with
all its obligations as prescribed by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
as well as in line with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
Malaysia is confident that States Members of the
United Nations can make a significant contribution to
breaking the impasse in the Middle East peace process.
Malaysia continues to believe that a two-State solution,
with the Palestinians and the Israelis living side by
side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, is the only viable
solution to this long-standing conflict.
For its part, Malaysia will continue to provide
assistance to the Palestinians, within its means. We

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

continue to reaffirm our unwavering support for and
solidarity with the Palestinian cause in materializing
their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence. Malaysia will work closely with the
international community and multi-stakeholders in
finding a peaceful, just, sustainable and lasting solution
to this long-standing issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Oman.
Mr. Al Towaiya (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, allow me, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, to extend to you, Madam President, my sincere
thanks and appreciation for having convened this
important meeting. I wish also to congratulate you on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.
Although our Arab region is experiencing political
crises, the Palestinian question, which has been going
on for 70 years, remains the central issue in the region.
Resolving it in a fair and lasting way will bring security
and stability to that region.
The Charter of the United Nations prohibits
and rejects the conquest of land by force. That is the
principle on which the Arab countries based themselves
when, during their summit held in Beirut in 2002, they
adopted the Arab Peace Initiative, which is underpinned
by the principle of land for peace and the withdrawal
of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since
1967. In addition, the Arab countries have spared no
effort in international and regional forums to mobilize
support for achieving the two-State solution, within the
borders of 4 June 1967, and to ensure that a just peace
prevails, in which no inequitable solution is imposed
on the Palestinian people, who are under the yoke
of occupation.
However, Israeli intransigence, procrastination and
evasion have not led to the desired solution to this issue or
to ending the conflict. Israel offers only one alternative,
namely, continue with the occupation, consolidate
colonization and violate Palestinian sovereignty.
We reiterate that resolution 2334 (2016) represents
a step in the right direction for ending the Israeli
occupation and its settlement project, rejecting violence
and establishing peace based on the two-State solution.
That is why the international community must now
undertake efforts and take the measures necessary
to implement that resolution. The international

18-3280131/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/10/2018

community must also bring pressure to bear on the
Israeli Government to abandon its settlement project.

suffering and ensure them their rights so that they can
realize their legitimate aspirations.

We underscore the Arab position calling for the full
lifting of the Israeli blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip,
while promptly achieving Palestinian reconciliation in
line with the document signed in Cairo last year. In that
connection, we reaffirm our support for the efforts of
our brothers in the Arab Republic of Egypt to ensure
Palestinian reconciliation.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.

In keeping with the provisions of international
law and United Nations resolutions on the Palestinian
question, the Arab Group calls on the Security Council
and its member States to take the following measures:
first, to not recognize any unilateral action aimed at
undermining the two-State solution, including any
action affecting the character, status or demographic
composition of Jerusalem, and to ensure that such
actions are null and void and have no legal impact;
secondly, to call once again on States to refrain from
setting up diplomatic missions in Jerusalem, in line with
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions; thirdly, to reiterate that the questions of
Jerusalem and refugees are final-status issues that must
be addressed through negotiations between the parties
on the basis of international legitimacy resolutions;
and, fourthly, to step up international and regional
efforts to bring about a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East by creating an independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in line with international
legitimacy resolutions.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
is currently facing a critical situation. That is why I
take this opportunity to highly commend the lofty
humanitarian work done by UNRWA to assist more
than 5.4 million Palestinian refugees, including
children, women and young people, by providing relief
and development services in the areas of health care,
nutrition, infrastructure and education.
The Arab Group rejects any attempts to
nullify the refugee issue or to remove it from the
international agenda.
In conclusion, let me say that there can be no
stability and peace in the region as long as the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories continues. We must assist
the Palestinians and save them from despair, because
the international Organization is unable to end their
32/34

Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we congratulate you and the
Permanent Mission of the Plurinational State of Bolivia
on your outstanding presidency of the Security Council
during the month of October.
Millions of human beings live day by day in pain,
suffering and despair as a result of armed conflict.
Costa Rica strongly deplores the escalation of the
conflicts in the Middle East. The situation in recent
years and months has deteriorated, and it has not been
possible to achieve peace and security in the region.
It is urgent to put an end to the humanitarian crisis
in some parts of the region and to seek an early and
peaceful solution thereto. That humanitarian crisis is
a tragedy of shocking proportions that represents an
affront to humanity. We therefore once again call on
the Security Council to fully discharge its mandate to
uphold international peace and security, as clearly set
out in the Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Costa Rica strongly supports the two-State solution,
based on the 1967 borders and in line with the
agreements reached by the parties. We believe that
remains the only viable solution. The resolutions of the
Security Council are binding and must be implemented.
The implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) is key to
making progress towards achieving peace.
This year has been a painful reminder of the
devastating consequences of protracted conflicts. Costa
Rica expresses its grave concern and condemns the
escalation of tensions, clashes and, above all, deaths.
Acts of violence, incitement and provocations by both
sides must cease. They must meet their obligation to
reverse all those negative trends on the ground in order
to build trust and foster a climate conducive to peace.
The protection of the civilian population is imperative.
Costa Rica reiterates its condemnation of settlement
activities and land grabs, as well as announcements of
new construction. All attempts must cease, including
plans to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar and forcefully
displace the population. Such actions, as Costa Rica
sees it, are contrary to international law and undermine
the solution based on the peaceful coexistence of two
18-32801

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

States. Each new settlement that is built in the occupied
territories is a new obstacle that stands in the way that
leads to peace.
Allow me to refer to the protracted situation in
Gaza, which has deteriorated rapidly in the past few
months. Poverty and unemployment have increased.
According to the report submitted to the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians on 27 September, poverty
increased from 39 per cent in 2011 to 53 per cent in
2017. In the second quarter of 2018, the unemployment
rate in the Strip exceeded 53 per cent.
We are convinced that there is a close link between
the socioeconomic situation and the humanitarian
reality, which is aggravated by the unprecedented
funding crisis of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. In
Gaza, the Agency provides access to primary health
care for 1.3 million people, access to education for more
than a quarter of a million children and food assistance
to almost 1 million refugees living in poverty.
It is therefore important to emphasize the
commendable work being done by the Agency, and
while my country is concerned about the severe
financial cuts to which it has been subject, the response
of the international community has been exemplary.
Costa Rica applauds the ministerial meeting held
in New York on 27 September, which sought to
mobilize political and financial support for the
Agency. Similarly, my country welcomes the support
of the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and UN-Women, among others, which
are implementing economic assistance programmes to
promote employment opportunities focused mainly on
women and young people in Palestine.
I conclude by urging that we put into practice
the principles of multilateralism, which prioritize
solidarity, peace among rivals and the commitment
to achieve the interest of the entire international
community. The United Nations must play its role as the
epicentre of global governance, based on respect and
the joint search for solutions. At this critical juncture,
it is imperative to renew international and regional
efforts to help the parties achieve a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace based on the long-standing terms of
reference endorsed by the Council. Military options
are not solutions. War cannot be fought with more war.
Peace must be built with the use of tools that diplomacy,

S/PV. 8375 (Resumption 1)

multilateralism and peace education offer us to end that
humanitarian tragedy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Israel to make a
further statement.
Mr. Bourgel (Israel): I have asked for the floor
to comment on some of the remarks made here earlier
today, and I will do my best to be brief, which I am sure
that you, Madam, will appreciate after so many hours
in the Chair.
With regard to the comment made by the
representative of Iran, it is worthwhile to remind
Member States of exactly who was talking. The Islamic
Republic of Iran is the world’s leading State-sponsor of
terrorism. It spends approximately $7 billion each year
funding its proxies and terrorist organizations, at the
expense of its own citizens. Iranian-made and Iraniansupplied weapons are fuelling conflicts and promoting
terror around the world, especially in Syria, Lebanon
and Yemen. Iran’s activities violate multiple Security
Council resolutions. Iran was also recently caught
trying to murder European citizens on European soil.
When it comes to Israel, Iran’s end goal is undeniable.
The Supreme Leader of Iran himself set a timetable of
25 years until the destruction of my country. It is the
moral obligation of the international community to take
concrete actions against those who insist on fuelling
violence, promoting terrorism and doing their utmost
to undermine global peace and security.
It is, perhaps, a vain exercise to respond to the
elucubrations of the representative of the Syrian
regime. Therefore, I will just mention that his absurd
accusations against Israel will certainly not distract
the world from the atrocities committed by the Syrian
regime against its own people.
It was probably also surprising to hear the Lebanese
representative lecture Israel while Hizbullah, an
internationally designated terrorist organization, plays
an open, active and prominent role in the Lebanese
Government. The result is that over 100,000 rockets are
on the northern border of Israel, as Hizbullah’s fanatics
threaten the stability of the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to make a further statement

18-3280133/34

S/PV.8375 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
United States has again abused this Council’s agenda. It
focused on Iran’s children. That is not surprising. Like
its addiction to imposing sanctions, America is addicted
to disinformation, fabrication and deception. In doing
so, it has tried to cover up its own shameless, illegal
acts against the Palestinians, including recognizing
Jerusalem as Israel’s capital, and to distract attention
from Israel’s crimes, including its brutal killing of
Palestinian children. But the bullets and bombs that
kill them are either directly supplied or funded by the
United States. Therefore, that country is an accomplice
in all crimes committed by Israel.
With respect to Iranian children, the United States
representative portrayed herself as more royalist than the
king, but what is the truth? Hundreds of Iranian children
were killed by Saddam’s chemical weapons, which
were mostly supplied by the United States. Hundreds
of Iranian children were killed by the Mujahidin-e
Khalq Organization, a terrorist organization that was
de-listed by America and now has the United States as
its safe haven.

34/34

18/10/2018

In 1988, the American forces in the Persian Gulf
deliberately targeted an Iranian civil aircraft and killed
all 290 people on board, of whom 66 were children. The
United States illegal sanctions hurt and harm children
more than others. That is how they help Iranian children.
Recently, the International Court of Justice ordered the
United States to remove all such sanctions. They must
implement that ruling.
My last point is that the kingdom of terror, Saudi
Arabia, is not eligible to talk about “our islands” in
the Persian Gulf. Yes, it is the “Persian Gulf” and not
any other fake name. Instead, the Saudis should stop
exporting terrorists to Syria and elsewhere, killing
Yemeni children in school buses and targeting wedding
ceremonies, and end Yemen’s occupation.
Last but not least, I salute Hossein Fahmideh,
my hero and the hero of all Iranians, from the
Council Chamber.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

18-32801
