S/PRST/2008/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 February 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5838th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 February 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
between Eritrea and Ethiopia”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls that, on 30 January 2008, it adopted
resolution 1798 (2008) on the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE). The Security Council is following with the utmost concern the
situation confronting the Mission. It expresses its full support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General to address this problem.
“The Security Council notes with great concern that, by maintaining
restrictions on UNMEE despite the Council’s numerous demands, and, by
refusing to reinstate fuel deliveries to UNMEE, the Government of Eritrea has
created a situation in which a temporary relocation of personnel and equipment
from Eritrea has been rendered inevitable. The Security Council also expresses
deep concern about the impediments and logistical constraints put on the
Mission in its attempts to organize this temporary relocation. The Security
Council condemns such steps taken by Eritrea.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the lack of cooperation from
the Government of Eritrea which not only gravely contravenes United Nations
Security Council resolutions and the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities
of 18 June 2000 (S/2000/601) but also fails to comply with Eritrea’s general
obligation to assist forces that have been stationed with its consent. The
Security Council holds Eritrea responsible for the safety and security of the
Mission and its personnel.
“The Security Council demands that the Government of Eritrea resume
full cooperation with UNMEE, including by ending all its restrictions on the
Mission, and abide by all its obligations as a United Nations Member State.
“The Security Council expresses its determination to closely monitor the
situation and to consider further appropriate steps for the safety and protection
of the Mission and its personnel.”

08-24226 (E) 150208

*0824226*
