S/2004/421

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 May 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 19 May 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you the text of the Quartet statement, which
was issued following the meeting of the Quartet Principals — representing the
United States of America, the European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United Nations — at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 4 May 2004 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this text to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-36180 (E) 250504

*0436180*

S/2004/421

Annex
Quartet statement
New York, 4 May 2004
Representatives of the Quartet — United Nations Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, Irish Foreign Minister Brian
Cowen, United States Secretary of State Colin Powell, High Representative for
European Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana, and European
Commissioner for External Relations Chris Patten — met today in New York.
The Quartet reaffirms its commitment to our common vision of two States,
Israel and a viable, democratic, sovereign and contiguous Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security; and calls on both parties to take steps to fulfil their
obligations under the road map as called for in Security Council resolution 1515
(2003) and previous Quartet statements, and to meet the commitments they made at
the Red Sea summits in Aqaba and Sharm el-Sheikh. In that context, the Quartet
urges the Government of Israel to implement its recent affirmation of its readiness to
implement certain obligations under the road map, including dismantling of outposts
erected since March 2001 and progress towards a freeze on settlement activity, and
urges the Government of Israel to implement those commitments and to fully meet
its road map obligations.
The Quartet members reviewed developments since their last meeting in New
York on 26 September 2003 and view with great concern the situation in the Middle
East. The Quartet condemns the continuing terror attacks on Israel, and calls on the
Palestinian Authority to take immediate action against terrorist groups and
individuals who plan and execute such attacks. The Quartet members recognize
Israel’s legitimate right to self-defence in the face of terrorist attacks against its
citizens, within the parameters of international humanitarian law, and the Quartet
calls on the Government of Israel to exert maximum efforts to avoid civilian
casualties. They also call on the Government of Israel to take all possible steps now,
consistent with Israel’s legitimate security needs, to ease the humanitarian and
economic plight of the Palestinian people, including increasing freedom of
movement for people and goods both within and from the West Bank and Gaza,
removing checkpoints, and other steps to respect the dignity of the Palestinian
people and improve their quality of life. Under the road map, the Government of
Israel should take no actions undermining trust, including deportations; attacks on
civilians; confiscation and/or demolition of Palestinian homes and property, as a
punitive measure or to facilitate Israeli construction; destruction of Palestinian
institutions and infrastructure; and other measures specified in the Tenet work plan.
The Quartet calls for renewed efforts to reach a comprehensive ceasefire as a step
towards dismantlement of terrorist capabilities and infrastructure, and renewed
progress towards peace through the implementation of the road map.
The Quartet notes the Government of Israel’s pledge that the barrier being
erected by Israel should be a security rather than a political barrier, and should be
temporary rather than permanent. The Quartet continues to note with great concern
the actual and proposed route of the barrier, particularly as it results in the
confiscation of Palestinian land, cuts off the movement of people and goods, and
undermines Palestinians’ trust in the road map process as it appears to prejudge the
final borders of a future Palestinian State.

2

S/2004/421

The Quartet took positive note of the announced intention of Israeli Prime
Minister Sharon to withdraw from all Gaza settlements and parts of the West Bank.
The Quartet welcomes and encourages such a step, which should provide a rare
moment of opportunity in the search for peace in the Middle East. This initiative,
which must bring about a full Israeli withdrawal and complete end of occupation in
Gaza, can be a step towards achieving the two-State vision; and has the possibility
of restarting progress on the road map. The Quartet further notes that any unilateral
initiatives by the Government of Israel should be undertaken in a manner consistent
with the road map and the two-State vision that underlies the road map.
The Quartet reaffirms President Bush’s call on 24 June 2002 for an end to the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967 through a settlement negotiated between the
parties. The Quartet also notes that no party should take unilateral actions that seek
to predetermine issues that can only be resolved through negotiation and agreement
between the two parties. Any final settlement on issues such as borders and refugees
must be mutually agreed to by Israelis and Palestinians on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the terms
of reference of the Madrid peace process, the principle of land for peace, previous
agreements, and the initiative of Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah endorsed by the
Beirut Arab League Summit; and be consistent with the road map.
The Quartet and the international community are prepared to intensify their
engagement with the Palestinians to restore momentum on the road map, enhance
Palestinian humanitarian and economic conditions, build transparent and
accountable Palestinian institutions, ensure security and stability in Gaza and the
West Bank from which Israel withdraws, prevent all acts of terrorism, and ensure the
dismantlement of armed terrorist groups. In furtherance of these goals, the Quartet
will take the following steps, with appropriate mechanisms established to monitor
progress and performance by all sides:
The Quartet will act on an urgent basis, in conjunction with the World Bank,
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, on the basis of a World Bank/Office of
the Special Coordinator rapid-assessment study, to ensure that Palestinian
humanitarian needs are met, Palestinian infrastructure is restored and developed, and
economic activity is reinvigorated. The Quartet welcomes the World Bankestablished Trust Fund as an accountable, transparent, and appropriately
benchmarked mechanism for receipt of international assistance.
The Quartet is prepared to engage with a responsible and accountable
Palestinian leadership, committed to reform and security performance. The Quartet,
through an empowered Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Task Force on Palestinian
Reform, and in connection with the major donors working through the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee and the Local Aid Coordination Committee, will engage the
Palestinians to reinvigorate the reform agenda of the road map, including a wellprepared and appropriately timed electoral process, paying particular attention to
areas from which Israel has withdrawn. In this regard, the Quartet members will
undertake to oversee and monitor progress on these fronts.
The Quartet will seek to ensure that arrangements are put in place to ensure
security for Palestinians and Israelis as well as freedom of movement and greater
mobility and access for Palestinians. The Quartet underscores the need for agreed,
transparent arrangements with all sides on access, mobility and safety for

3

S/2004/421

international organizations and bilateral donors and their personnel. As Israel
withdraws, custody of Israeli-built infrastructure and land evacuated by Israel
should be transferred through an appropriate mechanism to a reorganized Palestinian
Authority in coordination with representatives of Palestinian civil society, the
Quartet, and other representatives of the international community to determine
equitable and transparent arrangements for the ultimate disposition of these areas as
quickly as possible.
Effective security arrangements continue to be critical to any possibility of
progress. In coordination with, and under the auspices of, an oversight committee
led by the United States, and in coordination with the empowered Prime Minister
and Cabinet, Palestinian security services should be restructured and retrained,
consistent with the road map, to provide law and order and security to the
Palestinians, to end terror attacks against Israel and Israelis and to dismantle
terrorist capabilities and infrastructure. The Quartet welcomes in particular the
Government of Egypt’s engagement on security issues, including efforts to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting ceasefire as a step towards this goal.
The Quartet reaffirms its commitment to a just, comprehensive, and lasting
settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict based upon resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973); and reminds all parties of the need to take into account long-term
consequences of their actions and of the obligation for all parties to make rapid
progress towards resumption of a political dialogue. The Quartet will remain
engaged with Israelis, Palestinians and all other parties — including through
presence of its envoys on the ground — to ensure appropriate follow-up to the steps
outlined above. An appropriate coordinating and oversight mechanism under the
auspices of the Quartet will be established. The Quartet also calls on all States in the
region to exert every effort to promote peace and to combat terrorism, and to prevent
terrorist groups from making use of their territory to plan, prepare, or launch
terrorist attacks.

4
