UNITEDiVATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING: 8/9 SEPTEMBER 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1448/Rev. 1) . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

Page
1

Statement by the President . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Israel addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8794);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8805);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8806)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . 1.. . . . . . . .

2

S/PV. 1448

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securiv Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Sunday, 8 September 1968, at 9 p.m.
President: Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

(Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l448/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8794);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of lsrael addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8805);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8806).
Statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to apologize to the members
of the Council for the short notice at which this meeting of
the Council has been convened. Early this afternoon I
received a request from the Permanent Representative of
Israel for the immediate resumption of the meeting of the
Security Council adjourned on 5 September 1968. Contip
mation of that request is contained in document S/8805
dated 8 September 1968, which has been distributed to
members. I immediately began consultations with members
for the meeting this evening. In the meantime, I received a
request from the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Republic for an urgent meeting of the Council. That
request is contained in document S/8806 dated 8 September 1968, which has also been distributed to the members
of the Council.
Adoption of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Algeria
on a point of order.
3. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): The
Security Council is meeting this evening as a matter of
urgency to consider the new situation arising from the
incidents which have occurred today, 8 September, in the
Suez Canal area. This is a new item included in the

Council’s agenda ‘at the request of the United Arab
RepubliC(S/8806):
4. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative of
Algeria, in ordering the agenda for tonight we have
followed the precedent of prior situations: namely, that we
have kept the item under the general heading of “The
situation in the Middle East” and have added the new item
to which the representative of Algeria has referred, the
letter dated 8 September from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic addressedto the President
of the Security Council.
5. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
6. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The representative of Algeria
was quite right in pointing out that the previous letter from
Israel had no connexion with the incident in question. In
accordance with the previous letter from Israel the Security
Council was convened, the parties were heard and the
members of the Council expressed their opinions and
arranged for consultations. The permanent members of the
Security Council held talks, and so did the non-permanent
members of the Security Council. Now, today, an entirely
different question has urgently arisen. You, Sir, as President
of the Security Council, have received a letter from the
United Arab Republic [S/8806] and a letter from Israel
[S/880.5]. You have called today a meeting of the Council
on this question. But what has the letter of 2 September
[S/8794] to do with this? Doubts naturally arise as to why
that letter has been included in the present agenda.
(tratislated

from Russian):

7. We all understand very well that the problem of the
Middle East is linked up with many other questions.
Beginning as far back as last year, since the time when the
aggression began and Arab territory was seized by Israeli
troops, various questions have been discussedmany times’,
and each of them, when it arose, was discussedindependently. For this reason doubts naturally arise as to why it
was necessary to fit the letter of 2 September into the
present agenda, since the Security Council has been
convened in connexlon with a new question.
8. The PRESIDENT: In answer to the representative of
the Soviet Union I would explain that the Presidency was
guided by rule 10 of the provisional rules of procedure,
which states that:
“Any item of the agenda of a meeting of the Security
Council, consideration of which has not been completed

at that meeting, shall, unless the Security Council
otherwise decides, automatically be included in the
agenda of the next meeting.”

heavy and prolonged exchange of fire along the Suez Canal
during the day of 8 September, that is today. The report
from the Chief of Staff on the firing exchange wasreceived
by me only at 8.58 local time tonight. This is understandable since the Chief of Staff compiles his reports to me o~y
the basis of the reports which he receives from the military
observersin the field; in this case there would be quite s
number of field reports from the observation posts on botg
sides of the canal. Throughout most of today the observes
have had to concentrate on efforts to stop the firing by
arranging a cease-fire that would hold. Only then could
attention be given to reporting.

The letter which I received from the representative of
Israel, contained in document S/8805, specifically referred
to the resumption of the discussion, and, as I say, I
followed both the procedure laid down in the provisional
rules of procedure and the practice of the Security Council,
in setting out the agenda which is before us. If the
representative of the Soviet Union would like to make a
formal motion regarding the way in which he would like to
have this agenda ordered I can consult the Council on that.
But I have only done what I believed to be normal under
the provisional rules of procedure, and I refer particularly
to rule 10.

15. The first of the three short messages which I received
from the Chief of Staff this afternoon reads asfollows:
“Heavy exchange of fire along almost all the canal
started at 1332 hours GMT. As reported by the Ismailia
control centre, weapons used are artillery, mortar, tanks,
machine-guns, recoilless and small arms. Cease-fire pro.
posed for 14.50 hours GMT and agreed to by both parties,
However, sporadic fire still going on at 1512 hours GMT
in OP Echo and OP Hotel area.”

9. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I only wish to draw attention to
the fact that we have met today on another urgent question
and not on the one in respect of which we reached
agreement on how to proceed with our work further.
10. The PRESIDENT: I have taken note of the remark of
the representative of the Soviet Union. Unless there are
further remarks, I shall take it that the agenda is adopted.

Since several references are made in General Bull’s reports
to the term “OP’‘-observation posts-1 should like to call
the attention of the Council to the fact that the locations
of the various United Nations observation posts are already
given in documents S/8053/Add.3 and Add.4 dated 31
October and 1 December 1967.

The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the Middle East

16. The second message which I received from General
Bull this afternoon reads as follows:

Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8794);

“Heavy exchange of fire recommenced at 1535 hours
GMT. New cease-fire proposed for 1630 hours GMT.”

Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8805);

17. The third messagewhich I received reads asfollows:
“Exchange of fire in canal area has ceased and since
1650 hours GMT all OP’s have nothing to report.”

Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8806)

18. I immediately asked General Bull to expedite to the
extent possible the transmission of his report on this Lttest
breach of the Security Council’s cease-firedemand. In view
of the fact that no messages about further firing have been
received from General Bull, I think it is safe to conclude
that the cease-firearranged by the United Nations observers
has been holding since it became effective at 1650 hours
GMT on Sunday, 8 September.

11. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) took places
at the CounciI table.

19. The latest report just received-at 8.58 p.m. local
time-is being processed and will be circulated in Englisll
and French tomorrow morning,1 but in the meantime, for
the benefit of the members of the Council I shall now read
it out. It was sent to me by General Odd Bull from
Jerusalem at 2305 hours GMT on 8 September and readsa~
follows :

12. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the question before it, contained in the three letters referred to in the agenda.
13. Before calling on the first speaker on my list, I
understand that the Secretary-General wishes to make a
statement and I now call on him.

“1. Observation post Lima reported at 1306 hours z
(GMT), explosions observed on east side of the canal in
the OP Gold/OP Red area. Again at 1308 hours Z,
explosions observed in the same area.

14. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In three brief cable
messages in the course of this afternoon the Chief of Staff
of UNTSO, General Odd Bull, has informed me of the

1 Subsequently circulated as document A/793Q/Add.78.

2

“2. OP’s Red and Gold reported that explosions were
seen at 1308 hours Z on both sides of the canal about one
kilometre south of OP Red.
“3. At 1311 hours Z, OP Lima reported heavy explosion observed on west side opposite area OP Gold and OP
Red. At 1314 hours Z, OP Lima reported heavy explosion
observed on east side close to OF’Red, and 1317 hours Z,
OP Lima reported heavy explosion observed in OP Gold
and OP Red area. OP Lima reports confirmed by OP’s
Red and Gold.
“4. Between 1308 hours Z and 1317 hours Z, fire died
down to resume with intensity at 1329 hours Z.
“5. At 1325 hours Z, OP Pink reported Israel Defence
Forces initiated fire.
“6; At 1332 hours Z, OP Mike reported tire initiated
by United Arab;Republic. Fire returned by IDF at 1336
hours Z. Artillery, mortars, tanks, heavy machine-guns
and light machine-guns used. OP Gold reported United
Arab Republic initiated fire at 1332 hours Z.
“7. At 1436 hours Z, OP Copper reported fire initiated by United Arab Republic. At 1332 hours Z, OP Blue
reported initiation of fire by United Arab Republic. At
1343 hours Z, OP Kantara reported fire initiated by
United Arab Republic. At 1342 hours Z, OP Silver
reported fire initiated by United Arab Republic. At 1345
hours Z, OP Yellow reported fire initiated by United
Arab Republic.
“8. At 1335 hours Z, OP Hotel reported hearing firing.
At the same time OP Lima reported exchange of fire in
OP Red Area.
“9. At 1440 hours Z, fire was returned in OP Copper
area, at 1343 hours Z in OP Silver area and immediately
in other OP areas,
“IO. First cease-fire time was proposed at 1355
hours Z for 1450 hours Z. Accepted by Senior Israel
representative at 1405 hours Z and by Senior United
Arab Republic liaison officer at 1418 hours Z. This first
cease-firewasnot effective.
“11. At 1350 hours Z, OP Echo reported firing by
IDF with artillery and mortars. At 1355 hours Z, OP
Juliet reported artillery, mortar and tank fire from both
sides.
“12. Due to damage to Kantara control centre, communications message from headquarters UNTSO to Kantara control centre were then relayed by Ismailia control
centre.
“13. At 1411 hours Z, all OPs on west side of canal
reported shooting from both sides of canal with artillery,
tanks and machine-guns.
“14. From 1435 hours Z to 1452 hours Z, all OPs on
west side of canal reported heavy firing from both sides
with artillery, mortars, tanks, heavy machine-guns and
light machine-guns.

“15. As firing continued in most areasa new cease-fire
time was proposed for 1630 hours Z. At 1541 hours Z,
Ismailia control centre informed Kantara control centre
that according to information from UNTSO headquarters,
IDF liaison officer accepted cease-fire time of 1630
hours Z. At 1607 hours Z, Senior United Arab Republic
liaison officer accepted cease-firetime at 1630 hours Z.
Firing continued in most areas, Israel Defence Forces
ceased firing at or soon after 1630 hours Z, United Arab
Republic finally ceased fire at 1705 hours Z.
“16. Cease-firesas follows:

OP Capper area:
OP Kantara area:
OP Yellow area:
OP Silver area:
OP Pink area:
OP Gold area:
OP Red area:
OP Blue area:

Israel Defence
Forces
1630 hours Z
1650 hours Z
1630 hours Z
1625 hours 2
1607 hours Z
1640 hoursZ
1652 hours Z
1636 hours Z

United Arab
Republic
1705 hours i
1650 hours Z
1647 hours 2
1630 hours Z
1630 hours Z
1646 hoursZ
1652 hoursZ
1650 hours Z

“17. During the incident, weapons used were small
arms, light machine-guns, heavy-machine-guns, tanks;
mortars, artillery from both sides. Observation post Pink
reported ground-to-ground missiles used by IDF. Kantara
control centre heard three rounds that sounded like
ground-to-ground missiles used by IDF.
“18. Casualties:Major E. T. F. Flyger, United Nations
military observer, Argentina, was very slightly wounded
at OP Red. Wound caused by wooden splinters from
door. Israel Defence Forces liaison officer advised eight
IDF soldiers killed and seventeen wounded, and two
civilians wounded, Kantara.
“19. Damage: .East side: Kantara control centre reported antenna damage, electric power line cut, water
truck damaged and windows broken at Kantara control
centre headquarters. OP Silver: Two caravansburnt out.
Caravans damaged at OP’s Gold and Red. Slight damage
to jeeps, OP Kantara; OP Yellow light damage. West side:
Severe damage caused to Ismailia control centre headquarters and some damage to United Nations residences.
Full report of damage to follow.”

That is the end of the report up to this moment.
20. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representative of
the Soviet Union on a point of order.
21. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian): It is not on a point of order that

I should like to speak, but I should like to put a question to
the Secretary-General regarding the documents which he
has read out.
22. The PRESIDENT: I have been requested to ask the
Secretary-General whether he might like to give any
clarification of the report he hasjust submitted. Would the
Secretary-General wish to reply to questions put to him at
this stage?

,‘i

r

23. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I do not think I am in
a position to elaborate on the report which I received this
afternoon from General Odd Bull. For the moment I am in
a position to submit the report as it is. I do not think I
should attempt to clarify any aspect of the report.
24. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated porn Russian): I do not mean that the Secre-

tary-General should comment on and explain the substance
of the documents or communications. But, taking into
account the fact that we have no document before us and
have only listened to everything, the question naturally
occurs to me whether anything is said in this text about the
explosion by the Israeli side of a mine which Israeli field
engineers, as is stated in the letter from the Israeli
representative [S/8805], detonated at 1 p.m. Is anything
said about this explosion in the text of these documents, in
General Bull’s report? This question is of great importance
because it was following this explosion that the exchange of
fire took place. Without the text this is difficult to
determine. Is there no possibility of clarifying whether in
the text of the documents received from General Bull there
is any mention of the explosion by the Israeli side, by the
Israeli command, of a mine which, as a matter of fact, was
the begin.ning of the exchange of fire?
25. The PRESIDENT: Does the Secretary-Generalwish to
reply to that?

approximately 1500 hours, the mine was detonated by
Israeli sappers. The explosions of this detonation were
reported by the United Nations military observers ir
General Bull’s report. Some minutes afterwards, United
Arab Republic military positions opened fire on those
sappers and on other Israeli forces in the area. At
approximately 1510 hours, Egyptian artillery fire was
opened along an extended sector from Kantara to the Pan
Tawfiq area. Fire wasreturned.
32. The United Nations military observers proposed a
cease-fire for 1650 hours. Israel agreed and stopped firing,
but as the United Arab Republic forces continued shelling
along the whole length of the canal sector, the cease-firedid
not come into effect.
33. As is already known, Egyptian artillery batteries and
other military installations are situated in the immediate
proximity of and inside Egyptian towns and other inhab.
ited localities. Sometimes such batteries and installations
are positioned next to hospitals, schools and public
buildings. The International Red Cross and other international organs have repeatedly drawn attention to this rash
policy creating serious dangers for the civilian population,
The Cairo authorities turned a deaf ear to all these
remonstrances.
34. At 1810 hours, the United Nations military observers
made another proposal for a cease-fire for 1830 houn.
Again Israel agreed. By 1835 hours, fire ceased, except for
small-arms fire by the Egyptian forces in the Port Tawtiq
area.

26. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Mr.President, I have
nothing to add to what I have just read. Early in the
afternoon, as I reported to the Council, I received three
short reports from General Odd Bull and at 8.58 p.m. I
received a long report which I have just read out. I did not
receive any other report today.

35. Israeli casualties include *eight soldiers killed and
seventeen wounded, three seriously. In the town of
Kantara, the only inhabited point on the east bank, the
Egyptian artillery bombardment damaged a church, two
mosques and numerous houses. Two local Arab inhabitants
werewounded.

27. The PRESIDENT: The reports will be distributed as
documents at the same time asthe record of this meeting of
the Council, for perusal in detail, and we shall, of course,
also have the statements of the parties who ‘have asked to
speak. The long report which the Secretary-Generalhasjust
read out will be circulated as a Security Council document.1

36. One United Nations military observer was also
wounded by United Arab Republic fire, and two observation posts were hit, burned and had to be evacuated.
Kantara control centre was damaged.

28. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Israel, on whom I now call.

37. I should like to express our regret to the United
Nations and to the Government and delegation of Argenv
tina on the wounding of the United Nations military
observer,Major E. T. F. Flyger.

29. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I regret that it wasnecessaryto
inconvenience members of the Security Council in requesting this urgent meeting at such short notice. Egyptian
attacks in violation of the cease-firehave assumed, in the
course of the day, such dimensions that an immediate
convocation of the Security Council became essential.

38. Only a few days ago, on 5 September at approxi.
mately 0900 hours local time, three anti-vehicle mines were
discovered planted on the patrol track in the same area
about ten kilometres north of Port Tawfiq. Footprints cf
several persons led to and from the Suez Canal. It is obvious
that the mines were laid by an Egyptian commando unit
which had crossed to the east side of the canal from the
west.

30. The report we have just heard from the Secretav
General emphasizes the gravity of these developments and
the United Arab Republic’s responsibility for repeatedly
initiating fire throughout the afternoon. Indeed, the United
Arab Republic wasfirst to attack and last to ceasefire.

39. In my statement on 4 September f1446th m=tiwl 1
expressed my Government’s concern lest the Egyptian
attack carried out on 26 August was a prelude to a renewed
campaign of violence along the cease-fire line. Today’s
developments strengthen this concern. The repeated plant.

31. Today, at 1300 hours local time, Israeli forces in the
Suez Canal sector discovered an anti-vehicle mine laid in a
track on the east bank of the canal approximately ten
kilometres north of Port Tawtiq. In the afternoon, at
4

ing of anti-vehicle mines in the same place, within sight of
Egyptian army positions only 200 to 300 metres distant,
leaves no doubt whatsoever about the origin and wellplanned nature of these military operations,

46. The PRESIDENT: I now recognize the representative
of the United Arab Republic, who is the next speaker on
my list.
47. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): On 4 September 1968 when I addressedthe Council, I commented
on the motives that had induced the Israeli authorities to
resort to the Security Council, and I had this to say:

40. The fact that today fire was opened by the Egyptian
army several minutes after the detonation of the mine, and
that only a few minutes later United Arab Republic
artillery launched an attack along the entire front from
Kantara to Port Tawfiq, indicates that this was a premeditated, large-scale and unprovoked assault in flagrant
violation of the cease-fire.

“ . . . it is imperative for responsible people to search
and ask for the motives that have spurred Israel to bring
an unfounded case before the Security Council. What
makes the search even more urgent is our cognizance of
Israel’s past history, its present behaviour and its future
designs. Despite its membership in the United Nations
and its verbal acceptance of the Charter, its principles and
objectives have consistently maintained that among all
the membership of the United Nations it should be the
one entitled to take the law into its own hands. Very
recently Mr. Tekoah arrogantly informed this Council
that no one, and I repeat ‘no one’, hasthe right to advise
Israel on the conduct of its defence policy. That policy is
pursued regardless of its victims-be they innocent men,
women and children-the rules of international law, the
principles of the Charter, or even the basic tenets of
human behaviour. Israel’s past and present bodes ill for
the future. This should be the main concern of the
Security Council.

41. It is interesting to note with what self-assured cynicism the Egyptian authorities reported on the progress of
their attack. At 2003 hours, Radio Cairo broadcast as
follows :
“Israel requested a cease-fire for 1630 hours. The
exchange of fire continued, however, until 1830 hours
when it ended. The Egyptian authorities agreed to the
cease-fireon condition that Israel would not reinforce its
troops on the east bank of the Suez.”
42. There could not have been a clearer admission of
Egypt’s guilt in this refusal to agree to the cease-fire
proposed by the United Nations military observers and
accepted by Israel. The United Arab Republic’s statements
which have been issued since the attack proclaim in
unequivocal terms that today’s aggression is to be regarded
as the beginning of a new Egyptian policy in the warfare
against Israel. The attempt to impose conditions on the
acceptance of the cease-fire, the boastful, arrogant communiques, are ominous in tone and substance, and contain
a clear threat of further escalation.

“Israel seldom resorts to the Security Council and has
always preferred to rely on naked force to achieve its
ends. If today Israel has opted for a different course,it is
not without misgivings that we should view its decision,
for it is customary for Israel to use the language of peace
when it intends to embark imminently on acts of war.

43. It seems fairly obvious that the United Arab Republic
is trying to undermine the cease-fire and create a situation
of grave danger in the area. One wonders what could be the
possible motives behind this menacing move. One cannot
but recall that only yesterday the Cairo semi-official daily
Akhbar el-Yom wrote:

“Should we then assumethat in bringing to the Council
a groundless accusation under the pretence that it is
seeking justice, Israel may in fact be creating a pretext to
start a full-scale military operation against my country,
against Jordan, or both? ” [1#46th meeting, paras. 3537.1

“The revelation of the true role played by Zionism and
imperialism in the events in Czechoslovakia has led to the
revolutionary forces in the entire world preparing themselvesto act against Israeli aggression in the Arab region.
The events in eastern Europe have opened the eyes of all
to the imperialistic Zionist danger.”

Today this is no more an assumption; it is a fact; it is a
Jeality.
48. Israel did not have the patience to wait for the
conclusion of the deliberations of the Council; for while the
Council was still discussing the Israeli allegations, the Israeli
forces opened fire today at 1600 hours local time, in the
area of Port Tawfiq and Suez, using artillery and tank fire.
Israel continued to escalate the firing by extending the
shelling to the cities of Ismailia and Kantara. Even
according to the report we just heard from the Secretary
General, there, are grounds for believing that missiles were
used by Israel. Our armed forceswere obliged to return the
fire in self-defence. This wanton Israeli attack causedheavy
losses in civilian life in addition to the wide damage and
destruction to buildings and public installations in both
cities. I shall keep the Security Council informed about this
latest Israeli act of aggression.

No comment is necessary on this.
44. At the 1446th meeting on 4 September, I asked the
Egyptian Government a simple question: Is Egypt ready to
take all necessary measures to prevent, in the future,
military attacks in violation of the cease-fire? The answer
came today in a hail of shells and bullets, in fire and death.
45. Whatever “its. motives, the recrudescence of Egyptian
aggression has brought the situation in the area to a point
of extreme danger. Egyptian aggressive designs must be
arrested. There can be no further delay under these grave
circumstances. We appeal to the Security Council to act
immediately and effectively to stop Egyptian acts of
aggressionand help maintain the cease-fire.

49. Having endured for the past twenty years the wiles
and guiles of Israeli behaviour, we are by now alert to all
5

Council-that we should have a short recess to consider
what action can be most effective at this stage.

their worn-out tactics. One of those tactics is to strike a
blow and then to race to the Security Council with a
complaint, labouring under the delusion that by resorting
to the Security Council, it will exonerate itself for the acts
of shame and aggression it has committed. We should no
longer be credulous of the Israeli contentions; on the
contrary, we should be wary of all the Israeli initiatives
because every time Israel professes its respect for the
principles of the Charter, it has always been a cloak for
future nefarious activities. The case at ‘hand is a typical
example of such duplicity, as has constantly been the case
in the past.

55. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Repub1ic.s)
I wish to speak about the
impressions that one gathers from the situation. From tha
official letter of the representative of Israel [S/8805] it h
clear that an anti-vehicle mine, laid in a track, war
discovered by Israeli troops. Even if this mine was really
there, it seems to have been without a time mechanism,
Why was there such a hurry to explode it? Would it not
have been better to inform the United Nations observers?
Once the mine had been discovered and the decision was
taken to explode it so that it would not hinder road traffic,
the latter side should have been notified that this explosion
was not the beginning of a bombardment and exchangeof
fire. One would think that it would have been logical for
the Israeli side to start by doing this.
(translated porn Russian):

50. At this juncture, I only want to remind the Council
that when, on 5 June 1967, Israel treacherously committed
aggression against my country, it came rushing to the
Security Council complaining that it had been aggressed
upon. The tactics of yesterday are being repeated today.

56. In the same letter it is stated, however, that two hours
later, at approximately I500 hours, immediately foBow+lg
the demolition of the mine by Israeli field engineers, an
exchange of fire began, and this has been confirmed by the
representative of Israel in his statement today. The question
naturally arises-and we are entitled to ask the representa.
tive of Israel-why did the Israeli side, knowing perfectly
well the tense situation in this area where the armed forces
of two countries stand opposite each other, act preciselyas
it did? Why was it necessary to be in such a hurry to
detonate the detected mine, immediately following which
the exchange of fire is said to have begun, causing many
casualties and material damage?

51. It should by now be clear that the Israeli allegations
on 26 August 1968, which were not corroborated by the
United Nations observers, were advanced to cover up for
the aggression committed today. Israel, again resorting to
the same tactics, claims that the detonation of an antivehicle mine on the east bank of the canal motivated our
forces to open fire.
52. This is another futile attempt to cover up for today’s
premeditated act of aggression. The civilian population
along the Suez Canal has, since the treacherous Israeli
aggression of 5 June 1967, been the target of systematic
and indiscriminate Israeli shelling from across the Suez
Canal, The casualty toll among the civilian population has
amounted to 332 killed and 767 injured. Since it is the
primary duty of every Government to exert all efforts in
order to ensure the safety of its population, and in view of
the brutal and wanton attacks perpetrated by the Israeli
armed forces against innocent men, women and children,
the United Arab Republic Government had to resort to its
right of self-defence, in conformity with the Charter.

57. The Israeli representative has spoken here about who
was guilty of starting the exchange of fire. But logic speaks
for itself: whoever first exploded the mine without infoml.
ing the headquarters of the United Nations observers,
whoever first raised a din is the one guilty of starting this
incident which entailed such unfortunate consequences
and, apparently, is doing so increasingly, aswe cansee from
the subsequent reports of General Bull. However, a legitimate question arises: did the United Nations observerspay
attention to this explosion, to the explosion of a mine by
the Israeli side? According to the interpretation I understood the statement of the Israeli representative to mean
that the Israeli command informed the United Nations
observers of this explosion post factum, that is, after the
explosion. But why was this. not done beforehand and why
wasa message not sent in good time to the headquartersof
the United Nations observers to announce that “We intend,
at 1500 hours, to explode a mine; please inform the other
side that this is not the beginning of a bombardment, that
the explosion is not connected with any military operations
and that it is simply a normal explosion of a detectedmine
which is hindering road traffic”.

53. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): We have listened
tonight to reports of grave events,and I believe that it must
be in the minds of all of us that we should, if we possibly
can, take urgent action to deal with this situation. I think
that it was right that the Council should be immediately
called; in accordance with our tradition we were ready to
come to the Council without delay, at only an hour or
two’s notice.
54. The reports which we have received since we came
indicate that that urgency wasjustified. I believe that it
may well be that we would wish to continue our discussion
of these grave events on another occasion; but I would
respectfully suggest to you, Sir, and to the Council, that at
this stage we could best servethe purposes of the Council
by recessing our proceedings-a short recess, I would
hope-so we can consider together what immediate action
can be taken. I believe that it is in the interest of speed and
in accordance with the gravity of the situation we discuss
that we should not seek to prolong the open debate in the
Council, but that we should consult together with a view to
the most urgent action that we can take. I therefore put
that suggestion to you, Sir, and to the members of the

58. Naturally the supposition arises that if Israel had acted
otherwise, if the Israeli command had acted otherwise,a
serious incident of this kind entailing such unfortunate
consequences, casualties and material damage might have
been prevented, Another question that naturally arises1s
that the attention of the Unitecl Nations observersaad
General Bull would have been drawn to this Circumstan@
and that he would have passed on his information concern*
6

ing the mine. Doubt and legitimate suspicion arise as to
why Israel acted precisely in the way it did. If it had had
peaceful intentions, it would perhaps have acted differently
and the incident would have been prevented. But it acted
precisely in the way it did, and as a result there followed a
chain of events which led to such unfortunate consequences. And this in its turn gives rise to the question: was
there really a mine or wasit the usual “canard”?

assured by General Bull that further reports will, be
forthcoming. Certainly, I think that his analysis of the raw
evidence which he has given to us in his longer report would
be of very great use and importance to the Council. I can
think of nothing more fruitless tonight, therefore, than for
us to engage in the kind of long speculative statements such
as we have just heard from the representative of the Soviet
Union, statements based on hypotheses and suppositions
and inferences drawn from inferences. Therefore, I would
consider it very sensible if we were to follow the suggestion
made by the representative of the United Kingdom.

59. I should like to draw attention to one more point.
According to the Russiun interpretation of General Bull’s
reports which were read out, the expression “Israel Defence
Forces” is used repeatedly in them. The United Arab
Republic armed forces are not mentioned at all in this way.
The impression is created that, on the east bank of the Suez
Canal, the Israel Defence Forces are defending themselves
against someone. But the whole world knows that this is
not so. Everyone knows why the Israeli forces arc there.
Against whom are they defending themselves? In reality it
is the Arab armed forces who are defending themselves
against the armed forces of the aggressors who have come
right up to th: Suez Canal from the cast. For this reason
one would like to express the wish that the United Nations
observers and General Bull would pay’more attention to the
terminology in their reports. Otherwise one is left with a
rather unpleasant taste where the authors of such reports
are concerned, which, of course, is undesirable for United
Nations observers,

63. With that in mind, I would move, under rule 33, that
we adjourn for a brief period of perhaps forty-five minutes
for purposes of consultation, with the thought in mind that
we may be able to act on this very important matter
tonight, because I think that speed is of the essence,as the
representative of the United Kingdom suggested. And I
would hope that further consideration of this matter might
be given by the Council after we have had the benefit not
only of being able to examine the reports of General Bull,
but also, hopefully, of further interpretation from him asto
just what the significance of those reports may be.
64. The PRESIDENT: I would draw the attention of the
representative af the United States to the fact that a
motion for suspension has to be decided without debate.
Before rccognizing him and entertaining that motion, I had
taken note of the desire of the representative of Israel to
exercise his right of reply. In these circumstances, would
the representative of the United States have any objection
to hearing the representative of Israel before putting the
motion to the vote’?

60. In conclusion, we have the right to put a question to
the official representative of Israel here. Does he himself
consider such acts of the Israeli command to be normal,
logical and legitimate, as when a mine, discovered on a
track or on a road-and as par as is known, in a deserted
spot in the Sinai Peninsula-and representing no immediate
danger, is exploded within two hours and without informing the United Nations observers at all regarding this?
Taking into account that such a way of dealing with the
mine and its detonation led to human casualties and
considerable material damage, the conclusion naturally
suggests itself that Israel ought not to have done this, and if
it did, it thereby took the initiative and laid the beginning
of the whole chain of extremely unfortunate consequences,
for which, undoubtedly, it will have to bear the responsibility .

65. Mr. BALL (United States of America): I would not
wish to deny the representative of Israel his right of reply,
but 1 have a feeling-4 had it very much in mind when I
made my motion--that
although I am sure we should
benefit from his reply to thr: extent that it would be
addressed to the rather supposititious statement by the
representative of the Soviet Union, nevertheless it can only
lead to the kind of discussion tonight which seems to me in
essence to be very fruitless. I see no point in trying to
discuss this serious matter when we do not have before us
the kind of evidence which the representative of the Soviet
Union has been insisting for the last few days that we
should have.

61. The PRESIDENT:
I have not lost sight of the
suggestion made by the representative of the United
Kingdom. He did not, however, make a motion under rule
33 of the provisional rules of procedure. In the meantime I
have been asked to add the name of the representative of
the United States to the list of speakers, and the representative of Israel has indicated a desire to exercise his right of
reply. I call now on the representative of the United States.

66. The PRESIDENT:
I interpret the United States
representative’s reply to my question to mean that he hasin
fact moved the suspension of the meeting under rule 33.
Under that rule I am required to recognize that a motion
for suspension shall be decided without debate.
67. Mr. MALIK

62. Mr. BALL (United States of America): Within the last
few days the representative of the Soviet Union has made a
great point of the fact that the Council was being asked to
act on inadequate evidence. Tonight we have had a long
report from General Bull, and we also have had three brief
reports from General Bull, which have beeneread out to us
by the Secretary-General. Those reports have not been
circulated and the last one in particular is long and
complicated and requires considerable study. We are also

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): A point of order.

68. The PRESIDENT:
69. Mr. MALIK

Is it related to the motion?

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian}: No.

70. The PRESIDENT: Since I have not recognized the
representative of Israel on a point which does not concern
7

tlie motion, I am afraid that I cannot make an exception
until we have reached a decision on the point of order
under rule 33. I have before me a motion to suspend the
meeting. This, of course, does not exclude the possibility of
continuing the discussion after the suspension for whatever
purposes the Council may decide, but I must ask the
Council to decide on the motion without debate, as
required under rule 33. Is there any objection to the
motion to suspend the meeting?
71. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated fiorn Russian): A point of order.
72. The PRESIDENT: ,I can only entertain that the point
of order raised by the representative of the Soviet Union is
in opposition to the suspension of the meeting. I must
abide by rule 33, that is, that the question of suspension
has to be decided without debate, and since the representative of the Soviet Union has raised, I take it, an objection,
I must put the question of the suspensionof the meeting to
the vote of the Council. I have put a motion to the Council
which has been moved by a member, and under the rules
that particular motion is not subject to debate. Do I take
the point of order of the representative of the Soviet Union
as an objection to the suspension of the meeting for
consultation? The representative of the Soviet Union has
been co-operative to the extent of saying that he is not
objecting to the suspension of the meeting. I give him the
assurance that he and others have the right to exercise the
right of reply when we resume our discussion. With that
comment, may I take it that there is no objection that this
meeting be suspended for consultation. Since there is no
objection we shall suspend the meeting for half an hour.

the meeting was suspended at 11.20 p.m., and resumed
at 1.05 a.m.

73. The PRESIDENT: When the Council suspended its
meeting to permit consultations, the President conducted
consultations with all members of the Council. After
extensive consultations the President has been authorized
to make the following declaration:
“The Security Council, having met urgently to consider
the item on its agenda contained in document S/1448)
Rev.1, having heard the reports of General Odd” Bull
presented by the Secretary-General, and having heard the
statements of the representatives of Israel and the United
Arab Republic, deeply regrets the loss of life, and requires
the parties strictly to observe the cease-fire called for by
the Security Council’s resolutions.”
74. Unless any member of the Council wishes to speak,I
shall consider that this declaration will be taken as the
declaration of the President, to be communicated to
General Bull and the parties, and that the next meeting on
this item will be arranged following normal consultations
among members of the Council. I have a request for a
meeting for tomorrow afternoon, but I shall be conducting
consultations in the normal way with members of the
Council. Unless any member has a comment, I shall adjourn
the meeting subject to consultations as to the time of the
next meeting.
The meeting rose on Monday, 9 September, at 1.10 a.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
d&positoirer
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

KAK

IlOJlYqHT?

COMO

CO&EGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todas
partes
Yentas,

Nueva

Litho in United Nations, New York

be

PUBLICATIONS
obtained
or write

Nations
Unier
sent
entier.
tnformez-vous
des venter,
New York

fram bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

DES NATIONS

PUBLICACIONES
de
del

York

UNIES

en vente
dans
les librairies
aup&
de votre librairie
ov
ou Genive.

M.3AAHHR’OPl-AHM3A~UU

OGEEAUHEHHblX

DE LAS AACIONES

Ias’ Naciohes
Unidas
estirn
mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero

lhroughoui
New
York

et les ogences
adresser-vou.s
b:

HAuUfi

UNIDAS

en venta en librerios
o dirijass
a: Naciones

y casas djstribuiddras
Unidor,
Stccicin

de

o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35731-October

1972--~~~~0
