UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

RECORDS
YEAR

2113th

MEETING:

. NEW

19 JANUARY

luf,j

LI;BRARv

MAR23 1982

YORK

UN/SA GoLLECTi0N
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/21

13)

Expression

of welcome to the Minister

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
for Foreign

Affairs

of Norway

. . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
Lebanon (S/13026 and Corr.l)

on the United Nations Interim
Force in
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2113

.”

_,.-.

_- .

._

.
I

--NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
wit,h
-$ureg;ill ,Mention
documentj
r i ,’ : .,’ of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
,.Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published ‘in
quarterly Supple&&
of the O$icial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
I . ,,.is given.
, .‘
-.; T./i b
’ ~ ‘. ’ ?fhe’r&&t~o~s%
ihki*Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResoIutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2113th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 19 January 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President Mr. Donald 0. MILLS

“--7

United Nations Interim Force irii%%non -w&IL)
forthe period 14September 1978 to 12 January 1979,
contained in document S/13026 and Corr. 1, and a draft
resolution contained in document S/13042.

(Jamaica).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

4. I take it that members of the Council are ready to vote
on the draft resolution. There being no objection, I shall
now put it to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of ha&s.

Provisional agenda (WAgendanll3)

In favan: Bangladesh, Bolivia, France, Gabon, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13026 and
corr. 1)
The meeting was called to 0raff

Against: None

at 4.30 p.m

Abstaining: Czechoslovakia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

Expr&sion of welcome to the Miikter
for Foreign Affairs of Norway

The &aft resoIution was adopted by 12 votes to none, with
2 abstentions.’

1. The PRESIDENT:
At the outset of the meeting I
should like to acknowledge the presence at the Council
table of the Minister for Foreign AfIairs of Norway,
Mr. Knut Frydenhmd. Norway has always taken a very
strong and responsible interest in the affairs of the United
Nations and has demonstrated this particularly and in a
very practical way in reference to the situation in Lebanon.
On behalf of the members of the Council, therefore, I
to His Excellency.
-- extend a warm
_- welcome
Adoption of the agenda
--.-

One member (‘Chits) did not participate in the voting.
5. The PRESIDENT: I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Security Council:
‘The Security Council, after considering the report of
the Secretary-General in document S/l 3026 and Corr. 1,
paid special attention, at its meeting on 19 January 1979,
to the question of restoration of the authority of the
Lebanese Government over the entire territory of
Southern Lebanon.

Z%e
agenda was rrdopted
..-

“The Council takes note of the recent efforts made by
the Lebanese Government to establish a presence in the
southern part of the country and expressesthe hope that
the continuation and expansion of such activities will be
encouraged.

ThesituatIoIlhltbeMl&&:

Repxt of the !!bebry-Qneral
on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebano~~ (S/l3026 and Corr.1)
2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon in
which he requests that he should be allowed to participate in
the discussion. I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of Lebanon to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

“The Council accordingly suggests that the Lebanese
in consultation with the SecretaryGovernment,
General, should draw up a phased programme of
activities to be carried out over the next three months to
promote the restoration of its authority.

At the invitation of thePreskient, Mr. T&?nl@.ebanon) took
a pIace at the Coundl table.

“The Council requests the Secretary-General to report
to it by 19 April 1979 on the implementation of this
programme.’
.~

‘3. The PRESIDENT:
h&&e&
of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General on the

’ seeresolution 444 (1979).
1

.

6. The Secretary-General wishes to make a statement, and
Inowcallonhim.
7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken note of
the resolution just adopted by the Council and also of the
President’s statement. I wish to assure the Council that I
and my colleagues here at Headquarters, as well as General
Erskine and the members of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, will continue our efforts to achieve the
objectives set for us by the decisions of the Council.
8. I .have stated my views on the situation regarding
UNIFIL at some length in my report to the Council and I
do not wish to repeat them. I should like to say again,
however, that the cooperation of the parties concerned is
an essential element in the effectiveness of UNIFIL. If this
cooperation is lacking, we shall inevitably continue to
experience the same di.tXculties which we are now
experiencing.
--9. I therefore appeal to the members of the Council who
are in a position to do so to bring their influence to bear on
those concerned in support of the efforts which we shall
continue to make to implement the Council’s resolutions. I
also appeal to the parties concerned to modify their attitude
in such a way as to afford UNIFIL the degree of cooperation necessary for the successful achievement of its
objectives. I do this in the firm belief that the successof the
Force will benefit all parties and be a major contribution to
peace in the area.
10. In my report and in the consultations of the Council I
have made no secret of my view that the present situation is
a serious one in which the credibility of UNIFIL is at stake.
It is essential that all concerned should make every possible
effort during the forthcoming mandate to .remedy this
situation and to make real progress towards the objectives
outlined in resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
11. To this end we shall especially concentrate our efforts
on the restoration of Lebanese authority and sovereignty in
the south. For this purpose we shall intensify our contacts
with the Lebanese Government with the aim, among
others, of working out of a phased programme for the
restoration of its authority in the area. I feel obliged to say
once again, however, that experience shows that the best of
plans and programmes will not achieve their ends without
the necessary degree of co-operation from all the parties
concerned. I sincerely hope that this cooperation will be
forthcorning.
12. I shall not fail to keep the Council informed of further
developments.
13. Questions have been put to me by some members of
the Council concerning the reported Israeli military
operation in Southern Lebanon in the early hours of this
morning.
14. I wish to make clear that that incident took place
north of the UNIFIL area on the other side of the Litani
River. However, 1 have received the following information
from UNIFIL.

*;
15, At 1823 hours GMT, on 18 January, there wasa heavy
exchange of artillery, mortar, machine-gun and tank fire
between the armed elements to the north of the Litani River
2
- ..

.

and the de facto forces and Israeli forces in the south; Just
after midnight on 19 January, Israeli fighter aircraft flew
over the UNIFIL area and attacked three villages to the
north of the Litani River. At 0125 hours, an unidentified
helicopter flew over Marjayoun and to the north of the
Litani and then returned to the south. Similar helicopter
flights took place at 0200 and 0325 hours.
16. * There. was a movement of unidentified armoured ;
vehicles from El Khiam to Marjayoun at about 0325 hours
and 23 Israeli armoured personnel carriers fully manned by
Israeli troops and four other armoured vehicles crossed
from Israel into the Lebanese Christian enclave at 0300
hours today. At about 0500 hours, those vehicles were
reported moving south from Marjayoun to Metulla, in
Israel. There was no movement by those armoured vehicles
in the UNIFIL area of control.
17. Since 0640 hours today, no further action has been
reported. At no time has UNIFIL been involvedin any of.
thi action or suffered casualties.
18. Since UNIFIL is not deployed either north of the
Litani or in the Christian enclave and has no freedom of
movement there, it cannot con&m more concrete details of
the reported Israeli operation, which did not take place in
any areas controlled by UNIFIL. However, the number of
troops and vehicle movements observed indicates some
form of ground attack by helicopter-borne troops, with
artillery support from the Christian enclaves.
19. That is the report I have to make to the Council‘mregard to the incident this morning.
:
20. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those deleg&ions which have indicated their desire to be allowed to
speak after the vote.
21. Mr. FRYDENLUND
(Norway): Mr. President, first
of all, I should like to thank you for the kind words of
welcome you extended to me. -It is an honour for me to
participate in today’s deliberations of the Council under
your able leadership. I promise, however, that I shall not be
permanently present at your meetings.
22. Allow me, as a point of departure,. to refer to the’
report which the Secretary-General has submitted to the
Council on the activities and functioning of UNIFIL over
the past four months. It is a frank and strong document ;
which goes to the heart of the matter. The SecretaryGeneral presents us with a rather depressing but realistic _
picture of the situation. Yesterday’s dramatic events
referred to just now by him clearly indicate and underline
the seriousness of the situation, and the information
provided in the report corresponds largely to ‘our own
assessment. The Norwegian Government shares the
concern expressed by the Secretary-General and supports
and
_.._ . - .-his_observations
__
..- conclusions.
_ _ _ _ _ ._- - 23. The Force has now been operational for almost one .
year. The Force, which was to be of an interim nature, was
charged with a double mandate: to.confirm the withdrawal
of Israeli forces from Lebanon and to assist the Lebanese
Government in ensuring the restoration of its effective
authority’in the southern part of its country.

-

.:

I

24. Much to our regret. it has not been uossiile for
UNIFIL, through no &It of its own, to accomplish this
task. As is the casewith all peace-keeping operations, such a
delicate task cannot be discharged successfully without the
full cooperation of the parties
.. concerned.

3 i. The situation in Southern Lebanon and in the country
as a whole must be viewed in the context of the situation in
the Middle East. The Norwegian Government hopes that
the leaders in the region will now take the decisions required
to bring a just and lasting peace to the area.

25. Less than two weeks ago, another effort was made, to
no avail, by the United Nations to elicit a positive response
to suggestions aimed at securing the effective functioning of
UNIFIL in the remainder of its area of operation. The
Norwegian Government deplores the fact that it has not
been possible to ensure deployment of UNIFIL
in
accordance with the provisions of its mandate and would
urge all parties concerned to co-operate fully with the Force
in order to facilitate such deployment.

32. In conclusion, I wish to pay a tribute to MajorGeneral Erskine, his staff and the officers and men of the ’
various contingents of UNIFIL for their dedication and
courage. Serving under extremely difficult conditions, they
have been able to maintain high morale and act impartially.
I take this opportunity to assure the Secretary-General of
our continued support’ in his efforts to .implement the
decisions taken by the Council in relation to the situation in
Southern Lebanon.

26. UNIFIL has clearly demonstrated its ability to control
its area of operation. My Government is convinced that the
full deployment of UNIFIL will contribute positively to
strengthening the security of all States in the region and thus
promote peace and stability. A continuation of the present
situation is unacceptable to the Council and the international community.

33. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Israel in
which he requests that he should be invited to participate in
the discussion. I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of Israel to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.
-.- .’

27. Another problem which is highlighted by the
Secretary-General-and
about which my Government
fully, shares his concern-is the harassment to which
UNIFIL, to an increasing degree, is being subjected by the
de facto forces. If continued, this might negatively affect the
morale and effectiveness of the Force. This situationwhich ‘goes beyond a mere lack of cooperation with
UNIFIL-is
totally unacceptable and must be brought to
an end. If this is not done, serious consequences might
ensue. This places a grave responsibility upon those who
obstruct or refuse to cooperate with UNIFIL in its efforts
to complete the task assigned to it by the Council.

At the request of the President, Mr. Hum (7sraeel) took the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

34.

Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interpretation
from
Chinese): On behalf of my delegation, I should like first of

all to extend the warmest welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway, His Excellency Mr. Knut
Frydenlund, who is participating personally in this meeting
of the Security Council.
35. The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has fully demonstrated
the gravity of the situation in Lebanon. In our statement on
8 December last /210&h meet&l, during the Council’s
consideration of the situation in Lebanon, the Chinese
delegation strongly condemned the Israeli Zionists for their .
obstruction of the exercise of sovereignty by the Lebanese
Government in Southern Lebanon and for the serious
incidents of Israel’s repeated armed attacks on Lebanon.
What arouses indignation, however, is that since then the
Israeli authorities have not shown the slightest intention to
shun evil and mend their ways but have continued
obdurately to resort to all means to obstruct the Lebanese
Government from exercising its sovereignty over Southern
Lebanon. In rectmt weeks, the Israeli aggressors have sent
out planes on many occasions to carry out indiscrimmate
bombing raids on Lebanon and to slaughter innocent
people there. In the past few days, Israel again flagrantly
launched armed attacks on Lebanese territory. The wanton
provocations by the Israeli Zionists have aroused great
indignation and stem condemnation by the peoples of
Lebanon, Palestine, other Arab countries and the rest ofthe
world.
. .
36. The Chinese Government and people hold that the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of !
Lebanon must be strictly respected, and we have always
given firm support to the peoples of Lebanon, Palestine and
6ther Arab countries in their just struggle against zionism
and hegemonism and for the recovery of their lost territories
and the regaining of their national rights. We strongly
condemn Israel for its series of crimes of aggression against
Lebanon. In our view, any resolution adopted by the

28. The second part of the UNIFIL mandatethe
return
of effective Lebanese Government authority in Southern
Lebanon-has so far largely been left unimplemented. In
this connexion, the Norwegian Government welcomes the
recent initiatives taken by the-Lebanese Government in
strengthening its presence in the area.What has been done
so far can, however, be considered only a modest fmt step.
We hope that we are now witnessing the beginning of a
process which will progressively lead to the complete
restoration of the Lebanese Government’s authority.
29. I have so far concentrated in my statement on the
problems and negative aspects of the present situation in
Southern Lebanon. That said, the Norwegian Government
fully recognizes that UNIFIL has contributed decisively
towards the maintenance of peace and stability in Southern
Lebanon and in the region as a whole. We feel that, in the
present situation, it is necessary to retain UNIFIL
in
Southern Lebanon. If UNIFIL should be withdrawn today,
thii would not only have undesirable repercussions in the
region: it would also raise doubts as to the future capacity of
the United Nations to deal effectively with issues relating to
international peace and security.
..
.
30. For this reason, the Norwegian Government has, by
casting a positive vote today, supported the extension of the
mandate of UNIFIL for a further period of five months.
The Norwegian Government will, furthermore, seek to
maintain its present level of participation in UNIFIL.
3

%%trit)
Council now should naturally condemn the
aforesaid Israeli acts of aggression. Furthermore, the
Council should take even more effective measures to stop
Israel’s aggression against Lebanon.

President of the Security Council [S/13028] that UNIFIL’s -.
task of restoring international peace and security remained
unfulfilled. It is true that it remains unfulfilled, but who is
responsible? Is it UNIFIL?
Is it the Government of
Lebanon, which has tried hard to send in its troops but has
seen its determination blunted? Or is it Israel, which has
defiantly blocked the deployment of UNIFIL
on the
internationally recognixed borders of Lebanon?

37. The Chinese delegation has studied the draft
resolution contained in document S/13042. We approve of
the relevant paragraphs in the draft condemning Israel’s
obstruction of the exercise of sovereignty by the Lebanese
Government in Southern Lebanon. However, in view of the
fact that the draft resolution mainly concerns the question
of the United Nations Force, on which the Chinese
delegation has always held a different position in principle,
we did not participate in the vote on the draft resolution. In
spite of this, we consider that the content of the President’s
statement is good, and we fully support it.

41. The Council debated this issue extensively about five
weeks ago [2106th meeting/. At that time I had the
opportunity to stress the dangerous nature of the “Metulla
connexion”, as I then named it. The problem with the
renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL is that the Council finds
itself a party to the failure of its own decisions. The
automatic renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL, in disregard
of its imperfections and the advantages it offers to Israel,
amounts to acquiescence in an anomalous situation.

38. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, I should like
at the outset to pay you a well-deserved tribute for the skill
and dedication which have character&d your handling of
this problem during the last three long and arduous, days.
. _ .-

42. The Council is in no position to take drastic measures
against Israel, which knows this fact and acts in the full
knowledge that it can get away with what it wants. After all,
one should not forget that 12 years of occupation of Arab
territories, with no commensurate action against it by its
benefactors or by the United Nations, have convinced Israel
that it can do whatever it likes with exceptional impunityso much so that even South Africa looks at it with a
jaundiced eye.

39. I should also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway. His presence underscores the
importance which his Government attaches to peacekeeping operations in general and UNIFIL in particular.
40. The delegation of Kuwait would like at the outset to
put on record its appreciation to the Secretary-General, his
staff and the officers and soldiers of UNIFIL, commanded
by our friend Major-General Erskine, for their unflagging
;effo_rts for .the implementation of resolution 425 (1978).
UNIFIL must be one of the most frustrating experiences
in peace-keeping operations. It is so frustrating because
the nature of the operation is different from the familiar
pattern of separating two warring parties or two communities engaged in bloodshed. Here we have an operation initiaa
assist a Government in its own efforts
SoratoG
its authority iir Zrie-section of its territory over
which it has lost control. UNIFIL therefore has to perform
duties of a domestic nature. According to its mandate,
UNIFIL has to confii the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Lebanon, to assist the Government of Lebanon in
restoring peace and order in the south and to maintain
international peace and security by forestalling threats that
might jeopardize the fragile truce of the region. Two-thirds
of its mandate, I would say, have been met, but what is left
unfulfilled is dangerous enough to give rise to serious
concern. The Force was sent to protect Lebanon from
Israel. It was sent to assist Lebanon to safeguard its
territorial
integrity and sovereignty in the south.
Unfortunately, what was once Southern Lebanon has now
become a buffer zone for the protection of Israel. The area
which is now under Israeli occupation-directly
or by
proxy-falls within the mandate of UNIFIL, and it is
therefore logical to expect its deployment therein. Southern
Lebanon is now in the hands of the stooges of Israel, who
are assisted, trained, supplied and controlled by it. The
unquestionable fact is that Israel refuses to let UNIFIL fulfil
its mandate. The Secretary-General’s report states unequivocally the facts about Israel’s attitude. Nowhere else in
the history of United Nations peace-keeping operations
have United Nations forces failed to carry out their
mandate. Instead of protecting Lebanon, UNIFIL is held
hostage by an insignilicant bunch of rebels who sheepishly
obey the orders of Israel. The representative of Israel, with
unusual temerity, stated in his letter of 14 January to the

43. My delegation is not necessarily happy to see the
Council renew the mandate of a force that is the victim of
the taunting trickery of Israel. In this welter of trickery and
deceit, the options are unfortunately limited. The SecretaryGeneral cautioned us against submission to despair when
he stated that “these difficulties should not be allowed to
obscure UNIFIL’s valuable contribution to peacein the
area” [S/l3026 and Corr.1, para 381.
44. Notwithstanding the difliculties, frustrations and imperfections of the situation, UNIFIL’s presence insouthern
Lebanon is essential. Otherwise Israel will invent an excuse
to invade Southern Lebanon and to squat on Lebanese soil
indefinitely. My Government supports the request for the
renewal of the mandate solely on that basis. My delegation
is gratified at the remark of the Secretary-General that he is
“fully aware of the potential dangers of assuming an
automatic renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL”
/ibid.
para, 401. Lebanon must assume its responsibility for its
territory. That is true. And in this cormexion my delegation
is happy to endorse the statement of the President inviting
Lebanon to assume its own responsibility. In paragraph 39
of his report the Secretary-General refers to the arran8ements being worked out between UNIFIL and the Government of Lebanon with a view to strengthening the latter’s
presence and authority in the area. We welcome and
encourage this trend.
45. Aware of the limitations of the Council on this issue,
my delegation believes that the key to successfor UNIFIL is
the co-operation of the Government of Israel. Israel is
obstructing UNIFIL’s deployment in the south. This is a
fact no one can deny. It is controlling the rebels in Southern
Lebanon. It is challenging the authority of the Council. The
question, then, is who will prevail on the Government of
Israel to be more cooperative with UNIFIL? In this
respect, first and foremost, the United States bears the
responsibility for exerting utmost pressureto ensure UNIFIL’s
4

full operation in Southern Lebanon. The speed with which
the United States acted in March 1978 for the establishment
of UNIFIL and the interest it has shown since then adds to
its responsibility. I must say that the power of persuasion
will have no effect upon Israel; it will never produce the
required results. Qnly the power of clout, the power of
confrontation, will bring about positive results. One should
not forget that Israel subsists on United States aid and is
protected militarily and politically by it. Only two days ago
The New York Times reported the decision of the Israeli
Government to build three additional Jewish settlements in
the West Bank and Gaza. Those settlements, which will be
appearing soon in Southern Lebanon if UNIFIL’s mandate
remains obstructed, are occupied by adventurers who
depend on Jewish and non-Jewish money that comes
primarily from the United States.
:
46. My delegation is aware of the political complexity of
bringing pressure to bear on Israel. But one must point out
that UNIFIL is yet another victim of power politics.

the presidential statement is addressed to Lebanon and
invites its Government to assume its responsibility.
51. As long as the momentum is forcefully preserved; kept
and maintained, these obstacles ought to give way to the
logical demand of normality. We in Kuwait say that the
only way to blunt Israel’s obstinacy is to maintain unrelenting pressure. In thii connexion I should like to use an
old Kuwaiti proverb. In Kuwait we say that even iron bars
give way to ceaselesspounding.
52. I should like to refer to another point. Only last night
we heard about the dastardly, cowardly attack by Israel on
Lebanon, which adds to the tension and the already
precarious situation in the area. This criminal attack shows
how contemptuous Israel is of international law, of the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations. It has violated the sovereignty of
Lebanon, it has breached its territorial integrity, and it has
challenged the United Nations. Aggression and brutal force
are the main tenets of the Zionist philosophy, for Israel is
the product of aggression; it expanded by aggression; it
exists on aggression. The dastardly onslaught upon Lebanon is yet another example in what have become almost
routine techniques of spreading death and destruction
inside Lebanon. Under no circumstances can Israel justify
its brutal attack on Lebanon. Israel cannot place itself
beyond and outside the pale of the law. The arguments
about terrorism have become hackneyed. The cycle of
violence will continue unabated as long as the underlying
causes exist.

47. The key for the successof UNIFIL lies in the pressure
Member States exert on Israel-and not only the United
States. As I said earlier, I am not convinced that the power
of persuasion will work. There must be a pinch here and a
punch there. Otherwise, UNIFIL will continue grappling
with the same problems, with cries of agony from Lebanon
and a bitter reaction from General Erskine and the staff of
UNIFIL.
48. In the debate last month I asked the representative of
Israel two questions. He dodged the issue with characteristic evasiveness. My two questions remain valid: is Israel
willing to allow UNIFIL
to deploy its forces on the
international borders between Lebanon and Israel, and is it
willing and ready to stop its assistance to the rebels in the
south? The Israeli representative will assist us and, indeed,
the Council in its deliberations on this subject if he answers
those two questions.

53. As we have been saying for years here, the Palestinians
must exercise their inalienable right to self-determination in
their own land. Without the exercise of this primordial
right, violence will continue and the area will remain, as it
has been for a long time, rent, punctuated, by truces and
wars. The Zionists have been building Jewish settlements in
the West Bank and Gaza, driving out the indigenous.
Palestinians, expropriating their land, diverting their water,
deporting their young men and intimidating their elders. It
is too much to expect the Palestinians to accept quietly the
fate of deprivation and exile. Nothing invites violence more
than deprivation, and there is no more acute deprivation
than that of the Palestinians. Israel’s treacherous policy of
terrorizing its neighbours finds encouragement .in the
inability of the Council to act decisively against it. We have
always said that the kid-glove treatment accorded to Israel
will bring about dangerous results. It the light of its black
record and bleak past, it is safe to say that the only language
Israel can understand is that of force and confrontation.

49. It is a fact that UNIFIL represents a conflict between
national interests and international obligations. Under the
Charter all States are expected to assist in the implementation of the Council’s resolutions and to abide by them. Here
is a State that is unwilling to assist or to abide by the
Council’s decisions,’ in the full knowledge that power
politics will protect it. It is unfair to leave the SecretaryGeneral saddled with the issue, but it is also unrealistic to
expect some members of the Council effectively to turn the
heat on Israel.
50. But, be that-as it may, one should not give in to
despair. The Council should maintain the momentum
which the report of the Secretary-General and the strenuous
informal meetings of the Council have generated. In this
respect, the statement of the President will have a very
positive impact, Anything that is unusual captures unusual
attention. It is unusual to adopt a resolution and a
presidential statement on one question at the same meeting.
But the situation is unusual, and therefore it requires an
unusual approach. In our view, thii will have a telling effect.
Some may argue that the Council, having failed to turn the
heat on Israel, has started to put the pressure on Lebanon.
The answer to this argument is that the two documents
should not be read in isolation but, it should be emphasized,
in conjunction with each other. My reading of the resolution is that it places responsibility squarely on Israel, while

54. The macabre crime perpetrated by Israel against
Lebanon has shocked the world and produced international
indignation. The Council therefore is in duty bound to
reflect this sentiment and condemn Israel for its criminal
and cowardly aggression against Lebanon. The urge for
condemnation becomes stronger in view of the presence of
UNIFIL in Southern Lebanon. Israel’s action represents
the blatant policy of discrediting UNIFIL, which monitors
the aircraft carrying the aggressors flying over its area of
operation, these aggressors whose ruthless and savage
attack on defenceless Lebanese are the product of Israel’s
mentality. After all, Israel’s Prime Minister is a notorious
celebrity in the jet set of terrorists. Recently he.rec$ved the
Nobel Prize for Peace. Nothing illustrates the ridiculous
paradox of this logic more than conferring on Begin the
5

medal for peace. The Lebanese, the orphaned children, the
widowed mothers and the mutilated casualties of this
: barbarous attack will never forgive the butchers at Tel
Aviv. First it was the people of Palestine, and now it is the
turn of the Lebanese to be the object of Israel’s policy of
annihilation.

61. Indeed, by not renewing the mandate of the Interim
Force for a longer period of time, the Council indicated
clearly, we believe, and this for the second time, that it did
not intend to accept the present situation, which endangers
its own authority, nor to resign itself to reducing the role of
UNIFIL
to that of a “buffer force” whose shape and
functions, limited by the calculations of one side and by the
ill-will of the other, would have assumed a final and
permanent form. My Government would not have been in a
position to give its consent to a decision which might have,
or appear to have, such implications. If the French
delegation finally agreed to the proposal to prolong the
mandate for a period of five months, and not four months
as it had done previously, we did so particularly in order to
take account of the additional difliculties to which a short
mandate would inevitably have given rise for the SecretaryGeneral as well as for his services and the contributing’
countries.

55. It is our duty, therefore, to speak out in the strongest
terms against this new crime. Israel is unworthy of United
Nations membership, unworthy of a seat in the United
Nations and in the General Assembly, which was built on
tolerance, understanding, respect for the right of peoples to
self-determination and support for the sovereignty of
Member States. It is indeed a shame to have Israel in the
midst of the civilized nations represented in this building. It
is an insult to our feelings.
56. My delegation thought of tabling a separate draft
resolution on the aggression of Israel against Lebanon. The
only reason for our restraint is that we do not want to
distract attention from the important role UNIFIL plays at
this juncture. But my delegation reservesits right to do so if
the situation remains as dangerous as it is now.

62. The political will of the Council having thus been
made absolutely clear in thii way, the text of the statement
which you read, Mr. President, seems to us to be of
particular importance.
In requesting the Lebanese
Government to establish, in co-operation with the
Secretary-General, a phased programme of activities which
could be undertaken over the next three months to promote
the restoration of its legal presence in the south of the
country and in deciding to meet at the end of this period to
reassessthe situation, the Council was living up to its proper
responsibilities and giving to those who hope for progress
the support of its prestige and authority. That is the primary
concern of my Government which has always made
absolutely clear its support for the actions of the United
Nations in Lebanon.

$7. Mr. LEPBETTE (France) (inferpretarionj?om French]:
MrXjresident, I should like to associate myself with what
tias said by the representative of Kuwait by telling you how
much I have appreciated and admired the courteous, skilful
and firm way in which you conducted the arduous negotiations which preceded this meeting. I should also like to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Norway, who has been
kind enough to honour the Council by participating in its
debate.
58. On two previous occasions, on 18 September and
8 December last, the Council had occasion to regret that the
missions it had entrusted to UNIFIL in March 1978 had not
been carried out in their entirety. Today again, in spite of
the constant efforts of the Secretary-General and his
representatives over the last four months, we can only regret
that it still has not been possible for the contingents of the
Force to deploy, even in a limited fashion, in the frontier
zone occupied by the defacto forces which are enjoying
active support from Israel. The report of the SecretaryGeneral makes it unambiguously clear that there is an
almost deliberate intent on the part of certain people to
hinder the action of UNIFIL, an intent which is furthermore reflected by frequent acts of harassment which
endanger the security of the civilian population.

63. Permit me now to pay tribute to the leaders of the
Force, oficers and civilians, and also to the men serving in
it. Day after day, sometimes at the sacrifice of their lives,
they have been making a remarkable contribution to the
search for peace and also to an improvement in the living
conditions of the sorely tried population of Lebanon. We
thank them all, through the person of their distinguished
Commander, Major-General Erskine.
64. My Government wishes to repeat to the SecretaryGeneral its expression of confidence and gratitude for his
tireless efforts to enable UNIFIL to carry out its task.
65. Mr. NGUEMA-MBA
(Gabon) (interpretation porn
French): Mr. President, allow me first of all, on behalf of my
delegation, to welcome most warmly the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway. His presence here in this
chamber cannot fail to demonstrate his country’s interest in
our work.

59. With regard to the second aspect of the Force’s
mission, we can of course only take gratification from the
fast measures which have been taken recently by the
Lebanese Government, in co-operation with the UNIFIL
authorities, to restore its legal presence in the south of the
country. Nevertheless, we must recognize that on this point
also the results achieved have been limited. We believe
therefore that it is up to the Council to do everything in its
power to help the Beirut authorities to continue and to
strengthen their action in this field.

66. Everyone remembers that when it established the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon the Council’s
basic concern was to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli
forces, to restore international peace and security and,
lastly, to assist the Lebanese Government in ensuring the
return of its effective authority in the southern part of the
country. The Council also called upon the parties involved
and all others concerned to do everything they could to
facilitate the operations of the Force.
_
.-. ._._
67. In spite of that, and upon consideration of the
Secretary-General’s report, my delegation cannot but feei
serious concern at the difficulty still faced by UNIFIL
in its
- -

60. That is why the French Government today lent its
support to the decisions we have taken renewing the
mandate of the Force for a period of five months. We
believe them to be wise and likely to respond to the
requirements of the situation as I have just briefly
outlined it.
6
-

.

..

attempts to implement its mandate in Southern Lebanon.
The alarming news which reached us recently from that
region certainly does not dispel our concern.

Government about its activities in Southern Lebanon. The
latest report by the Secretary-General is still more
disturbing. It shows that these representations, and indeed
the Council’s action last month, have had no effect. The
Secretary-General tells us:

68. Since the establishment of UNIFIL, and in all its
resolutions on the situation in Lebanon, the Council on
every occasion, appealed to all concerned to co-operate
with the Force. It seems, from the report of the SecretaryGeneral, that this cooperation has not been forthcoming.
This is certainly a situation which is difficult to accept.

“UNIFIL
now lacks the co-operation both of the
defacto forces under Major Haddad and of the Israel
Defence Forces, in relation to the complete deployment
of UNIFIL in its entire area of operation” [s/13026 utid
Con. 1, para. 341.

69. My delegation feels that the time has perhaps come to
impress upon all those concerned once more that they freely
accepted the sending of the United Nations Force to
Lebanon, as well as its mandate, and that, therefore, the
United Nations is fully entitled to expect from them
unrestricted cooperation with UNIFIL in the implementation of its task. Those same concerned parties should also
be made to understand that if the present situation
continues there will be no further reason to authorize the
peace-keeping force to remain there. Then the problem will
arise of reviewing either the nature of the Force or its
mandate.

Further, a pattern of behaviour has emerged on the part of
the defacto forces which suggests a deliberate attempt to
harass UNIFIL in its efforts to implement its mandate. The
fact and the timing of the Israeli operation last night
underline the Secretary-General’s remarks. The British ,’
Government is deeply concerned by this development. We
condemn both the terrorist attacks in Israel and the Israeli
reprisals.
75. This refusal to cooperate with the peace-keeping
force of the United Nations threatens the fragile equilibrium
in which Lebanon now survives. The latest incidents
underline the need for a renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL.
My Government accepts the Secretary-General’s recommendation that UNIFIL’s mandate should be renewed for a
further live months. If UNIFIL cannot fulfil its mandate, it
will be difficult for it to continue. Its disappearance could
have very serious consequences.

70. Yet today, once again, my delegation voted in favour
of the draft resolution which we have just adopted-and we
fully support your statement, Mr. President-with the firm
hope that despite the clear lack of progress in the
deployment of UNIFIL
over the entire territory of
Southern Lebanon, everything will be done by all sides to
induce the main parties concerned to respond at last to the
appeals of the Security Council.

76. Over the next three months we hope to see a
determined and realistic effort to extend the presence of the
Lebanese Government, civilian as well as military, to the
south. Meanwhile, I should like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his staff for their efforts. Our confidence as
well as our sympathy goes out to Major-General Erskine,
his officers and men, in the task they face, which is being so
unwisely made so difficult for them. .

71. Before concluding, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his objective report and to assure him
of our support for all his efforts to have the Council’s
mandate implemented. On behalf of my delegation, I
should also like to pay a tribute to the work accomplished
by the Commander of the Force, Major-General Erskine,
and the officers and troops in a situation which is
particularly difficult.

77. Mr. MUTUKWA
(Zambia): This is the second
meeting of the Security Council this month at which you,
Mr. President, have demonstrated your prudent skills as a
diplomat in guiding the work of the Council in an
exemplary manner.

72. Mr. ROBINSON (United Kingdom): First I should
like to add my delegation’s warm welcome to the Foreign
Minister of Norway and thank him for joining the Council
at this meeting on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, to which Norway has contributed so generously.

78. My delegation joins those that have preceded me in
welcoming the Foreign Minister of Norway in our midst at
this meeting of the Council.

73. When the Council met last to discuss the problem of
Southern Lebanon at the beginning of December, it was on
the basis of a disturbing report from the Secretary-General
in which he described the grave situation existing at that
time in the area. The report [S/12929] underlined the fact
that UNIFIL was not receiving co-operation from &facto
armed groups which are supplied from, and in our view
considerably influenced by, the Government of Israel. In
the course of the 2106th meeting, Sir, your predecessor as
President of the Council read the statement approved by
consensus which, among other things, called upon those not
fully cooperating with UNIFIL,
particularly Israel, to
desist forthwith from interfering with the Force’s
operations ,in Southern Lebanon and added the call to
Member States in a position to do so to bring their influence
to bear on those concerned.

79. I should like also to express the appreciation of my
delegation to the Secretary-General for the comprehensive,
lucid and objective report which he has presented on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which details the
operations and the problems confronting the Force in
Southern Lebanon. That report is as revealing as it is
sobering. It tells it all.
80. The report, which covers the period from 14
September 1978 to 12 January 1979, provides a vivid
account of the gravity and the deterioration of the situation
in Southern Lebanon, in that ever-troubled region of the
Middle East. In his concluding remarks, the SecretaryGeneral has pointed out that:
“ . . . although UNIFIL continued to play an important role in maintaining peace and stability in Southern

74. My Government responded to that call and, no doubt
like many others, made representations to the. @aeli
7

Lebanon.. . there was virtually no further progress in
deploying the Force in the area in the south held by
defacto armed groups. This means that, despite
continuous and persistent efforts at all levels, UNIFIL
has reached the end of its second mandate without
completing the tasks assigned to it in Security Council
resolution 425 (1978).” [X!&!, para. 33.1

87. In conclusion, the Zambian delegation wishesto pay a
tribute to Major-General Erskine and the United Nations
forces in the field for.their dedicated services and sacrifices
in the cause of peace. We also commend those countries
which have contributed and those which continue to
contribute forces and logistical support to UNIF,IL. It is
only that collective international support that can further
the noble _.goals of international peace and security. :

81. UNIFIL
has been unable to fulfil its mandate
primarily because of the intransigent attitude of the Israeli
authorities who are also arming and abetting the armed
groups under Major Haddad. The Israeli authorities
continue to incite some elements in Lebanon to create
havoc for UNIFIL in furtherance of their expansionist
policies. The report on UNIFIL’s operations shows that
there have been a number of violent incidents which have
been provoked and perpetrated against the ever restrained
United Nations peace-keeping forces. Those soldiers of
peace are being harassed and humiliated by Israel and its
puppets both overtly and covertly.

88. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): I should
first like to welcome most warmly to the Council the’
Foreign Minister of Norway, Mr. Frydenlund. It is most
appropriate for him to join with us on ‘this occasion in fight
of the important contribution Norway is making to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the longstanding support of Norway for all United Nations &ace-.
keeping activities.
89. The action we have taken today reaffirms the
determination of the international community to help the
Government of Lebanon to restore peace and order, as well
as its sovereignty, in the south. We should have preferred
renewal of UNIFIL’s mandate for a full six months; none
the less, our decision to renew it for live months reflects our
belief that UNIFIL will continue to be of vital importance
for the maintenance of peace in Southern Lebanon. The
extension also reflects the deep appreciation of the
international community for the work of the oflicers and
men of UNIFIL, who have performed admirably in the face
of a very difftcult political-military situation. I should like to
review that situation briefly.

82. Surely Israel cannot expect to win sympathy from the
international community and world public opinion if it
specializes in harassing United Nations peace-keeping
forces. Within the last 24 hours, it has been reported that
Israel has once again attacked certain areas in Southern
Lebanon in the vicinity of the United Nations forces. Israel
should be reminded that the present conflict situation,
which necessitated the creation of UNIFIL itself, was a
result of the acts of aggression committed by Israel against
Lebanon.
83. The Force has a vital role to play in the service of
international peace and security. It continues to prevent the
resumption of hostilities between the armed groups in the
area. Without it, the civilian population in Southern
Lebanon would have abandoned their homes to become
refugees elsewhere. That was the situation prior to the
arrival of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
84. Zambia urges the Israeli authorities to facilitate the
work of the Force. Furthermore, Israeli authorities should
desist from linking the present peace-keeping operation to
any incidents occurring inside Israel-a linkage that wasthe
purpose of their letter contained in document S/13028. If
Israel wants peace with its neighbours, the proper approach
is to cooperate with the demands of the United Nations and
not to remain recalcitrant.

90. When the Security Council established UNIFIL, no
one thought its task would be easy. For some time Southern
Lebanon had been the scene of violence and insecurity, and
the events of this week demonstrate once again that that
tragically remains the caseas the Council meets here today.
We deeply deplore the cycle of violence and bloodshed of
the incidents and attacks which have occurred in these days
at Ma’alot, at Jerusalem and, last night, in the area northof
the Litani River. This cycle, whose cost m fatalities and I
injuries to innocent civilians inevitably -deepens hostility
resentment, impedes our efforts to attain stability and peace
in the area. We earnestly appeal to all concerned finally to
renounce violence and to commit themselves instead to
seeking only peaceful solutions, through UNIFIL and the
Security Council, to the diflicult dilemmas of Southern
Lebanon.

85. My delegation supports the request to extend the
mandate of UNIFIL for another five months; that is why we
voted in favour of the draft resolution just adopted. We did
so in earnest, notwithstanding the interim nature of
UNIFIL.
We support this move because there is no
alternative option open to us at present.

9 1. The important element of the UNIFIL mandate-and
its most difficult-the
restoration of Lebanese governmental authority in Southern Lebanon, clearly remains
unfulfilled. The Secretary-General’s report points out that
uncooperative attitudes on the part of some of those
involved have much to do with that lack of progress.

86. It is abundantly clear, in my delegation’s view, that the
present state of affairs in Southern Lebanon cannot be
permitted to drag on. A more permanent and practical
resolution of the problem is both desirable and urgent. The
international community has a duty to force Israel to leave
Lebanon and thereby allow the Lebanese people to live in
peace without external interference. It is also evident that a
resolution of the larger conflict in the Middle East is
intricately intertwined with the Lebanese problem of which
we are seized.

92. My Government is deeply concerned about the
situation. We are concerned that the militia forces
supported by Israel have inhibited UNIFIL’s freedom of
movement and deployment in its area of operation. More
seriously, those forces have engaged in indiicrimiite
shelling of UNIFIL’s area of operation. But it would be a
mistake to conclude that co-operation by Israel and by the
militia alone would resolve the issue. Others must cooperate as well. Those who have directed the infiltration
into the UNIFIL area and, through it, into Israel by armed
8

Palestinian elements must ceasetheir activity; they too must
respect UNIFIL’s mandate.

to them. The situatiorrin Southern Lebanon remains grim :
and foreboding, a situation that is perceptibly deteriorating
into an impenetrable impasse. The Secretary-General has
bluntly stated the obvious, that despite continuous and
persistent efforts at all levels, UNIFIL has reached the end
of its second mandate without completing the tasks
assigned to it in Security Council resolution 425 (1978), the
primary aim of which was to augment the military
credibility and control of UNIFIL in the zone, to promote a
return to normal conditions and to restore the effective
authority of Lebanon
- in the area.
100. The situation obtaining today constitutes a serious
challenge to the continuance of the peace-keeping
operation, to the credibility of the Security Council and to
the moral and political conscience of the Governments and
peoples of the world. It is, as the Secretary-General
characterized it, an impossible situation, an unacceptable
situation. Thii is dramatically highlighted by Israel’s attack
last night deep within Lebanon, openly flouting its
aggression and defiance of the United Nations. The United
Nations force in Southern Lebanon not only have been
obstructed and frustrated in their tasks, hamstrung as they ..
are under terms of their mandate by the inability to retaliate
through use of force, but have been subjected to continuous
harassment, premeditated obstruction, threats and armed
attacks, and even abduction by armed elements much larger
and better equipped than they are. What is perhaps even
more untenable is the humiliation that they must suffer in
the pursuit of peace. In the final analysis, the treatment ’
accorded to UNIFIL is a slur on the collective efforts of
mankind and a slap in the face of the United Nations. It is a
manifestly illegal and unjust situation which can no longer
be countenanced without abdication of the Council’s
responsibility.

93. ‘We all should support and encourage the Government of Lebanon in its efforts to introduce into Southern
Lebanon those civilian and military elements which will
enable it to assert its authority and make it possible for
UNIFIL finally to conclude its work. In that connexion, we
note with pleasure the recent deployment of a limited
number of Lebanese army personnel to work with UNIFIL
contingents.
94. In sum, all elements must cooperate with UNIFIL.
All must recognize that the international community
intends to co-operate with the Government of Lebanon in
restoring its effective authority in all areas within its
internationally recognized boundaries. That is the only
long-term solution to the problems of Southern Lebanon.
UNIFIL is an interim Force with a limited objective; it
cannot be allowed to become permanent.
95. In stressing the need for co-operation by all parties, I
wish also to point out, as the Secretary-General does, that
the problem of Southern Lebanon is related to the problem
of Lebanon as a whole. Positive efforts for national
reconstruction and reconciliation are now being made by
President Sarkis and his Government. The successof those
efforts, in our view, can have significant benefits for the
situation in Southern Lebanon. My Government strongly
supports those efforts, which will require the co-operation
of all parties concerned. We urge that all Lebanon’s friends
and neighbours should give their full support to the
Lebanese Government.
96. In concluding, let me once again express my
Government’s profound admiration
for the superb
leadership shown by the Secretary-General, for the staff of
the Secretariat and especially for Major-General Erskine
and the outstanding performance of all UNIFIL’s offrcers
and men. They have set a standard of excellence for the
Organization and we should all be proud of them.

101. My Government has carefully studied the report of
the Secretary-General and we fully endorse his observations
and conclusions. In supporting the resolution we have just
adopted, I should like to elaborate our concern on four
essential aspects.
. .^_
102. First, I shall refer to the decision whether or not to
renew the mandate of UNIFIL. This decision has posed a
fundamental dilemma, a choice between unpalatable
alternatives and a situation of, as it were, double indemnity:
On the one hand it is clearly recognizable that over a period
of 10 months UNIFIL’s role in Southern Lebanon has been
effectively frustrated, circumvented and even truncated. It
has not been able to complete its mandate, to say the least.
But what is more dangerous is that its presence has been
subtly distorted and manipulated to subvert the purposes
for which it was originally intended and give it an altogether
different one. Today, UNIFIL serves in essenceto protect
not the parties who were victims of invasion and aggression
but the interests of those who initiated and inflicted the
crisis on this area. Southern Lebanon has now become a
defacro “security belt” for the aggressor, and UNIFIL is
being used to perpetuate thii position as a policeman.
Indeed, UNIFIL authorities and the Secretary-General are
being blatantly accused of permitting infiltration into this
zone by Palestinians. Such an accusation is as incongruous
as it is despicable and illegal. On the other hand, them can
be no doubt but that UNIFIL
has made a valuable
contribution in maintaining peace in a large part of the area,
by restoring normalcy, promoting the return of the original
inhabitants and bolstering their confidence. UNIFIL
moreover has performed a crucial preventive role by-.

97. Mr. RAISER (Bangladesh): I join other representatives here in expressing to you, Mr. President, our sincere
admiration for the skill, ability and wisdom you have shown
in guiding our deliberations in the last few days.
98. My delegation also welcomes very warmly the Foreign
Minister of Norway, whose presence adds lustre to the
. proceedings of the Council. He represents a country that is
held in very high esteem in my country. We are especially
appreciative of the fact that Norway has undertaken to
participate so ungrudgingly in the United Nations peacekeeping operation and in the furtherance of the objectives of
the Charter.
99. The Secretary-General’s report and the additional
information
provided by him today gives a lucid,
dispassionate and incisive picture of the. situation in
Lebanon. It serves once again to highlight his proven
qualities of impartiality, objectivity and re+onsibility. I
take thii opportunity to record formally our appreciation
and admiration for the Secretary-General, his devoted stafI,
. the Commander, Major-General Erskine, and the o&em
and soldiers of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon for their unstinted dedication to the pursuit of the
,fulfilment of the. difIicuh mandate that has been entrusted
9

containing the resumption of hostilities and their potential
escalation into a more explosive danger to peace and
security. It cannot be doubted that UNIFIL’s removal
would create panic and chaos among the inhabitants of the
area and result in a return to a shooting war.

coming-as further evidenced recently by the unr&ponsive
meeting with the Israeli Defence Minister, Weizman-but
overt opposition and resistance have been deliberately
incited and escalated into a consistent pattern ofbehaviour.
It is also evident to any objective observer that Israel’s
acceptance of a United Nations force in Lebanon and of its
mandate was basically a cover-up for its real intentionsthe maintenance of a defacro occupation zorie in Lebanon,
a vacuum so to speak, with the United Nations to police its
outermost limits as an essential buffer and the outlaw
elements of Haddad to mask Israel’s dominance over this
area and to conceal Israel’s aim to perpetuate its control.
Evidence Of Israel’s collusion with Haddad is now
incontrovertible and needs no further elaboration.

103. What I have said serves to highlight in some part the
complexities of the situation. The Secretary-General
himself has pinpointed the dangers of assuming an
automatic renewal of UNIFIL, which has all along been
envisaged as temporary and interim in nature. The danger is
obvious. UNIFIL cannot be taken for granted by any party;
its role cannot be reduced to the limited one of preserving in
perpetuity a state of nebulous and suspended peace or of
providing routine lo&tic support towards that end. Also,
UNIFIL cannot be used, as has been aptly pointed out, to
sustain a temporary respite after which the parties
concerned and the Council itself can tackle anew a solution
the crisis.
- to --.-.
L
104. The question arises, in the circumstances, whether
the Council is right in renewing the mandate of UNIFIL or.
whether it should now seriously consider ‘either its
withdrawal or the strengthening of its mandate into an
enforcement role under relevant provisions of the Charter.
For our part, Bangladesh believes that given a lack of
political will, we have no alternative but to accede to the
renewal of the mandate. We reiterate, however, that this
cannot be construed as an automatic right to serve limited
ends and a reduced role, or one that should be allowed to be
subverted to serve ulterior motives. The permanent
members’ of the Council in particular have a clear
responsibility to promote effectively UNIFIL’s competence
and capacity to fulfil its defined tasks.

iO8. The Secretary-General’s several reports have all also
clearly underscored the moderation and restraint of the
Palestinians, and indeed the active positive co-operation
and collaboration of the Lebanese forces, which are
increasing their joint actions with UNIFIL. The presence in
the. Council of some of the Lebanese liaison off&rs is
undeniable proof of their co-operation.
109. These remarks have brought clearly into focus the
direction along which the Council must procekd. The
consensus statement of 8 December 1978 /2XO6fh meeringJ
indicated the fundamental premises for the Council’s
action. We are happy to note that these have progressed
further 4 the present resolution, and that for the first time
blame has been squarely placed on those responsible for the
crisis in Southern Lebanon and on those who continue to
sustain’ and foment the problem. We are conscious’of and
fully support the desire of the Council to act within the
bounds of moderation and restraint. Nevertheless,
Bangladesh still retains some moral and mental reservations
with regard to the resolution, particularly since it would
have preferred a more telling indictment and a
condemnation of those who have initiated and fueled this
untenable situation. In our opinion, the Council should
have directly and clearly called upon Israel to desist from
interfering \Ijith the operation of UNIFIL
in Southern
Lebanon and to cease fortliwith its conti&.d logistic
support and military collaboration with the outlaw Haddad
.forces operating in that area. Clearly, Israel has a
i!%e~biZlZTnt role to play in facilitating the exercising by
UNIFIL of effective control in that region. Its .own good
faith is at stake. Bangladesh also believes that a cardinal
element that required specific reiteration was the call of
8 December upon all Member States that %rein a position
to do so to bring their influence to bear on those
concerned-and particularly on Israel--so that UNIFIL
may discharge its responsibilities unimpeded. We see that
the resolution has included this point.
.
I
. _ -,
110. The fourth aspect on which I wish to touch con&rns
the question of the time-table, or phased programme, for
the full implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate. Bangladesh
fully endorses the introduction of this newclement into the
‘resolution and the statement of the President of the Council.
For some time now, the Secretary-General in his reports has
been underscoring what he considered to be the “‘essential
pre-condition” for the effective functioning of UNIFIL in
the remainder of its area of operation, “without any
prejudice” to the full mandate entrusted to UNIFIL
[S/12929 of 18 November 1978, para. IS. and S/I3026 and
Corr.1, para. 211.

105. The second aspect with which we are concerned
relates to the duration of UNIFIL’s mandate. Again we
were faced with a choice affected by some of the factors I
have already elaborated. Bangladesh has taken note of the
Secretary-General’s view that UNIFIL should continue for
a further period of six months. We have also noted that this
view has the concurrence of the Lebanese Government. The
rationale for the extension by six months was intimately
connected to logistic and administrative problems involved,
and such an extension is in our opinion both justifiable and
valid. However, the concerns expressed in support of a
shorter period of four months so as to maintain political
pressure and a psychological impetus for concerted action
appear to us also to be constructrive.
106. Bangladesh has supported, though somewhat
reluctantly, the compromise decision for an extension of the
- mandate by five months. We agree that the real test for such
a de&ion will be the effectiveness with which the mandate
can be fulfilled and the psychological support given to the
Lebanese people and Government by UNIFIL’s presence.
We also believe the longer period could have been justified
because the resolution provided an essential watershed
period after three months to review the situation.
107. The third aspect to which I wish to address myself
concerns what Bangladesh considers to be essentially the
hard core, the crux, of the problem: why UNIFIL’s role has
been so successfully and continuously circumscribed and
frustrated. Successivereports of the Secretary-Gene&l have
unambiguously and repeatedly indicted those responsible
for this failure, namely, Israel and the outlaw forces under
Had&d.
Not only has cwperation
not been forth10

11I. We believe that these suggestions constitute the first
I 16. This has been confirmed by many facts. Over the last
step towards the ultimate aim of restoring not only the
month alone, members of the Security Council have learned
military credibility of UNIFIL in the entire area of Southern
ofcrdents
of almost incessant artillery fire conducted by
Lebanon, bi.ii%i%-&i%$$mkit
of the armedf&es 07~ the Israeli army against peaceful settlements in Southern
Lebanon, raids by Israeli military patrols and squads
Lebanon and its civilian presence in thii region, thereby
facilitating the return of the original Lebanese inhabitants
penetrating deep into Lebanese territory, air raids by the
to their homes in safety and confidence and, finally, the
Israeli air force on Palestinian refugee camps, and also
establishment of internationally recognixed boundaries.
diversionary actions and artillery fire from ships and
The charge upon the Lebanese Government towards these
launches of the Israeli navy. In all those acts of aggression,
ends is clear, and every encouragement and assistance must _ the only victims were the unarmed civilian.population.
be provided to their efforts, in close cooperation with the
Secretary-General and UNIFIL. We are aware that, given
117. On 8 December [2206?h meeting/, a statement of the
the constricted and complex ground position, these tasks
President of the Council was confirmed and approved by
consensus. It contained a direct demand addressed to Israel
cannot be defined with any degree of precision.
to desist forthwith from interfering with UNIFIL’s
Nevertheless, some beginning must be made towards the
ultimate goal of our efforts. The ultimate yardstick for the
operations in Southern Lebanon and to comply fully and
Secretary-General’s successwill remain the. degree of cowithout any delay with resolutions 425 (1978) and
operation forthcoming from the parties directly concerned
426 (1978).
and the sanction that the Council can bring to bear on those
who
118. In the report submitted by the Secretary-General for
_-__.impede
_ ..- this..-process.
the. consideration of the Council, responsibility for the
112. Mr.. TROYANOVSRY
.(Union of Soviet Socialist
continuing tension in Southern Lebanon is unambiguously
Republics) (interpretationfrom Russian):I should like first
attributed to Israel and its prodges, the anti-Government
of all to welcome to the work of the Security Council
detachment under the command of Haddad. The Council
Mr. Knut Frydenlund, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
cannot but heed the warning of the Secretary-General that
Norway, a country with which the Soviet Union maintains
the acts of provocation on the part of Israel and its protbg6s
relations of good neighbourliness and cooperation.
are clearly deliberate in nature and that, inasmuch as they
apparently are going to continue, “it may be necessary for
113. Today, as happened more than once last year, we
the Council to consider what course of action would be
have been compelled to return to the question of the United
warranted to deal with this situation’*[S/l3026 anci Corr. 1,
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in connexion with the
para. 351.
abnormal situation that for a long time now has existed in
the south of that country. We continue to witness the
119: 6n 15 January, Israeli naval vessels subjected a
explosion of mines and of shells, flying bullets, falling
Palestinian refugee camp to artillery fire and carried out a
bombs and the death of innocent peaceful inhabitants.
landing on Lebanese territory. On 20 December last year,
the
Israeli air force bombed settlements in Southern
114. The question arises: What is it that has changed in
Lebanon, an act which caused casualties among the
Southern Lebanon since March 1978, when Israel
peaceful population and widespread destruction. It is clear
committed its act of aggression against this peace-loving
that
the Security Council cannot overlook those blatant acts
Arab State, an act that entailed a considerable loss of
of
aggression
or the flagrant violation of the sovereignty of
human life and a tremendous amount of material damage?
the
State
of
Lebanon.
That act of aggression gave rise at that time to widespread
and justified indignation throughout the world and became
120. Even now, during the Council’s discussion of the
a subject for consideration by the Security Council, which,
question of renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL, Israel, in
on 19 March of last year, adopted resolution 425 (1978),
cynical disregard for the will of the international
demanding that Israel should immediately ceaseits military
community and the decisions of the Council, is intensifying
action against Lebanon, withdraw forthwith its forces from
its policy of aggression and international terror. Last night,
all Lebanese territory and strictly respect the territorial
Israel, using aircraft and tanks, carried out a new,
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of that
barbarous
raid on settlements in Lebanon and Palestinian
country. However, during the last 10 months the only thing
refugee camps, which left numerous casualties among the
we have seen is Israel, on various pretexts, attempting to
peaceful population.
sabotage the precise implementation
of the Security
Council’s
decisions.
__ -~___
121. The constant acts of aggression on the part of Israel
against Lebanon, the continuing flagrant Israeli interven115. Up till June 1978, Israel had recourse to all kinds of
tion in the internal affairs of the State of Lebanon, serve
different devices and subterfuges in order to avoid
only to complicate further an already dangerous situation in
withdrawing its troops from the whole -territory of
that area. Israel and its protectors are doing everything in
Lebanon. Subsequently, formally withdrawing its troops, it
their power to perpetuate their seizure of Arab territories
actually handed over control over important frontier areas
and to deprive a whole people+he Palestine Arabs-of their
not to United Nations forces, as provided for by decisions of
inalienable national rights. The policy of separate deals
the Security Council and as was called for by the Lebanese
pursued by Israel and Egypt with the active participation of
Government, but to anti-Government armed units under
the United States is inimical to the interests of bringing
the command of Haddad, which are purely and simply
agents in the service of Israel. That all went to show that
about a just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East and encourages Israel in its attempts to consolidate the
Israel had no intention of respecting the sovereignty and
results of its aggression against Arab countries. It is only
territorial integrity of Lebanon but, rather, was striving to
leave the door open for itself for new acts of provocation , natural that the policy of separate deals should have met
with broad condemnation throughout the world, primarily
and aggression against that country.
11

from the Arab States and peoples themselves. A major
achievement of the patriotic forces of the Arab world was
the results of the Baghdad conference, the decisions of :
whichtie playing an important -part in the st-ruggle against
the policy of separate anti-Arab deals and for the
attainment of a just settlement of the Middle East problem. -.122. There is a path towards the establishment of lasting
peace in the Middle East, although the approaches to it have
now been essentially blocked by those who have turned
from that path in the pursuit of one-sided advantages for
themselves. This is the path of a comprehensive settlement
which would make it possible for the Arab countries to
recover the lamis seized from them in 1967 and enable the
Arab people of Palestine to exercise their lawful national
rights, including their right to self-determination and the
creation of their own State, while enabling all States of the
area to enjoy the guaranteed right to a secure existence and
development. It is precisely this kind of settlement which the
Soviet Union and other fraternal socialist countries have
been supporting. They stated this once again at the meeting
of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties
to the Warsaw Treaty held at last November in Moscow.
L*
123. Taking into account the position of the Arab parties
directly interested, which have declared their support for an
extension of the mandate of UNIFIL, the delegation of the ,
’ Soviet Union did not object to the Security Council’s
adoption of the relevant decision. However, the Soviet
delegation confirms the position of the Soviet Union with
regard to UNIFIL on, infer &a, questions related to the
direction of those forces by the Council, the principles for
the selection of national contingents and the system of
financing them. We wish to stress once again that all the
costs connected with the elimination of the consequences of
Israel’s armed aggression against Lebanon should be borne
by
the aggressor.Y_
.
124. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation wishes to express
its serious dissatisfaction at the fact that the resolution of
the Council does not contain a firm condemnation of Israel
for its continuing sabotage of Council decisions or for its
incessant acts of aggression and flagrant intervention in the
internal affairs of Lebanon. In the light of recent events in
Southern Lebanon, this condemnation is more necessary
than ever. We believe that the adoption of effective
measures to ensure compliance with the decisions adopted
by the Council in connexion with Israel’s aggression against
Lebanon is long overdue. It is a secret to no one that this has
been hindered primarily by the position of the United
States, which maintains “special” relations with Israel and
-- has been blocking such effective
-. .----measures. _ .125. Mr. GUIMAI&ES
(Portugal): Before I proceed
with my statement, I should like to join other delegations in ;,
greeting Mr. Knut Frydenhmd, Miiter
for Foreign Af- i
fairs of Norway-a country with which Portugal has the
most cordial and close relations-whose presence here
today is particularly appropriate, taking into account the
important role Norway has played in United Nations peaceoperations.- -___ _
-keeping
-_----__-.--__------.-126. Portugal voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted by the Council, in the belief that the withdrawal of
UNIFIL from its area of operation would in the present
conditions only worsen the situation in Southern Lebanon
and, as the Secretary-General stressesin his report, “disrupt
the fragile peace which now exists” there [ibid, put-u. #II].
12

127. Furthermore, we supported this resolution because,
,
we felt that, despite all the ditEculties it has met, UNIFIL
has played an important role in restoring peace, security
and normal living conditions for a large part of the
inhabitants of its area of operation. The sufferings these i
populations have had to undergo during recent years have
been once again brought to our minds today by an attack
carried out on Lebanese territory, which we cannot but
strongly deplore. These sufferings are more than enough to
justify all our efforts to spare them from the horrors of war ’
and to assure them a life as secure as possible under the
prevailing conditions in that region. The position of *
the Lebanese Government favourable to the renewal of
UNIFIL’s mandate is therefore understandable and has our
support.
128. Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the serious diiculties United Nations forces have met with while performing
the tasks assigned them by the Security Council. We learn
from the Secretary-General’s report that the interference
with UNIFIL action by the dejhcfo Lebanese armed groups
has, if anything, stiffened and that these forces, as well as the
Israel Defence Forces, bear major responsibilities in impeding “the complete deployment of UNIFIL in its entire
area of operation” /ibid, para. 341.
129. We are deeply concerned with these facts and we
deplore the attitude of the parties that do not fully cooperate with UNIFIL. Any obstruction brought about to
the deployment of a United Nations peace-keeping force or
any interference aimed at making more difficult the accomplishment of its mandate is, in our view, an unacceptable defiance of the Security Council’s authority, which
cannot but meet with our strong disapproval.
.
130. We are aware that the situation existing in the area
where UNIFIL
operates is closely linked with political
developments in Lebanon and, indeed, in the whole
atIlicted region, but we believe that an over-all settlement of
the Middle East problem will be much easier to reach if
sectorial problems are previously solved.
131. My delegation therefore believes that there can be
no excuse for the lack of co-operation with UNIFIL that
some of the concerned parties have shown, notwithstanding
all the calls made upon them to collaborate in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions, thus creating the risk of jeopardiiing the co-operation UNIFIL has so
far received from other elements.
132. We acknowledge the progress-however smallachieved in the period to which the Secretary-General’s
report refers on the strengthening of the authority and
presence of the Lebanese Government in Southern Lebanon. We do hope that these steps will mark the beginning of
amptat&kaeag to the full restoration of Lebanese authority
.
133. Nevertheless, we think it should be stressed that the
renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL cannot be assumed to
be automatic and indefinite and that all athe parties
concerned must endeavour to make their best efforts to
enable UNIFIL fully to carry out its mandate before its
eventual withdrawal.
134. Before I conclude, I should like to join with others
around this table in commending the Secretary-General for.
-

the clear and helpful report he has presented to us and also.
to express to him our gratitude for the skilful way in which
he and his assistants have been carrying out their complex
duties concerning
UNIFIL.
.-_-..------.-._.-__.
.- ..-.
135. I should also like to pay a tribute to Major-General
Erskine and to all the officers and men serving under his
command, as well as to UNIFIL civilian personnel, for
the devoted and courageous way in which they have
discharged the difficult task assigned to them, under the
pressures and dangers the situation involves. We hope
that their efforts will contribute to restore real and lasting
peace in Lebanon, a country with a rich cultural heritage
and a long tradition of tolerance whose recent plight has
so deeply moved the people of Portugal.
136. Mr. FUENTES IBANEZ (Bolivia) (interpretation
from Spanish): It is a great pleasure for me to welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway,
whose presence in this chamber is a further
demonstration
of the constant interest of his
Government in the United Nations and especially in the
work of the Security Council.

for a report to be made within 90 days on progress,
achieved.
.. 140. Since the Force. lacks the possibility of actually
making war, its capacity for action is limited to mere
vigilance and persuasion, short of dissuasion. That
circumstance leads to the danger I have already mentioned,
that the Force could become a simple observer and one with
limited means for resolving situations or even for defending
the authority with which it is invested. Here we see once
more the dilemma of the authority of United Nations peacekeeping forces. This is a problem faced by the Security
Council and by the United Nations itself, and from that
dilemma one can see the ditIiculty of resolving problems
that involve the vital interests of peoples, interests which at
times’ challenge the very principles of morality and justice.
These are the problems that generate the wars that afflict
peoples and in the face of which action by the Council alone
is not suflicient to restore peace, unless that action is
accompanied by political will on the part of those that are
most called upon to co-operate in the implementation of the
Council’s decisions.
141. But we are not here to speculate. We must act in a
direct and objective manner. The Force must be a
persuasive entity, one enjoying the complete support of the
international community. That is the intent of operative
paragaph 6, which indicates that, in favour of peace,
influence should be brought to bear from outside the area of
conflict on those concerned, especially by the Member
States that are in a position to exercise intluence on the
parties to the conflict.

137. The Council has once again renewed the mandate
conferred upon the Secretary-General
under its
resolutions
425 (1978) and 426 (1978) for the
establishment and functioning of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. This additional
extension,
which follows the adoption of resolution 434 (1978), is
taking place at a time when there is visible concern and
discouragement at the little progress achieved since the
Force was established.

142. Although in principle my delegation feels that every
resolution adopted by the Security Council should of itself
unequivocally justify the measures that have been judged
appropriate in each case, in the consideration of the renewal
of the mandate of UNIFIL, it has been decided to make the
Council’s action even stronger by a statement by the
President. In spite of the foregoing, my delegation saw
nothing against associating itself with the feelings of the
majority if that will clarify and strengthen the cooperation
between the international community, represented by the
Security Council, and the Government of Lebanon. It is
essential that the latter should continue its efforts for the full
restoration of its authority and for the establishment of a
gradual programme of measures which will result ,in the
greater effectiveness of the Force in m-establishing the full
authority of the Lebanese Government. So far so good, but
there is a new element requiring a reexamination of the
situation in the near future in order to find more effective
ways and means to secure the implementation of the terms
of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).

138. It should be recalled that the decision of March last
year gave rise to new hopes. It was thought that the
efforts and the joining of wills that that represented
would be duly appreciated and that it would be possible
to count on the co-operation of all forces involved,
regardless of how opposed their interests might be, and
that the reiteration of the international community’s will
for peace might have a pacifying effect, permit the
restoration of the full authority of the Lebanese
Government and make it possible for its long-suffering
people to live in peace.
139. Unfortunately, this has not been the case and this
has created a climate of dissatisfaction and, one might
say, discouragement. As has happened in other cases, the
Interim Force is tending to lose its temporary nature and,
rather than just an emergency Force, it is becoming an
expeditionary Force whose mandate, when it cannot
promptly achieve the objectives for which it was
established, has to be renewed periodically. One may
conclude that this could become a routine and automatic
action that in fact contravenes the reasons for which the
Force was established. To prevent this happening,
readjustments must be made; pressure must be brought
to bear on the reluctant sectors. And that is the reason
why the Council has today adopted two decisions. In the
first, it reiterates the objectives for which the Force was
established and the essential, imperative need for cooperation on the part of all parties concerned in the
elimination of the obstacles in the way of more effective
implementation of‘rcsoiutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
Although it has finally been decided that the mandate will
be extended for five months, a new provision is included

143. Some of the comments I have made stem from a
valuable and objective source: the report of the SecretaryGeneral in document S/13026 and Corr.1. That report
reflects the disappointment we all share. But despite that
‘disappointment there is also a renewed atliiation
of faith
that we are in duty bound to support, especially those
Governments that are in a position to influence all the
forces involved in the conflict.
144. We are certain that Major-General Erslcme and hi
officers ’ and men, as well as the civilian support
personnel, .will continue to serve the objectives of the ” ’
Organixation in a spirit of self-sacrifice, dedication and
13

competence, as they have done up to the present, and that
they will continue to do so until they have fulfilled their
mission.
145. Lastly, I should like to commend you, Mr. President,
for the outstanding manner in which you have been iding
our work. This has not surprised us, since we.are 8”armhar
-*
with your talent and experience, and is a guarantee that we
shall fulfil our responsibilities.
146. Mr. HRCKA (Czechoslovakia) (interpretationfiom
Russian): I would fmt associate myself with those
! delegations that have welcomed to our midst the Foreign
Minister of Norway.
147. The Security Council is meeting again after four
months to consider the question of the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
As the report of the Secretary-General shows, the situation
in that area has not only failed to improve but, because of
the continuing interference by Israel in the internal affairs of
Lebanon, has become explosive, even more unstable and
ever more complicated.
148. The resumption and perpetuation of the legal power
of the Lebanese Government over the whole territory of the
State is one of the tasks facing the Force. It is a task that still
remains unfulfilled because of the refusal of the Israeli
Government to abide by the decisions of the Council, in
particular resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). As the
report states, such a state of affairs cannot fail to encourage
the Council to consider the question of “what course of
action would be warranted to deal with this situation’*
/S/13026 a& Corr.1, para. 3.51.We entirely agree with the
comments of the Secretary-General
“that the situation in Southern Lebanon cannot be
divorced from the situation in the rest of the country.. .
and that external factors have a bearing on [the Force’s]
possibilities of making further progress” (ibid., para. 371.

conditions of peace and the restoration of the authority of
the Lebanese Government over the whole territory of the
country can be brought about only by means of increasing
pressure on Israel. In this sense we view positively certain
aspects of the statement made today by the President of the
Council.
152. In this situation, the position of the Czechoslovak’
delegation remains unchanged. We want to express our.
regret at the fact that, in spite of the difticulty and danger of
the situation in Southern Lebanon, and in spite of Israel’s
latest attack upon Lebanon, the Council has not succeeded
in arriving at an agreement on the question of condemning
Israel for its continuing intervention in the internal affairs of
a Member State or for its failure to comply with the
resolutions of the Council.
153. We once again confnm the reservations and .the
position with regard to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon that our delegation explained at the meetings of
the Council on 19 March, 3 May and 18 September 1978
[2074th, 2076th and 2085th meetings/. We also wish to
confirm our position with regard to the financing of the
Force. This time too, therefore, the Czechoslovak
delegation abstained in the voting on the resolution just
adopted.
154. Mr. HARRIMAN
(Nigeria): Mr. President, I am
sure that my delegation welcomed you earlier, but I have
great personal pleasure in welcoming you to the presidency
of the Council. I always recall how apparently enthused you
were every time some of us whom you described virtually as
men from the political planet descended on the Group
of 77. You always regarded our participation asstimulating
and refreshing. May I reciprocate by saying that we
welcome your versatility in transforming your role as a keen
negotiator of the Group of 77 on the new international
economic order into one on international peace and
security. We have seen your prowess in the one and we are
assured of your successin the other.
155. The presence of the Foreign Minister of Norway,
Mr. Knut Frydenlund, here to&y is a reflection of the
dedication of the Government and people of Norway to
international peace and security, to human values and to a
better world.,

149. Indeed, why should Israel want to cease its
intervention in the internal affairs of Lebanon? After all, it is
being supported by every possible means. It is being treated
most politely as an irreplaceable ally in that region by those
very forces that want to pose before the world as friends of
the Arab peoples. In a word, as long as support persists for
the aggressive policy of the Israeli Government, Israel’s
policy of provocation against Lebanon will continue.

156. My delegation appreciates immensely the htcid and
succinct report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

150. We cannot and should not look in Southern
Lebanon for any influence of the Camp David agreements,
because their purpose is not a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East; it is not the satisfying of the legitimate rights of
the Arab people of Palestine; it is not the withdrawal by
Israel from all the Arab territories it has occupied; it is not a
comprehensive and collective solution to the conflict within
the framework of the Geneva Peace Conference. It is
nothing more than a separate deal behind the back of the
Arab peoples and at the expense of their vital interests.

157. I am particularly happy that Nigeria continues to be
able to play its part in the peace-keeping responsibilities of
the Security Council. This we feel obliged to do as members
of the Council and as a country that believes that universal
peace cannot be achieved if situations like that in Lebanon
and other international brush-fires are not quickly and
effectively contained. Nigeria was thus very pleased to have
been able to meet the additional requirements of UNIFIL
following the withdrawal of some Iranian and French
contingents.

151. The most recent Israeli invasion of the territory of
Lebanon is only one further piece of evidence that Israel is
continuing its aggression against neighbouring Arab
countries and disregarding the efforts of the United Nations
and the dispatch of the United Nations Interim Force into
the area. This intrusion goes to show once more that

158. The whole episode of Southern Lebanon appears to
be nothing but a red herring to divert attention from the
eroding, if not crumbling, credibility of Israel in the over-all
Middle Eastern arena.
--159. Israeli intransigence is demoralizing to UNIFIL
forces. Most of them-especially those from Africa-still

.living in tents in wintry conditions are being continuously
humiliated by Israel and its armed stooges led by Major
Haddad. Supply routes continue to be harassed, leading to
greater cost of operation.

s&nity and that is why we fully supported the &&onth
*,
extension period for the Force’s mandate, as recominended
earlier. In addition to the proposal to reassessthe sjtuation
after a three-month period, we insist that the issue should be
kept under constant review.

160. The contingents of the Force, without the authority
to fight back, have been able only to look on while civilian
settlements in the UNIFIL area have been shelled and fired
upon with automatic weapons by the so-called Christian
militia acting for Israel by proxy.

166. Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for hi endeavours’to enable UNIFIL to fulfil its
mandate at an early date.
167. I cannot but conclude by praying that those Powers
which have the leverage with Israel will use that influence to
prod Israel into ending its defence of concerted international decisions.

i61. Israel’s cowardly invasion of Lebanon yesterday and
the boastful glee expressed at least by the press at Israel
having crossed United Nations lines is another reflection
and evidence of an attempt to discredit UNIFIL. This
process of defence of the United Nations by Israel is
obviously a process aimed at deterring the United Nations,
provoking its exit and thereby enabling Israel to implement
its policies of expansionism.

168. The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement on
behalf of the delegation of JAMAICA.
169. I wish at the outset to welcome His ExcellenFy, the *.
Foreign Minister of Norway, Mr. Knut Frydenlund, to this
meeting of the Security Council. His participation is
particularly appreciated since it uhderlines Norway’s interest in the question which is before us, an interest which has
already been demonstrated by its participation in UNIFIL
as a contributing Government.

162. In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the Commander of UNIFIL,
Major-General
Erskine, his staff, both civilian and military, and the officers
and men of the contingents of UNIFIL for their courage,
dedication and sustained discipline in the face of a very
difficult and sometimes dangerous situation. To have kept
their composure in spite of deliberate provocation from
Israel’s client agents in the region of their operations is no
small achievement.

170. My delegation echoes the expressions of gratitude
and appreciation already addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by several representatives for the excellent report in
document S/13026 and Corr. 1. That report, to which I shall
refer again, has greatly enhanced our understanding of the
grave and complex situation in Lebanon.

163. In order to accelerate the process of implementation
of UNIFIL’s
mandate, the Council must reaffirm the
principle of strict respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Lebanon within its
internationally recognised boundaries. We should always
keep in clear perspective this cardinal aspect of the Force’s
mandate in order to avoid the unpleasant and, indeed,
unacceptable situation of UNIFIL being institutionalized
into a force for the protection of Israel’s northern border.

171. The issue with which the Council is now concerned is
one which critically tests the capacity of the United Nations
to respond to its Charter provisions for peace-keeping. At
one level, our task to&y might be seenas a simple matter of
renewing the mandate of UNIFIL
in the face of the
continuing critical situation in Southern Lebanon. But my
delegation also takes full account of the difficulties and
limitations in respect of peace-keeping machinery, and the
fact that the situation in Southern Lebanon is an integral
part of the wider and decidedly complex Middle East
problem.

164. In this regard, we deplore vehemently Israel’s defiance of the decisions and authority of the Security Council.
Should Israel persist in its acts of recalcitrance and defiance,
the Council will be left with no option other than to take
appropriate measures under the Charter to compel Israel to
co-operate with UNIFIL in the fulfilment of its mandate.

172. My delegation was prepared to support fully the
renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL for a period of six
months. We were prepared to do so in the light of the
imperative need for thii and the significant contribution
which the Force has made in the area to which it is assigned.
We were prepared to do so because of our belief in the need
to make every possible effort to prevent further deterioration in the situation in Lebanon and to contribute to the
maintenance of the fragile peace in the Middle East.

165. My delegation believes that the cost to the international community of Israeli aggression in the Middle East
is becoming intolerable. Last year we had 10 formal
meetings of the Council on UNIFIL alone, the largest
number of such meetings held on any issue apart from
Namibia, the meetings on which also added up to 10, and
many more agonizing hours in informal consultations, also
at great cost. We had initially supported the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for a six-month renewal period
for mandate of UNIFIL but reluctantly agreed with the
consensus contained in the resolution just adopted. However, we wish to stress the fact that thisgesture was designed
to facilitate the work and operations of UNIFIL since the
longer period naturally provides for more viable planning
by UNIFIL. At the same time, we feel concerned that a
shorter renewal period might lend credence to or heighten
the current atmosphere of uncertainty leading to unexpected explosions of no small dimension. The Council
should not give any impression that it is scuttling its
responsibilities with regard to international peace and

173. Jamaica takes this position, despite the inescapable
fact that, in the 10 months of its existence, UNIFIL has been
prevented from fully implementing its mandate, and that
the attitudes and actions of certain parties directly involved
place serious limits on the prospects of UNIFIL’s successin
the period ahead. The report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral makes it quite clear that despite the Force’s
creditable efforts, the objectives of the Security Council are
being thwarted by the lack of co-operation of the Lebanese
defacto armed groups and the Israeli authorities. My
delegation is most concerned that the attitudes of these two
parties have negated the Force’s efforts to extend its area of
15

operation into Southern Lebanon, in fulfilment of its
mandate. We share the concern, expressedby the SecretaryGeneral in his report, at

177. It therefore becomes increasingly urgent and
necessary that all Member States which are in a position to
do so should use every effort to secure Israel’s cooperation
with UNIFIL.

“a pattern of behaviour on the part of the de facto
forces that would suggest a deliberate intention to harass
UNIFIL in its efforts fully to implement resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978)” /S/13026 and Corr.1, para. 351.

178. My delegation deplores all acts of violence which
disturb the already precarious situation in Southern
Lebanon and present further difficulties in the way of the
Force’s task.
s
179. Returning now to my role as PRESIDENT of the
Council, I call on the next speaker, the representative of
Lebanon.

174. It is to the credit of UNIFIL that, despite the serious
operational obstacles and the consequent frustration that it
experiences, it has made such a valuable contribution to
peace in Lebanon. In its area of operation, the Force’s
efforts have restored life to villages which were emptied by
the previous military situation, and have created an
atmosphere of security in which people can once more seek
to lead relatively normal lives. The dedication and discipline
of the troops in the face of a dangerous situation, in which
there have been 6 soldiers killed and 67 wounded in action,
are highly commendable. Their conduct is a tribute to the
countries which have sponsored them. My delegation adds
its sincere expression of gratitude to Major-General Erskine
and the troops of UNIFIL for their efforts in the cause of
international peace and security.

180. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council for
granting my request to take part in this debate. Given the
late hour, I shall try not to abuse the time of the Council,
though I do want to stress some of the points that have
already been made by members.
181. I should like to associate my delegation with the
remarks made in the Council in welcoming the Foreign
Minister of Norway. His presence here at a debate
concerning my country represents to us in Lebanon a
further sign of the devotion of hi country, his Government,
its delegation here, and the soldiers of his country in
Lebanon to the cause of peace and justice, and offers
testimony of how much they have all contributed to that
cause.

175. Jamaica, none the less, cannot accept that UNIFIL
should become a permanent fixture in Lebanon. The
presence of the Force should not be a factor aiding the
congealing of the present situation in which the Lebanese
territory is divided and its legal Government deprived of the
opportunity of exercising its rightful authority. My
delegation wishes to reatTum the applicability to the
Lebanese situation of the principles of respect for
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and of
non-intervention in internal affairs. We therefore deplore
the support by the Israeli authorities of the Lebanese
defacto armed groups. We call upon the Israeli authorities
and these defacto armed groups to co-operate with
UNIFIL and to cease those activities which prevent the
legal,Govemment of Lebanon from exercising its authority
in the southern section of the country. Jamaica believes that
those countries that are in a position to exert influence on
Israel and the de facto armed forces should take such action
in support of peace in the area and also of the Security
Council in respect of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and international security. In view of
our position on this issue, my delegation voted in favour of
the resolution which has now been adopted by the Council.

182. I also wish to welcome the presence of MajorGeneral Erskine. I believe that his presence with us here will
enable him, when he returns to the very difficult task which
he is performing, to convey to his men the importance
which the Security Council and the world community
attach to the magnificent work which they are all doing in
the face of the tremendous difliculties which confront them.
_‘..
183. I shall not follow the conventional pattern of
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the :
presidency of the Council, as this chamber still echoes with
the unanimous expressions of praise for your leadership
during the past debate. Hardly could such a dehcate task
and in such a tragic context be performed with more
dexterity, objectivity and genuine concern for peace and
justice. I should like to add that your leadership in the long
consultations that took place before the Council voted on
the draft resolution is in itself another tribute to you. Weal1
thought that this was going to be another solemn and quiet
debate on the renewal of the UNIFIL mandate. However,
the Israeli aggression last night, which was an aggression
primarily against UNIFIL,
makes it imperative that I
should comment on it, and I should like to reserve my right
to make further comments in the Council on this issue at a
later stage if necessary.

176. Before concluding this statement, I must, on behalf
of my delegation, refer to the recent action by Israeli forces,
on which the Secretary-General has just reported to the
Council. This attack is clear evidence of Israel’s refusal to
cooperate with UNIFIL. The preambular paragraphs of
the resolution which has just been adopted by the Council
draw attention to the grave situation in Southern Lebanon
resulting from obstacles placed against the full implementation of the mandate of UNIFIL and state that “the
continuation of the situation constitutes a challenge to” the
authority of the Security Council “and a defiance of its
resolutions”. The recent attack must be seen as an outright
defiance of the Council, not only because the Israeli
invading troops crossed the UNIFIL area of operation, but
also because the invasion was effected at the height of the
Council’s consideration of the renewal of the mandate of
UNIFIL.

184. We lodge with you and with the Council the
strongest protest against an inadmissible act which we think
has been carefully timed to take place, as you said,
Mr. President, while we are meeting tu salvage what we can
of peace and security in the area.
185. I should like now to thank the Council for the
resolution that it has just adopted. We Find it within the
usual practice and within the usual framework to be the
strongest possible resolution, although my Government
16

-’

=

:;;

,I_

*

would have preferred a more explicit condemnation of
Israel, a much stronger endorsement of the, SecretaryGeneral’s report and hi personal action, and certainly a
further strengthening of the effective .capabilities of
UNIFIL.

.. /

.

A,

*. _!:,

‘+:..-

already highly sensitive situation in Lebanon.*’ [Ibid.,
para. 38.1
6‘. . . UNIFIL
performs an essentially stabilizing
function and. . . its premature withdrawal would
inevitably disrupt the fragile peace which now exists in
Southern Lebanon.

186. We think that this morning’s aggression is another
*proof that the situation in Southern Lebanon has become
untenable and inadmissible. It highlights the clear reference
in the Secretary-General’s report to the continued Israeli
presence inside Lebanese territory. It highlights the fact that
Israeli withdrawal is still a fiction. It highlights Israel’s
continued arrogant defiance of the Security Council, the
international community and every single principle of
international law and order. It also highlights the fact that
Israel has opted for continued war in Lebanon while
pretending to seek peace elsewhere.

“. . . I therefore appeal to those immediately concerned
to reconsider urgently their attitude to UNIFIL and to
ask themselves. whether, in the context of the
.maintenance of international peace and security, they
would really be better off if UNIFIL were obliged by
continuing frustration to withdraw without fulfilling its
mandate.” [II&!, paras. 40 a&41.]
190. That is a very gloomy prospect, but we are
confronted with it. We are confronted with it at the
beginning of this new year. Therefore I should like to
respond to the Secretary-General’s warning by quoting the
President of the Republic of Lebanon in his annual address
to ___-.the diplomatic
last:
..._. corps
_ on
. 6 January
.- -. - .
“With every passing day we ask ourselves again:
How much longer can our country bear the catastrophes
that continue to fall upon us, endlessly. . .? Yet I want
solemnly to proclaim that Lebanon is determined to
make of this new year, in the name of the ideals which we
cherish, a year of hope and peace, of reconciliation and of
resurrection.”

187: If we here, all of us together, do not put an end to
what is in fact the continued occupation of Southern
Lebanon by Israel there will not be peace in the Middle
East, and that most explosive area will endanger peace and
security everywhere else in the world.
188. That is the tragedy, and we know that representatives
share not only our sufferings but also the torture of soulsearching questions about the future which we bring today
before the Council-the future of a country which the world
has loved, the future of peace in the area, an area so vital to
the world, the future of a peace-keeping operation launched
less than a year ago which has since been eroded to the point
of being described in the Secretary-General’s report in the
most dramatic terms, so much so that Mr. Waldheim felt
obliged “to inform the Council that the present situation
cannot.. . continue indefinitely”, and to add that,

Speaking of the situation in Southern Lebanon, President
Sarkis
that same address:
..__
‘.
_... .
-- said in .-._-_-.
“Peace in one country cannot be established by waging
war in another ;. .; you do not solve the Palestinian
problem by creating a Lebanese question; nor can one
settle the fate of a dispersed people by the dispersal of
another peaceful people . . . Southern Lebanon has been psubjected to repeated acts of aggression of varying kinds,
some directly and some by proxy.. . The international
forces [the United Nations forces] that have come to put
an end to such violations of Lebanese sovereignty have,
in turn, been the victims of provocation, obstruction and
aggression.. . We who have known, in the critical days of
our history, the meaning of hardships and sacrifice, know
as well how to appreciate the efforts of those who have
come to help us overcome our present difficulties. We
had not even waited until our Army wasreconstructed to
send a detachment that could co-operate with the United
Nations forces. We felt that it was our national duty that
we should stand as one with soldiers who had come from
all parts of the world to lend us their help and
assistance.. . For we strongly believe that such attitudes
are the most genuine expressions of the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, and an act of faith in the
principles of the international Organization . . .

‘;Through no fault of its own, UNIFIL has not been
in a position to alter.. . a situation which is neither
acceptable to the Government of Lebanon nor
compatible with the intentions of the Co~ncil.“[S/13026
and Corr.1, para. 41.1
That means that,
“despite continuous and persistent efforts at all levels,
UNIFIL has reached the end of its second mandate
without completing the tasks assigned to it in Security
Council resolution 425 (1978)” [ibid, para. 331.
The report continues:
“If the restraint being shown by UNIFIL continues to
be exploited in this way, it may be necessary for the
Council to consider what course of action would be
warranted to deal with thii situation.” [Ibid, para. 35.1
._
189. Elsewhere, the Secretary-General addresses some
very significant and more explicit and potent warnings
which I feel compelled to underline at this stage of our
presentation, despite the fact that many members of the
Council have already referred to them:

“We therefore address our sentiments of particular
appreciation and gratitude to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations for his special role in making such
attitudes possible.”

. . .UNIFIL
continues to prevent the resumption
of serious hostilities between the armed groups in the
area. There can be no doubt that, without UNIFIL,“and it pleases me to underline that-“these hostilities
would be contributing another explosive element to the

191. While conveying those thoughts of the President of
the Lebanese Republic, I will undoubtedly be forgiven
lengthy quotations. I should like to return in a moment to
the report, because I think it is my duty, now that the
resolution has been adopted and we have heard the
17

’

clear international commitment
cannot challenge and destroy.

President’s statement, to’ put things in their proper
perspective. I also thought that my country’s attitude, as
expressed by the highest legitimate constitutional authority
of the land, should be put on record here.

which Israel’s defiance

202. The time has probably come for us, in the Council, to
take a fresh look at the basic principles that prompted the
inception of UNIFIL,
its terms of reference and the
guidelines by which its action was and is to be govemedand those terms of reference and guidelines are referred to in
,the resolution adopted today.

192. Drawing further on the Council’s patience, I wish to
add that in the same solemn address the President of the
Republic,of Lebanon expressed some thoughts that seem to
meet the Council’s and Secretary-General’s sentiments
today: our common concern for international peacekeeping and our common belief that beyond a certain stage
of defiance and obstruction it becomes imperative --to
strengthen United Nations forces and give them the means
of fulfilling their mandate forcefully and with confidence
and assured success.

203. Ten months ago exactly, in a -moment of &eat
enthusiasm, -with a unique -perception of historical .~
responsibility, and in a context of drama and revolt, the
representative of the United States of America, Ambassador Andrew Young, introduced, in the following terms,
the draft resolution which became resolution 425 (1978):

193. I shall not burden the debate with further repetitions
of facts and figures that are by now clearly established. The
Secretary-General’s report now under consideration is so
factually well substantiated that we really have nothing to
add to it. Previous reports, and particularly the report of
13 September 1978 [s/12845], are no less eloquent.
.-

“The Security Council meets today against a background of tragedy but with an opportunity to play a
constructive role in restoring security and stability in
violence-tom Southern Lebanon.
“The aim of the Council must now be to end as quickly
as possible this new cycle of violence, and to deal with
some of the immediate underlying causes. . .

194. What, therefore, is our case?
195. First, we accuse Israel of, beyond any doubt,
obstructing international peace-keeping, in continued
defiance of United Nations resolutions and the universal
consensus.

“. . . First, we expect Israel to withdraw from Southern
Lebanon, and we have made our views in this respect
known to the Israeli Government. Secondly, the
territorial integrity of Lebanon must be fully respected.
Thirdly, the United Nations has a vital role to play in
assisting the Government of Lebanon to restore.. . conditions that will facilitate the m-establishment of its
authority and provide a return to security and a peaceful
life for the people of the south.” f2073rd meeting,
paras. 11, 12 and 13.}

196. Secondly, we also accuse Israel of wilfully attempting
to use UNIFIL as a cover to perpetuate its aggression
against Lebanon, the practical occupation of Lebanese
territory and the violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and its internationally recognized
boundaries.
*

‘204. I could go on quoting, but I shall stop with the
following sentences:

197. Thirdly, we further accuse Israel of trying to establish, unimpeded, vicarious occupation of Southern Lebanon,
usurping authority through mutineers and mercenaries, not
only to prevent the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty, but
with the express purpose of disrupting our society and,
through the destabiiization of Lebanon, imperilling the
chances of peace and security in the whole Middle East.

the United Nations would ‘have responsibility to
establish and provide security in the southern border
region of Lebanon and,*‘-and
I emphasize those
words--“’ tt would assist the Government of Lebanon in
promptly reestablishing its authority in’that area and,
once this was established, relinquish its’responsibilities to
Lebanon.” [Ibid.., para. 14.1
“

.

198. The time has come to put an end to Israel’s self-given
licence to exploit the sufferings of our people, for we have
paid too dear price for the wars that have been fought on
our land, transforming us into an arena for everybody’s
wars and everybody’s revolutions as well.
).
199. Such is the accountability of the nations in
Lebanon’s tragedy that the time has come for the
international community, here represented, to carry withus
the responsibility of Lebanon’s salvation to the end.

.

.

When that is done, the objectives established by
this draft resolution’*-that
is, the draft resolution that
became resolution 425 (1978)--%ill
have been fully
achieved and, we fully expect, the cause of peace and
justice in the Middle East substantially advanced.“flbid,
para. 17.J
‘6

.

.

.

205. Such were the words of Ambassador Akrew
Young,
and we ail know the marvellous response: m’less than three
days, two resolutions were adopted, the Force was
constituted, and peace-keeping was beginning while Israel
was still pursuing its aggression.
_.
206. If the Council -Ai bear ‘with me a littie~Ionger, I
submit that we may find it appropriate to read from the
Secretary-General’s report on the implementation
of
resolution 425 (1978)-a report presented to the Council on
the evening of 19 March 1978 and approved almost

200. In that perspective, and in the context of our present
concern with the Force’s mandate, what have we asked for?
That UNIFIL should be given the power to succeed in
fulfilling its mandate.
-I
201. My Government has no desire to perpetuate the
presence of UNIFIL. We have repeatedly stated that we
consider the United Nations Force to be an interim
arrangement. But we strongly believe that there is there a
18

-

instantly, that same night, by resolution 426 (1978). This
was said in that report:

on-the use of the diplomaticoption.
Yet we doubt that the
military option will ever be more than a mere deterrent,
although we hope it will succeed.
-.

‘The terms of reference of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) are:
H. . .

-Thirdly,
UNIFIL
has not found it possible or
necessary to use all the ways and means at its disposal to
fulfil its mandate and exercise its rights without exceeding
its military prerogatives. It has not been possible or
necessary, so far, even to use a show of force or establish its
military credibility by asserting its right to self-defence
against those who would hinder its freedom of movement
or deployment. And here again I come back to the warning
by the Secretary-General that the restraint shown by
UNIFIL should not be mistaken for incapacity.

‘(b) The Force will confii the withdrawal of Israeli
forces, restore international peace and security and assist
the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its
effective authority in the area;
l .
.

.

.

‘,

209. That having been said in all candour, I should like
once again to state our conviction that the time has come for
new but vigorous action, bearing in mind the lessons of the
past and the lessons of today-indeed this very momingbut more concerned with projecting the unfulfiied
objectives into a perspective of the future. Thii should
necessitate the establishment of a definitive-plan of action,
within a limited time-frame. We are happy that the
resolution adopted today calls for that.

“(4 The Force will use its best efforts to prevent the
recurrence of fighting and to ensure that its area of
operation will not be utilized for hostile activities of any
kind;” [S/Z2611, para. 21.
Further on, under “General considerations**, we read the
following-and the Force will have to take this into account
under the resolution adopted today:
‘Three essential conditions must be met for the Force
to be effective. First, it must have at all times, the full
confidence and backing of the Security Council. Secondly, it must operate with the full cooperation of all the
parties concerned. Thirdly, it must be able to function as
an integrated and efficient military unit.

210. Not only does my Government feel confident that it
is today in the ‘position of being fully associated with
UNIFIL
in such a plan of action, but it is also the
unanimous and clearly expressed determination of the
House of Parliament of Lebanon that it should be so. For
we then would feel that even if we failed to recover our
territory by force, we would at least have retrieved our
rights, restored the dignity of our constitutional institutions,
and earned the respect of those of our friends whose
sympathy cannot be drawn on for ever, unmatched.

6‘. . . :
‘(b) The Force must enjoy the freedom of movement
-and communication
and other facilities that are
necessary for the performance of its tasks. . .

211. Mr. President, I cannot conclude without referring to
the statement that you read and for which we thank you and
the Council. We consider this statement to be a
consecration ,of my Government’s commitment to the
Council on 8 December 1978 f2ZO6th meetingf, when I said
that the Lebanese Army was prepared to start assuming its
responsibilities and requested a joint planning between
UNIFIL and the Government of Lebanon.

‘6. . .
‘(4) The Force will be provided”-and
this is an
important passage-“with -weapons of a defensive
character. It will not use force except in self-defence. Selfdefence would include resistance to attempts by forceful
means to prevent it from discharging its duties under the
mandate of the Security Council. The Force will proceed
on the assumption that the parties to the conflict will take
all the necessary steps for compliance with the decisions
of the Council.” /Ibid, paras. 3 and 4.j

212. I remember, however, that at that meeting of
8 December the representative of Kuwait had addressed to
the representative of Israel a direct question, which he
reiterated today: Is Israel or is it not going to withdraw from
Lebanon? His question is today answered, but, alas, in the
most negative and destructive manner. As for us in
Lebanon, we maintain our pledge, and we consider that this
pledge has acquired, through the Security Council, through
the Lebanese Parliament and through acts of the Lebanese
Government, the highest possible-we hope-credibility.
We hope also. that it will change the face of things in
Lebanon. My country is not for sale nor is it for hire, and I
hope that we shall be able to prove it.

207. Since the report of 19 March 1978 many things have
happened, but also many things have not happened that
should have happened and that were expected to happen.
We have also had many reports, all equally explicit, many
speeches, all eloquent, and many resolutions that have all
reiterated the same principles.
208. In the light of all that, my delegation feels, in
conclusion, that we must emphasize the following:

213. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Israel. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

-First,
Israel has not complied with resolution
_ 425 078) nor has it complied since with resolution
- 426 (1978) or 434 -(1978), nor has it responded to the
various %alls upons” or “‘deplores’* or “regrets”: all of
them expressions that have been used here in the Council.

214. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, let me begin by
paying my warmest respects to you as President of the
Security Council for this month. Let me also take the
opportunity to congratulate Jamaica, a country with which
we enjoy cordial relations, on its election to the Council. We

-Secondly, diplomatic action has not persuaded Israel
to comply or respond. The time has come to put a limitation
19

are confident that it will carry. out the international
responsibilities entrusted to it with all the seriousness and
objectivity that they demand. We are also confident that
you, as its Permanent Representative, will carry out your
duties in the Council with all the wisdom and skill that you
have so amply demonstrated in your other capacities within
the United Nations.

reassertion of Lebanon’s authority over its own territory
and to the establishment of international peace and
security. With those considerations in mind, the Council
called for “strict respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence”-and
I stress,
“political independence”-“of
Lebanon within its internationally recognised boundaries”. UNIFIL wasentrusted
with an appropriate mandate. It was established not only
for the purpose of confuning the withdrawal of the Israel
Defence Forces, but also for “restoring international peace
and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return ofits effective authority in the area”. In
order to achieve this purpose, UNIFIL was ordered to
prevent the infiltration of armed personnel into the areas
under its control, an instruction aimed at preventing the
PLO from returning to the region, this being,a necessary
condition for the establishment of international peace and
security.

215. I should also like to associate myself with all those
who have welcomed the Foreign Minister of Norway to the
deliberations of the Council this afternoon.
216. All of US here are painfully aware that Lebanon’s
problems far transcend ffie issue of the operations of
UNIFIL in the south of that troubled country. Not only
have those problems existed for more than twodecades, but
unless they are confronted directly and with determination
they will continue to plague the country long after UNIFIL
withdraws. The situation now prevailing in the south of the
country is merely one symptom of a much larger problem.

222. I have deliberately recounted the background to
resolution 425 (1978) in some detail because we have
recently witnessed a distinct tendency to ignore essential
elements of that resolution. Both in the current debate and
in the debate on the Secretary-General’s interim report last
December, there has been an undisguised attempt by some
participants to gloss over the real issues faced by Lebanon
and to direct the focus of their comments on Israel instead.

217. The internal problems of Lebanon are of long
standing. They were greatly aggravated by the arrival of
large numbers of armed terrorists from the organization
known as the PLO. With its expulsion from Jordan in
September 1970 and its exclusion from other Arab
countries, the so-called PLO took advantage of Lebanon’s
inherent weaknesses to establish operational bases and
headquarters there. Indeed, the erosion of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, to which resolution 425 (1978) refers, began in
the early 1970s when the PLO set up what was virtually a
state within a State in Lebanon, principally in Southern
Lebanon, where one of the areas was dubbed as
“Fatahland”.

223. Indeed, thii truncation of the original UNIFIL
mandate may even have been construed by some from the
Secretary-General’s last two reports, which may lend
themselves to a narrow interpretation. On that interpretation, the function of UNIFIL
would be confined to
confirming Israel’s withdrawal and to the establishment
and maintenance of an area of operation. In the process,
attention may have been diverted from the centralityof the
other inseparable components of UNIFIL’s
mandate,
which are restoration of international peace and security
and assistance to the Government of Lebanon in ensuring
the return of its effective authority in the area.
._224. It is patently clear thatthe Council has so far failed to
come to grips @th the fundamental issues undermining
Lebanon’s sovereignty and stability. This was demonstrated most dramatically last October, when the Council
peremptorily calIed for a cease-fire at Beirut, without any
deliberation whatsoever on the,issues. Indeed, members of
the Council will recall that it took only four minutes to
adopt a resolution which nervously avoided even indirect
reference to the outside State involved in the massive
bombardment and destruction of civilian quarters of
Beirut.

218. Over the last few years, the PLO, with increasing
intensity, has turned Southern Lebanon into a staging post
for its murderous incursions into Israel. Names like Avivim,
Ma’alot, Kiryat Shmona and Nahariya came to denote the
scenes of bloody massacres of women and children. All
these acts were perpetrated by PLO terrorists operating
from Lebanese territory.
_
219. In the last four years alone there have been close to
2,OQQ individual acts of aggression involving artillery,
Katyusha, mortar and other attacks mounted against Israel
from Lebanon and resulting in hundreds of Israeli
casualties. This intolerable situation culminated in the
particularly brutal attack on a civilian bus on the Haifa-Tel
Aviv highway last March.
220. Nor were the PLO’s terroristic activities confined to
Israel. A reign of terror swept Lebanese villages in the south
as the PLO gradually tightened its grip over the area.
Moreover, Southern Lebanon became the training ground,
logistics centre and refuge for members of the Terrorist
International from all over the world. Their activities have
plagued numerous countries and the international
community at large.

225. Nor is this a matter of the past: another major
exchange of gunfire between Syrians and Lebanese at
Beirut, as reported by 27teNew York Times on 14 January,
resulted in a toll of at least 18 dead and 73 wounded,
according to’hospital and relief sources, In the words of Tie
New York Times, “It was the worst clash here since the
United Nations Security Council called in October for a
cease-fire”. Nevertheless, it is unlikely that thetiuncil will
meet to discuss the problem of the Syrian occupation of
Lebanon. Instead,. it will concentrate on far more marginal
matters in the south.

221. When the Security Council met in March last year to
deal with the problem of Southern Lebanon, it was well
aware of the international issues flowing from the situation
in that country. The Council took cognizance of the
problem of Lebanon in its entirety, fully understanding that
the presence of 30,000 Syrian troops and thousands of PLO
terrorists on Lebanese soil constituted major barriers to the

226. So far, Israel’s withdrawal from Southern Lebanon
remains the only part of theUNIFILmandate
that has been
20

unconditionally fulfilled, as confirmed by the Commander
of UNIFIL, Major-General E. A. Erskine, and reported in
OPI Press Release UNIFIL/8
and document S/12620/
Add.5 both of 13 June 1978. It is a matter of great concern
and regret that the other two parts of the mandate have not
yet been implemented.
-‘.
.“-.
..
227. Israel’s concern in this matter derives from a direct
and vital security interest. Like any Government, the
Government of Israel has the right, and indeed the duty, to
protect the lives and safety of its own citizens. What
happens in Southern Lebanon directly affects the daily lives
of our people who live in the towns and villages throughout
Israel, and in particular in the north of the country. We have
closely followed the concerted efIforts of the PLO in recent
months to increase the infiltration of its terrorists into
Southern Lebanon with the declared aim of using the area
as a base for operations against civilian targets in Israel, as it
had been for several years in the past. Indeed, shortly after
the establishment of UNIFIL, Abu Iyad, Yasser Arafat’s
second-in-command and architect of the murderous attack
on the Israeli bus on the Tel Aviv-Haifa highway last
March, stated in an interview with the Swiss newspaper
Tages Anreiger:

.-

two others were wounded. The three terrorists were killed,
and on their bodies were found leaflets identifying them as
iiienibe~ ‘-of-.a .ierrorist group called the “Popular
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine*’
(PDFLP) yet another constituent of the terrorist PLO.
231. On the same day, radio stations in Syria and Iraq
broadcast a statement from the PDFLP openly taking
responsibility for that criminal action. A leader of that
group held a press conference at Baghdad on 13 January, in
which he described the terrorist act as part of a campaign to
escalate armed attacks on Israel, and as being connected
with the meeting of the so-called “Palestine National
Council”, opening at Damascus on Monday, 15 January.
He particularly noted that Yasser Arafat and all the
constituents of the terrorist PLO had applauded that
.- act.
-232 It should be noted ‘that this is the second time that
PLO terrorists operating from Lebanon have attacked a
civilian target in Ma’alot for the purpose of holding hostage
large numbers of innocent and unarmed civilians. On 15
May 1974, PLO terrorists murdered 21 Israeli schoolchildren and wounded 70 more in a school building in that
town. I refer members to documents S/l 1290 and S/l 1295.

--

“We have fought against the Arabs and against the
Israeli. We will fight against the United Nations too if
they stand in our way. No one can prevent us from
to our bases in Southern Lebanon.*’
- returning
..-._- _-.-_
Already, the PLO has managed to move several hundred of’
its terrorists back into the region in order to resume criminal
activities
against Israel.
_228. The PLO has not hidden its intentions but has
proudly claimed responsibility for each new act of
barbarism perpetrated against Israeli civilians. When on 21
December 1978 the PLO, shielding itself behind the
UNIFIL area of-operation, fired Katyusha rockets from
Lebanese territory at the Israeli town of Kiryat Shmona,
killing one elderly man and wounding five persons,
including a lo-year-old child, the PLO brazenly took
responsibility for that outrage.

233. To revert to the present, as I indicated in my letter of
17 January, on 16 January-just
three days ago-a
Mercedes car was spotted suspiciously parked in one of the
main thoroughfares of Jerusalem.The police discovered a
powerful explosive device concealed in the vehicle. The
device was safely dismantled and thus what might well have
been a major human tragedy was averted. The PLO openly
took responsibility for this attempted _-..-_
outrage.
234. Yesterday, as I reported in my letter of 18 January
/S/13041]. an explosive device went off in the Mahane
Yehuda open market at Jerusalem, injuring 20 civilians,
some seriously. The device was timed for the middle of the
morning on what is traditionally the market’s busiest day of
the week with the clear intention of causing havoc and
indiscriminate murder.

235. All these recent incidents have one thing in common.
They aim at the mass murder of civilians. A bomb explodes
229. As I indicated in my letter of 21 December 1978
in a civilian bus at Jerusalem on 17 December. The town of
/S/12979], a spokesman for the so-called Popular Front for
Kiiat Shmona is shelled on 21 December. On 13 January a
the Liberation of Palestine, which is a constituent of the
guest house at Ma’alot with 230 visitors is attacked. On 16
PLO, said that terrorist operations, which have increased
January a car loaded with explosives is left in the centre of
over the last few months, would continue. In the six weeks
Jerusalem. Two days later an explosive device goes off in an
prior to that rocket attack, the PLO perpetrated 14 outrages
open market teeming with people. This has been the
and attempted acts of terror in residential areas. When 20 1 consistent pattern of the PLO’s cowardly activities
civilians were injured in the blowing up ofa Jerusalem 6~s
throughout its existence. This is not the work of a national
on Sunday, 17 December 1978, the terrorist faction known
liberation organization, as the PLO incongruously purports
as the “Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine*‘,
to be. It is the work of international criminals of the worst
which also operates under the PLO umbrella,
took
kind bent on the indiscriminate mass murder of civilians.
responsibility, as reported in my letter of 21 December
Thii is the true character and the true face of the terrorist
[S/12978].
PLO. This is the true face of the terrorists we are dealing
6
with. Their current aim is-as Yasser Arafat has made
230. Just last week, on 13 January, PLO terrorists, who
clear-to try to disrupt the peace process in the Middle
had crossed from Lebanon, attempted to commandeer a
East. As reported in The New York Timesof today, Yasser
guest-house in the town of Ma’alot in northern Israel.
Arafat at Damascus yesterday called for an increase in
Fortunately and providentially, a tragedy of massive
terror attacks on Israel “as part of the Arab effort to resist
proportions was only narrowly averted by the alertness of
Egyptian-Israeli peace moves”. A more accurate quotation
the Israel Defence Forces. As Council members have been
was carried by Reuters yesterday, where Arafat was
informed in my letter of 14 January [s/13028], 230 men,
reported to have called for the defeat of what he termed
women and children were staying in the guest-house when
“US-Zionist plots” in the Middle East. This is of course
the terrorists attempted to hold them hostage. One woman,
standard PLO jargon to describe the PLO’s efforts to
who tried to escape through a window, fell to her death, and
subvert the ongoing peace process in the Middle East.
21

-. 236. Here at the United Nations the PLO does not reveal
its true colours. Intent on cultivating a false image of
moderation, it has mastered the art of double-talk in order
to maintain an aura of respectability. Sometimes, however,
its guard slips even here. On 26 December 1977 the PLO
information agency announced that orders had been issued
“to liquidate a number of agents” after President Sadat’s
visit to Jerusalem and boasted that it had already killed
Hamdi Kadi, in charge of education at Ramallah. The same
day, the PLO observer at the United Nations publicly
justified the murder, telling NBC news:

UNIFIL,
acknowledged in the Secretary-General’s last
report, is an indicator of a major unsolved problem which
requires serious discussion in this chamber rather than the
virtual conspiracy of silence which surrounds it.
241. There are also other grave aspects of the PLO
activities in the Force’s area of operation which should be
closely examined and brought to a halt. On 18 December
1978, villagers near the water installations of Taibe and
Hulleh were attacked. On the same night other villagers
near observation post Ras were shot at, and anti-tank mines
and other military equipment left by the terrorists were
discovered. On 10 January 1979, villagers in Tii-Harfa were
attacked by 11 terrorists.

“The collaborators with the forces of occupation
are executed. They are not assassinated. So thii man must
have been executed because of his collaboration with the
forces of occupation.”

242. Members of the Council will readily understand that
we are talking here of a considerable threat by the so-called
PLO to three tangible targets: to the citizens of Israel,
particularly in the north of the country, to the villagers in
Southern Lebanon, and to the men of UNIFIL
in the
fulfilment of their duties. I say a “considerable threat”
advisedly because there are today some 2,000 armed PLO
terrorists in Southern Lebanon. I repeat, there are 2,000 in
Southern Lebanon-that
is, south of the River Litani.

Asked by the disbelieving NBC interviewer whether he
actually condoned what had been done, Mr. Terzi replied:
“Those .who collaborate with the enemy should be
executed, yes”.
237. Despite the obvious danger which the PLO
constitutes to international peace and security, it enjoys
observer status in the United Nations and has been
accorded irregular privileges as well as opportunities to
participate in the deliberations of various organs of the
United Nations, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the rules of procedure of the organs
concerned.

243. I would respectfully draw the attention of Council
members to the map attached to the Secretary-General’s
last report. They will note that UNIFIL is not deployed in
the Tyre area, a narrow tongue on the Mediterranean coast
which reaches within 8 miles of Israel. In that area there are
today some 1,500 terrorists, deployed deliberately in
refugee camps as well as in the town of Tyre and elsewhere.
These are the same terrorists who in a series of bloody
encounters prevented UNIFIL deployment in the Tyre area.
They are the same terrorists who have consistently
prevented the entry or passing of any elements of the
Lebanese army. They are within easy striking distance of
the north of Israel. Moreover there are terrorist groups
totalling about 500 men throughout the Force’s area of
operation, in encampments and even in private houses in
villages. These terrorists carry out various activities in the
area of operation, including patrols, entry into villages to
pressure, blackmail and intimidate the local population,
and, as I have explained above, harassment of the United
Nations forces.

238. These latest incidents are indicative of the increased
PLO infiltration into Southern Lebanon. They also
underlie
the fact that UNIFIL’s
task of restoring
international peace and security, as set out in resolution
425 (1978), not only remains unfulfilled but also is openly
and directly challenged by the same subversive elements
which have consistently endeavoured to use Lebanese
territory for the purpose of launching attacks on Israel, thus
undermining international peace and security throughout
the region.
239. In the first months after the establishment of
UNIFIL, the PLO chose to keep a relatively low profile.
This was highly convenient from its point of view, since it
allowed the PLO to introduce hundreds of its terrorists into
the Force’s area of operation. Besides that, there is ample
evidence that the PLO is infiltrating arms and ammunition
into the Force’s area of operation. On 24 December 1978,
Israel handed the UNIFIL
commanders evidence that
weapons were smuggled into the Kafar Kila area-well
within the Force’s area of operation-which were passed
through the Iraqi diplomatic pouch into Lebanon disguised
as medicaments.

244. This is by no means the end of the story, because
directly north of the Litani, at Nabatiya and in the region of
Sidon, not to speak of Beirut and Tripoli, another 10,000 to
12,000 PLO terrorists are to be found. This, then, is the true
measure of the problem. Until it is faced, no real
improvement in the situation can be expected.
245. The tactics of PLO have not changed. As has been
their deliberate practice in the past, they hide behind
Palestinian refugees and simple Lebanese villagers. They do
so for the transparent purpose of shielding themselves and
making it all the more difficult to root them out. I can do no
better than to quote once again the former Permanent
Representative of Lebanon, who in October 1976 informed
the General Assembly that:

240, In recent months, however, the PLO has raised its
profile and, as I have just said, begun to challenge UNIFIL
directly in the exercise of its mandate. In the SecretaryGeneral’s interim report dated 18 November 1978
[S/I29291, some of these provocations were briefly
mentioned. Since that report, the frequency and gravity of
these terrorist-instigated incidents have increased and they
can no longer be brushed aside. Between 1 November 1978
and 17 January 1979, there were at least 35 major incidents
of this kind. I shall not burden the Council with the details
of those incidents, for many of them have also been
reported in the press. This form of direct challenge to

. . . me Palestinians] transformed most-if not
all-of the refugee camps into military bastions. . .
‘6. . . common-law criminals fleeing from Lebanese
justice found shelter and protection in the camps. . .
6‘

22

Those camps in fact became centres for the training of
mercenaries who were sent and financed by some other
Arab
. _States.“z
--.-.
__
With regard to the ordinary Lebanese, Ambassador
Ghorra said:
_----..- -_
“Palestinian elements belonging to various.. . organizations resorted to kidnapping Lebanese.. . holding
them prisoners, questioning them, torturing them and
even sometimes killing them. . . They committed all sorts
of crimes in Lebanon . . . They smuggled goods.. . They
went so far as to demand ‘protection’ money.. .

251. I should like to remind the representative of Kuwait,
whose distasteful remarks of 8 December of last year were only surpassed by the excessesof his vulgarity today, that a
State cannot invoke in its favour benefits deriving from
certain provisions of international law without being !
prepared at the same time also to abide by the duties flowing
from international law. Arab States, including Kuwait, seek
to impose on Israel duties stemming from the international
law of peace while simultaneously claiming for themselves
the privileges of the international law of war.
252. If certain Arab Governments are either unwilling or
unable to nrevent the harbouring. training and fmancine of
terrorists operating from theirterritori&
with a vie< to
Iiarassing other States, the~musttir&beDrepared
to face
the risk- of those States- taking the necessary countermeasures to stop such harassment. That is not only a
fundamental premise of international law, it is also a
I
conclusion dictated by simple logic.

“It is di&ult to enumerate all the illegal activities
committed by those Palestinian elements.i’3
246. This practice is still going on in the UNIFIL area of
operation. It is admitted by United Nations off%ials in
Lebanon, as reported by Mr. Ned Temko in an article from
Beirut published in The Christian Science Monitor on 15
January 1979. It is clearly reflected in the cautious language
of the Secretary-General in his last report [S/Z3026 mtd
Corr.4 in which, in paragraph 18, he states:

253. In this connexion, and in view of certain charges
which have been raised, I should like to point out that the
Israel Defence Forces have standing orders preventing any
shooting in the direction of UNIFIL positions. These orders
are and will be scrupulously observed.

“In the area where UNIFIL
has full control, it
continued to . . . provide the population with some
measure of assurance and safety.”

-The operative word is “some”. I repeat “some measure of
assurance”.

254. It is a matter of regret that the Council has so far been
unable to face squarely the question of why Lebanese
authority has not been restored in Lebanon. Some have
attempted to avoid the real issue by focusing on the local
Lebanese forces which emerged as a reaction to the PLO
presence.

247. But there is also a new element in the tactics of PLO.
Previously they hid behind a shield of refugees and villagers.
Now they are trying to hide also behind a shield of United
Nations peace-keeping forces. This surely is totally
inadmissible and can only be regarded for what it is: the
total abuse of international peace-keeping.

255. To detach the question of Southern Lebanon from
the situation in Lebanon as a whole will not enhance the
cause of peace. So far as Israel is concerned, we remain
irrevocably committed to the twin principles of restoring
international peace and security and of restoring effective
and genuine Lebanese authority throughout Lebanon. It is
also our view that the Government of Lebanon cannot
succeed in this undertaking when a Syrian occupation army
maintains its gunsights on the civilian population of Beirut
and while armed PLO terrorists are allowed free rein on
Lebanese,--soil.
_

248. Israel cannot acquiesce in these tactics being adopted
by the PLO. In the light of the true character of the PLO,
and given Israel’s right, and indeed duty, to protect the lives
and safety of its citizens, Israel will continue its policy of
taking the necessary action against PLO bases used for the
training of terrorists and for launching criminal activities
against Israel.
249. In striking at the terrorist bases from which the PLO
murder squads launch their criminal missions against the
civilian population in Israel, my Government is exercising
its inherent right of self-defence, a right enjoyed by every
sovereign State, a right recognized also under Article 51 of
the Charter. Like any other Government, the Government
of Israel, as I have said before, has the right and the duty to
take all the measures necessary to protect the lives and
safety--of its citizens.
_
; 250. A State’s right to take the measures necessary to halt
and to foil terroristic activities emanating from across its
boundaries is a principle well recognized by international
law and by international practice alike. What is more, the
very toleration by a State on its territory of armed bands
engaged in hostile activities against another State is
considered a breach of international law on the part of the
State tolerating the presence of such bands on its territory.
-I* 2 OJ%ial Records of the General Assembly. ~irty-fist sesSiOt&
~kttary kfeetings, 32nd meeting, paras.64 and 65.
3 Ibid, paras.

256. In the Security Council’s debate on the SecretaryGeneral’s interim report dated 18 ‘November
1978
[S/22929]. the representative of Lebanon made it clear that
he was aware of the true dangers, the real dangers, inherent
in the situation. He indicated that Lebanon was disturbed
by the incidents between the PLO and UNIFIL, and then
went on to make the following appeal:
“While hoping that the Palestinians-all
the Palestinians, both in the area controlled by UNIFIL and
beyond-will not be led to a change of attitude, we wish
to reiterate in this chamber previous Lebanese appeals
that Lebanon should not again be the substitute arena for
a substitute war. We think this message shopld be clear to
all. We think further that the greater the response from
the Palestinians to thii role of partners in peace, the
greater will be the chances of peace, ail chances of peace:
peace with Southern Lebanon, peace in Lebanon as an
independent State restored to its unity and sovereignty,
and, above all,.. peace in the Middle East.” /22061h
meeting,para. 144.1

65 and 66.

23

257. Equal awareness of the threat which the PLO and,
for that matter,- the Syrians constitute to the peace and
security of Lebanon was expressed in a letter addressed to
the President of the United States by a Lebanese group in
Venezuela, published in The New York Times today. As
members will have noted, the heading to that open letter
declared unequivocally that
-.

263. While we are, of course, aware of the decision’
previously-taken in thii regard by the Security Council, we
behevZt*e
special procedure employed by the %ouncil
in the past and that proposed today is not appropriate.
Members of the Council are familiar with the reasons for
our position and I need not repeat them here.
.264. Accordingly, Mr. President, we request that you
should put to the vote the question of the invitation to the
Palestine Liberation Organization.

“The presence of the Syrian and Palestine armed
forces hinders the peace in the millenary country of the
cedars, the open door to the cultural interchange between
the East and the West.”

265. The PRESIDENT:
If there are no other members
wishing to speak, I shall put to the vote the proposal to
grant the request for participation
now before the_____-..
Council.
-

258. It is a matter for regret that the Security Council has
failed thus
- -..far to come to grips with the real and central issue
?il’hiid
to hi -these statements: Instead, it has again
produced a highly one-sided and unbalanced political
resolution. The operative part of that resolution begins by
singling out Israel for criticism, while at the same time
turning a blind eye to the real threat to UNIFIL in the
implementation of its mandate and to international peace
and security in the region. The prominence given by this
unbalanced approach to Israel detracts much from the
resolution’s standing. But this is not unusual. It is a sad
comment on the authority and credibility of the Council’s
resolutions that members have had to request the President
of the Council to make a separate statement on matters
contained in the resolution in the hope that that statement
will make a more solemn impression than the resolution
itself.

A vote was taken by show of hard.
In fmour Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against: United States of America
Abstaining: France, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The proposal was adopted by IO votes to I, with
4
abstentions.
-.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ab&I Rahman
(Polestine Liberation Organisation) took the pIace reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber.

259. Before concluding, I wish on behalf of my
Government to express once again our appreciation to
those States Members of the Organization which have
’ contributed contingents to UNIFIL. Their officers and men
are operating under difficult and trying circumstances.

266. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic in which he requests that he should be
allowed to participate in the discussion. I propose,wth the
consent ot the Council, to invite. that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity with the provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

260. Let me also observe that peace-keeping operations
can be a doubleedged sword. They can contribute towards
creating the political climate for the making of peace and for
the advancement of international security. But there is also
a danger that they can be used, or rather misused, by those
bent on subverting peace, while behind the cover of the
peace-keeping forces the ground is being prepared for
resumed hostilities and further threats to international
peace and security. Israel trusts that thii danger will be
recognized and -that all effective steps will be taken to
avert it.

At the invitation of the President Mr. El-Choufi (Syrian
Arab Republic) took the place rqervedfor him at the sia%of
the Council chamber.
267. The PRESIDENT:
The next soeaker is the
representative of the Palestine Liberation ‘brganimtion. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

261. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter dated
19January from the representative of Kuwait [S/l3w]
in
which he requests that the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organimtion should be invited to participate in
the discussion. This proposal is not made under rule 37 or
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure but, ifapproved
by the Council, the invitation will confer on the PLO the
same rights of participation as those conferred on a
Member State when it is invited to participate under to rule
37. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on thii
proposal?

268. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): Mr. President, I should like at the outset to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month.
:
269. I should like also to join the speakers who preceded
me in welcoming the Foreign Minister of Norway to thic
meeting.
270. I would not have asked to be allowed to speak today,
had it not been for the barrage of lies and distortions to
which the Council has been subjected by the representative
of the Government of Menachem Begin. I should like to put
on record that Menachem Begin was the man who led the
massacre of 254 Palestinian+children,
menand women- 1.
on 9 April 1948. Menachem Begin is the man who was
hunted by the British authorities for crimes he committed 4

262. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): The
United States delegation has consistently taken the position
that representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization could be granted a hearing under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure but not, as proposed, with
the same rights of participation as a Member State.
24

.

.

_‘,

277. I do not want to dwell,at length on Israel’s record,
because other United. Nations organs have condemned
Israel on many ‘occasions. However, I should like to
reaflirm once more that our resistance to Israeli occupation
will persist as long as our national rights in Palestine are not
recognized and as long as the Government of Menachem
Begin, supported by the United States of America,
continues to commit crimes every day against ‘our people.
Our resistance will cease only when our people are able to
enjoy their rights and live in dignity like all the other peoples
of the world.

during the British Mandate against Palestinian civilians as
,.
_ well as officials of the British -.-_Government.
.- ..I_
271. Our position on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon is very clear. From the very beginning we stated
that we would co-operate with UNIFIL. The report of the’
Secretary-General clearly points out that the Palestine
Liberation Organization has been cooperating with and
assisting UNIFIL in carrying out its mandate in Lebanon.
Our position on Lebanon is also very clear, We
affirm once more our total commitment to respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
Lebanon.
..___
273. Today the representative of the Zionist Government
of Israel tried to tell the Council that acts of resistance to
occupation, which are respected by the Charter of the
United Nations, are acts of terror. I think that many of the
representatives present here today have suffered from
foreign occupation and have themselves participated in
resistance to foreign occupation, particularly our French
colleagues who fought against Hitler when he occupied
France
during the Second World War.
.-.--..
272.

278. The PRESIDENT:
The next .speaker is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
279. Mr. EL-CHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic): I should
like fust of all to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
responsibilities of the presidency of the Security Council
and to associate myself with all members of the Council
who paid a tribute to your skill and statesmanship.

274. I am amazed that some representatives speak of the
cycle of violence and counter-violence. In that sense, they
are equating the criminal with the victim. That is unfair to
the Palestinian people, because under no circumstances can
the victim and the victimizer be put on an equal level. The
Israeli Zionist establishment has usurped our homeland,
destroyed out national heritage and converted us into a
nation of refugees or people under military occupation. It
still denies us our right to self-determination; it still calls us
aliens in our homeland; it still treats us as secondclass
citizens-in fact, as thirdclass citizens because there are
some dark-skinned Jews who are considered to be secondclass citizens. Does anyone really expect us to throw flowers
at the Israelii? I must say to those who expect the
Palestinian people, to throw flowers on their usurpers that
they are wrong. The Palestinian people, in accordance with
their human, political and moral rights, are just resisting the
occupation of a country that they love, Palestine. It is our
country. I do not know how the representative of the
Government of Menachem Begin, who probably was born
somewhere in eastern Europe, and his leader, who wasborn
in Poland, can have the audacity to tell me, a Palestinian
who was born in Palestine, that I am an alien in Palestine,
and expect me to remain silent and throw flowers at him.
Under
-_ - no circumstances can we accept that situation.
275. Therefore, our acts of resistance to the illegal
occupation which has been so declared by the international
community and by this body are legal in themselves. The
General Assembly as well as other organs of the United
Nations have supported and upheld the right of .the
, Palestinian people to struggle by all means to attain their
inalienable rights in their homeland, namely, their right to
’ self-determination, their right to national independenceand
their right to return to their homes and properties. Israel for
the last 30 years has subjected the Palestinian people to
- criminal- acts. -276. Last night’s attack against the people of Lebanon
and against Palestinian refugees, who are not in Lebanon by
choice but were forced to become refugees, is another crime
in theseries of crimes that have been and still are committed
on a daily basis by the Israeli Zionist Government.
25

280. I welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Norway at this important meeting of the Council. Once
again Norway is proving its dedication to the work of the
United Nations.
281. The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic extends
its thanks to the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in document
S/13026 and Corr. 1. We believe that that report sheds light
on the actual situation in Southern Lebanon and clearly
points to the party responsible for the obstacles that have
been placed in the way of UNIFIL’s unimpeded functioning
to establish normalization and eventually help in restoring
peace in strife-tom Lebanon. The facts and documented
incidents contained in the Secretary-General’s report speak
for themselves, and the .facts point to Israel as the only
culprit in this tragic quagmire in Lebanon. While repeated
Security Council resolutions have called for cooperation
with UNIFIL, Israel has retained its typical belligerent
posture.
282. The threefold task of UNIFIL is clearly stated in the
Secretary-General’s report. Paragraph 17 of the report
reads in part:
“First, UNIFIL continued to ensure that the area
where it was fully deployed would not be used for hostile
activities of any kind and to promote a progressive return
to normal conditions. Secondly, it sought to extend its
deployment in the border area, which had been handed
over to the Lebanese defacto armed groups by the Israeli
forces during the last phase of their withdrawal. Thirdly,
it continued its efforts to assist the Government of
Lebanon in restoring its effective authority in the area.”
283. To the first objective Israel has responded with sheer
arrogance, as it continues to commit periodic acts of
military provocation and sabotage; and it has not been
content with those. Israel has also chosen to subject civilian
settlements to harassment as well. To the second objective
Israel shamelessly attempts to whitewash its criminal
collusion through its continued provision of logistical and
other forms of support to Major Haddad’s renegade
leadership of armed militia who have resisted all efforts of ,
UNIFIL fully to deploy itself in Southern Lebanon.

.

.. 284. My delegation strongly condemns Israel’s intran- ’ should do that; should stronger and more substantial
sigence and sheer arrogance in obstructing UNIFIL in the
measures be necessary to compel Israel to comply, then
execution of its task. Its outright refusal to recognize the
such measures should be taken.
’ authority of UNIFIL
amounts to blatant defiance of
Security Council resolutions and clearly indicates its
290. I hope that the attempts by the representative of
unwilhngness to heed the international community’s desire
Israel to cloud the issues at hand will be clearly seen as
for peace in Lebanon and the Middle East as a whole.
another attempt to confuse thiiinternational body. Hetried
_
-‘-1
to distort facts and to distort the discussion here and to
place it in another arena, by referring to what he called the
285. That belligerent posture is again made clear in
Svrian occunation in Lebanon. The Svrian forces in
Israel’s latest act of aggression in Lebanon. Today Israeli
Lebanon are’part of the Arab deterrent
ground forces
by artillery carried out a two..__ -.. fo&e
__ - agreed=o,
-~_.-.-..-.-_-- =o?ted
Arab States. We have no
bronged attack deeD in Southern Lebanon. An Israeir ~d&%&izedb~th~I%&%%of
intention of remaining in Gbanon for a single day without
battalion advanced -towards the area of Deir Mimasthe explicit request of the constitutional Lebanese
Yahmor-Amoun-Qalaa under cover of shelling from a tank
Government.
support column and bombardment from positions in
Marjayoun and Qlea. Israel’s air force also participated
with machine-gunning. At the same time another Israeli
291. Our declared position has been, is and will ever
remain support for Lebanese sovereignty, territoriafforce advanced on the Marjayoun-Khardali-Dimashqiyeh
axis under cover of artillery. Meanwhile, the Israeli navy
integrity and political independence. The talk by the
shelled Jisr-Al Qasmiyeh. Israeli artillery bombarded the
representative of the expansionist Zionist State about a
area extending from Nabatiyeh to Hasbani. Those
Syrian occupation is but flagrant and arrogant distortion. It
is an attempt to mislead the Council in its deliberations. It-is
atrocities resulted in the death of six persons, the wounding
another example of the character of the Zionist expansionist
of nine others and the destruction of several houses.
entity that is called Israel.
286. It is clear that the Israeli penetration involved
crossing UNIFIL’s area of operation. That is the clearest
292. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Kuwait
evidence of Israel’s non-recognition of UNIFIL’s or any
wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply and I now call
international body’s authority. I should like to quote the
on him.
following from today’s United Press International release:
293. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I have listened to the
“The Israelis passed through a zone that should have
statement of the representative of Israel. I would have
been patrolled by United Nations peace-keeping forces,
hoped that he would sit here throughout the Council’s
but a United Nations spokesman in Beirut said Israel’s
deliberations, instead of making one statement and then
Christian militia allies had zoned off the attack route a
retiring to the sidelines. That would have been better. That
few days earlier and made it off-limits to United Nations
is the way it should be: to listen to facts and then try to refute
troops?
them.
287. In the face of this clearly condemnable act, Mr. Tom
Reston, United States Department of State spokesman,
commentedr “The United States Government regrets the
Israeli decision to carry out the raid this morning into
Southern Lebanon”. We believe that the United States has
an obligation to do much more than merely to regret. As a
permanent member of the Security Council, it has an
international obligation to uphold the Charter of the United
Nations, that is, to stop aggression and punish the
aggressor. The United States, as the financier and supporter
of Israel, has an ethical obligation to assure that its
armament, its money and its political support are not being
used for purposes of aggression.

294. In my view, the lengthy statement -of the
representative of Israel is childish gibberish, it is infantile
swashbuckling. But that is not important. This is what is
important: As I listened to the representative of Israel, I
thought that the item -we were discussing was the PL6
presence in Lebanon, or PLO actilvities in Lebanon. But we
have not come here to discuss the presence of the PLO in
Lebanon, We have not come here to discuss what he called
“terrorism”. If the representative of Israel wants a debate
on terrorism, we are ready for it, in any forum-in the
United Nations or .outside it. We shall identify, with
documents from the horse’s mouth, the real terrorist.

288. Filly,
i should like to state that this latest Zionist
incursion into Lebanese territory cannot be viewed apart
from the long Zionist history of acts of aggression,
expansion and occupation. In fact, the arrogant refusal to
cooperate with UNIFIL cau be understood only in relation
to the very nature and philosophy of Zionism-an ideology
founded on an insatiable desire for war, acts of aggression,
occupation and annexation.

295. But that is not the point of my intervention. The
representative of Israel wascriticizing not only the Security
Council, as the representative of the international will, of
international aspirations and determination, but also the
whole world. His statement was full of criticism of the
whole ‘world. But it is not the world that is at fault, Who is at
fault? It is Israel that is at fault. It is Israel that has departed
from the norms of international law-those norms that fit
spoke about at such length in attemptmg to justify Israt&
brutal, criminal. attack on Lebanon.

289. As a last point, I would state that the issue before us is
clean whether UNIFIL will be given the opportunity to
carry out its functions of helping to restore normalcy and
peace in Lebanon; This consequently involves a strong
determination by thii body to eradicate all obstacles in the
way of the accomplishment of this goal; And should it
involve the strong condemnation of Israel, then this body

296. The complaints against UNIFIL by the representative of Israel were not only-unjustified but.unacceptable.
Had Israel accepted UNIFIL’~
full deployment on. the
internationally recognized borders, the complaints with
which hi statement abound.ed would have been completely
unnecessary.
26

.

.-.

297. ,A11this can be compared to the situation in which a
guard is,tied tightly to a post by his master:and then is taken
to task by the master of the house because he was unable to ’
chase out an element unwelcome to the master. Who is to
blame here? ,The guard who wastied tightly to the post? Or
the master who tied the guard tightly to the post, making it
impossible for him to chase out the unwelcome element? In
this case, the guard has been taken to task: that is the essence
of, the criticism against UNIFIL now. UNIFIL has been
criticized -by -the.-representative
of Israel because, he says,
-.
some el&nents crossed Bie‘borders. -But uMF”iL FnOtresponsible. Who is responsible for hamstringing UNIFIL?
On what do we base our judgements here? Not -on
documents issued outside the United Nations, not on press
releases or press reports. We base our judgements on the
documents submitted by the Secretary-General on the
activities of UNIFIL.
Even a cursory glance at those
documents proves to any reader that the blame lies with
Israel for blocking the full deployment of UNIFIL on the
international borders, because Israel assists these robots
who are its barking dogs in preventing UNIFIL from
functioning properly and effectively along the international
borders. *
298. So any criticism of UNIFIL by a Member State
which does not fulfil its commitments and obligations
voluntarily is unacceptable. The failure of Israel to carry out
criticism
of UNIFIL does not cut any ice; it holds no water.
-- 299. My final point is this. There can be no consideration
under international law or the standards of decency or the
Charter that can justify.a Member State’s violation of and
encroachment upon the sovereignty of another Govemment. Lebanon is not a policeman for Israel. And the
Lebanese people are not the protectors of Israel.
Allegations that some unwelcome elements came over from
Lebanon cannot be used as a pretext for violating territorial
sovereignty or political independence. There can be no
~justilication whatsoever for thii.

._

involved in the Arab-Israel conflict. To appeal for an
objective approach from a representative who is also a party
to the dispute would be a futile exercise. In fact, his very
participation in the decision-making process here is a
violation of the elementary principle that no one should be a
judge in his own case. I will refrain again, as I have done in
the past, from commenting on the style he has chosen to
employ in these discussions. It is apparently a matter of
personal taste, and as the ancient Romans taught us, “de
gus@us non est disputandum”.
303. Similarly, the Soviet Union, which did not support
the creation of UNIFIL in the first place, is today being
asked to evaluate the success of that Force in restoring
international peace and security in the region. This at a time
when the Soviet Union is making every effort-and we have
heard references to that effect here in the Soviet statement
this afternoon-to torpedo the peace negotiations and to
prevent the establishment of international peace and
security in the Middle East. To such States, whose prior
political objectives render them incapable of even hearing
Israel’s case, I make no appeal for objectivity.
304. However, there are many other representatives who
are willing to hear both sides of a dispute and who are
capable of understanding and evaluating the actions of a
small State attempting to protect its citizens from the
scourge of terrorism. Indeed, many of those representatives
represent States that have seen innocent men, women and
children among their own nationals brutally murdered by
the terrorist international. Many of them are acutely.
conscious of the responsibilities of a State to protect its
civilian population, and some have themselves struck back
forcefully in exercise of those responsibilities.
305. Unfortunately, repeated efforts to move the United
Nations to assume such responsibility on behalf of all its
Members have been frustrated time and again by those who
openly protect and encourage the assassins. After the
murder of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics in
1972, the Secretary-General asked the General Assembly to
devise measures to eradicate the scourge of international
terrorism. The issue was manipulated until the world
Organixation came up with such a convoluted definition of
the question that it could almost be construed as support for
terrorism, and that is where the matter rests, having been
buried in committee ever since.

300. The resolution that we adopted and the statement of
the President do not satisfy my delegation. They are mild in’
their language. There should have been condemnation of
Israel for its brutal attacks on Lebanon; but we accepted
their restrained language because we do not like to create
difficulties. We did not want to upset the apple cart. I could
have submitted a draft resolution condemning Israel for its
brutal attacks, but I restrained myself simply because it is
useless to upset the apple cart when there is harmony on
certain elements, and what is important for us is the renewal
of the mandate of UNIFIL. As long as UNIFIL is there, we
believe that the “brutal policy of Israel is bound to be
contained, and that is why I said in the course of my
statement that it is very important to pound hard even on
iron bars because even iron bars will eventually give way to
hard and severe pounding.

306. It is thus no wonder that when the President of the
United States Airline Pilots’ Association, 3ohn O’Donnell,
testified before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee last year, he discounted a United Nations action against
.-_hijacking, ---saying
-“We are totally convinced ‘that the United Nations
has neither the will nor the means to effect any
meaningful
solution in fighting terrorist hijackings.”
That was contained in a Reuters report of 30 January 1978.

301. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel has
asked to speak in exercise of the’tight of reply. I invite him to
take a place at theCouncil table and to make his statement.

307. In response to this failure of the world Organixation,
many States have taken individual action to protect their
citizens from the terrorist menace. Some have combined for
the purpose. On 17 July of last year, the seven leaders of the
largest democracies, meeting at Bonn, announced an
unprecedented anti-terrorism agreement which indicated a
new resolve to act outside the framework of the United
Nations.

302.‘ Mr. BLUM (Israel): Although I am‘addressing the
Security Council as a whole, I am well aware that there are
some members to whom any appeal for a reasoned,
objective approach would be in vain. The representative of
Kuwait, for example, represents here not only his own
country but a particular bloc of States that, is directly
27

308. Indeed, it is interesting to note that even those
countries that have been most active in frustrating
intemational~efforts at combating terrorism will brook no
such attack on their own soil or against their own citizens.
When Palestinian terrorists seized a Kuwaiti aeroplane in
July i977, the Kuwaiti newspaper AI-Rai al-Amm of 10 July
stated:

313. This danger would not exist ifother subversive hands
were not involved. I have on past occasions drawn the
Council’s attention to Syrian designs in Lebanon, pointing
out that the role of the Syrian occupation army in Lebanon
was directly related to the long-standing Syrian aspirations
for a Suria d-K&a-or
“Greater Syria”. Syria’s
determination to torpedo a peace settlement, its failureever
to establish diplomatic relations with Lebanon, which has
been explained here by reference to the allegedly fratemalrelations between the two countries, its barbarities against
the population YTI%iitihich~-~tie-nOw
common
knowledge-these are not isolated incidents but integral
parts of an over-all policy. Those members which have been
hesitant to accept our interpretation of these events in the
past may more readily listen to Yasser Arafat. At a recent
rally at Beirut of the Lebanese Ba’ath Party, Arafat
reported a meeting with Syrian President Assad:

“Kuwait. will be excused if it reacts violentlv against
such a reckless movement . . ..Theworldwille&&usif
we-strike a painful blow in~~~~~n~~-bTb~T~esakid.our
security and stability . . . The solution should be in the
hands of Kuwait alone-in the use of an iron fist.”
Despite the stance of the Kuwaiti representative in the
Council, his people appear to understand well the
sentiments of the Government and people of Israel. Even
President Assad, at present serenading the terrorist
organizations at their National Council meeting at
Damascus, reacted differently when PLO terrorists
attacked the Semiramis Hotel at Damascus. Mr.Assad
stated on Radio Damascus on 27 September 1976: “We
condemn this act of terror, committed by a gang of traitors
and criminals. We refuse to bargain with them.”

“Al-Assad said that Palestine is the southern part
of Syria. I told him that Palestine is southern Syria and
Syria is northern Palestine.”
That was reported on the “Voice .of Palestine” on 18
November 1978, A few days later he told Palestinii
workers at Damascus:

309. Indeed, I would ask: How many States represented
“Syria is’ an extension of Palestine, and Palestine,
here would sit back passively and watch their own women ,.
is
an
extension of Syria, as President Hafez Al-Assad has
and children being killed and wounded by terrorists? As the
said.”
--- ._
representative of a country that is one of the prime targets of
international terror, I can only repeat what I have told the
That was reported on “Damascus Domestic Service.‘*on 20 Council before-that the Government of Israel is in duty
November 1978. And as recently as last week, A&at said
bound to fake all measures necessaryto protect the lives and
that Syria
-.__
._ safety of its citizens.
“forms the northern part of Palestine, forms with .
Palestine, which is Syria’s south,a whole which cannot be
310. In our own region, the terrorists have consistently
partitioned”.
resorted to the most vicious and cowardly methods. Their
_..
.-.
victims are invariably unarmed and defenceless civiliansIs
that
the
import
of
the
current
so-called
Palestine
National
schoolchildren on vacation, women doing their shopping,
Council meeting at Damascus?
civilians asleep in their homes.
314. It is a very odd “national liberation movement**
3 11. The terrorists hide in crowded refugee camps and use
which serves the stated imperialist designs of a
their own women and children as shields. Now they are
neighbouring State. It would be odder yet for the Security
using the United Nations itself as a one-way shield,
Council to support those designs. It is, in short, the
infiltrating the UNIFIL zone to perpetrate attacks inside
responsibility of the Council to ensure the fulfilment of the
Israel and hiding behind UNIFIL
lines to protect - UNIFIL mandate, not its subversion.
themselva from Israel’s acts of selfdefence.This cowardice
has been compounded by deception, as the terrorists
315. The PRESIDENT: I caIl on the representative of
cultivate a false image of ‘*moderation” under the guise of a
Lebanon, who has asked to exercise his right of reply.
.
national liberation movement. They speak with a forked
tongue, openly gloating over their barbaric deeds on Radio
316. Mr. TUI%I (Lebanon): Mr. President, I repeat my Damascus and Radio Saghdad and then reverting to the
thanks to you for accepting my request to .participate in this.
mellitluous sounds more appropriate to international
debate. I do not want to abuse the right,and indeedthe hour
diplomacy here at the United Nations. Once in a while the
is late, but I cannot let the remarks of the representative of
two faces converge embarrassingly, as I have had occasion
Israel go by unanswered.
to point out in my previous statement.
317. Riding high on the tide of State terrorism, the,
312. As we have said, because of its structure we do not : representative of Israel, in his consummate art of: .; _
expect the United Nations actively to support the peace
misquotation, has come before the Council not to
efforts in the Middle East. But we do insist that this
contribute to resolving the issue at stake-namely, how we
Organixation. should not assist the terrorist PLO in
might make peace-keeping a success-but, rather, to
subverting the peaceprocess. The Security Council should
threaten and to confirm the aggressiveintentions of Israel.
respond forcefully to the recent PLO attempts to abuse
In the light of what happened last night, I cannot let that go.
UNIFIL.
UNIFIL’s
mandate requires it to restore
by without asking the CounciI to take note of the fact that
intem~ational peace and security, an impossible task if the
further threats have been expressedhere before this body, at
PLO becomes able to use UNIFIL as a shield for terror
a moment when we were all meeting to see how we couth’
attacks aimed precisely at sabotaging the peace efforts.
advance the cause of peace.
28

been testified to explicitly and repeatedly by the SecretaryGeneral in his several reports, by the overtly expressed
condemnation of the great majority of States members of
the Council, by the resolution that has just ben adopted .
today deploring this fact, and also indirectly by itself, for it
has repeatedly sought to evade answering this issue.
.

318. Furthermore, I think that there is something we here
must be cautioned against-and
that is the art of
distraction. Every time we have addressed ourselves to an
issue-and this is probably the third or the fourth meeting
at which we have examined the situation in Southern
Lebanon-we have found the representative of Israel
exercising,. again in a consummate manner, his art of
creating a false problem, pretending to deplore it, and then
reventmg us from reaching a solution. I shall not go into a
-F ongdiscourse, but I-beg the Council not to allow Itself to be
distracted. I want, however, to reassert that what happens
between Lebanon and other Arab States-the relations
between. Lebanon and Syria, between Lebanon and
Kuwait, between the Lebanese and the Palestinians-is
something that concerns the Lebanese, the legitimate,
sovereign authorities of Lebanon, and the various sovereign
: Governments of the Arab States.

326. Israel cannot drown its responsibility and guilt in a
cacophony of accusations against others.
327. What is even more disconcerting is that Israel has
expressed concern and regret that Lebanon’s sovereignty
has not been restored. Yet, we have heard the categorical
accusations of the representative of Lebanon that it is Israel ’
and Israel alone that is impeding this process. The
conclusions are obvious. Israel invaded and brutally
occupied Southern Lebanon, in violation of international
law and all norms of civilized conduct. In spite of its
acceptance of UNIFIL’s presence and mandate, it is Israel
that is openly flouting, obstructing and preventing the
fulfilment of its mandate.

319. Those issues are not at stake here. What is at stake
here is the fate of peace-keeping in Southern Lebanon,
’ which the Israelis chose to&y to challenge, as I said earlier,
in a most defiant, arrogant and cynical manner. I would,
therefore, while asking the Council to take notice of
renewed threats that have been addressed to us, ask it to
take notice also of the fact that the representative of Israel
gives himself the right to be judge and jury in questions that
are the exclusive province of my country and my
._ Government.

328. It is in the light of the above that Bangladesh rejects
Israel’s remarks as distasteful, hypocritical, irrelevant and ’
unacceptable and calls upon the Israeli first to mind their
own responsibilities instead of harping on those of others.
329. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

’ 320. I also wish to say, like my Kuwaiti colleague, that
should other issues be brought before the Council-and I
have reserved my right to lodge a formal protest against the
renewed aggression-then probably the Council would be
asked by Lebanon kindly to look into and study and adopt
whatever resolutions it may deem appropriate concerning
Israeli aggressions.

330. Mr. EL-CHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic): If it had
not been for the distortions and lies of the representative of
Israel, I would not in fact have detained the Council any
longer. I shall not try to defend the Syrian position and
policies, which are not at stake or under discussion in these
deliberations. I was hoping against hope that the
representative of Israel would show some objectivity in cooperating with the mandate of UNIFIL. Paragraph 1 of the
resolution which has just been adopted by this Council

321. If I wanted to follow the Israeli representative’s
example in the art of quotation, I could cite a list of
aggressions perpetrated by hi Government against my
country. This list, which I have here, goes very far back, and
1 wonder whether it does not reflect Israel’s consistent
policy: not to prevent Palestine from becoming southern
Syria,
but probably to make Lebanon northern Israel.
_

“‘Deplores the lack of co-operation, particularly on
Israel’s part, with the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon fully to implement its
mandate, including Israel’s assistance to irregular armed
groups in Southern Lebanon”.

322. The PRESIDENT
I call on the representative of
Bangladesh to exercise his right of reply.

This is really the issue, and I hope that the influence, the
prestige of the Council will be brought to bear for the
fulfilment of the mandate of UNIFIL in Southern Lebanon.

323. Mr. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): We are exercising our
right of reply in the belief that Israel’s statements are
directed against the Council as a whole, of which we are an
integral part, and also to counter the allegation that the
Israeli representative has made, that the accusations against
Israel emanate from one particular prejudiced group of
States. We believe that these charges emanate from all
universally.
,----.__-_
324. The subject we are discussing today is a limited and
restricted one; it is the mandate of UNIFIL and its renewal
: in the face of obstacles that have prevented
its--fulfilment.
_
.- .-.
’ 325. Israel has characteristically injected a series of
; irrelevant, extraneous and unjustified accusations directed
at a host of countries but has ignored the cardinal issue at
.; -stake-its
_-...-___ own responsibility in the matter. That there is
lack of co-operation or%%eTs$?&Zb
say the leas&has
29

331. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Kuwait has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I call on
him,
.
332. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): The Israeli representative
cast slurs on our integrity when he said we could not be
objective. This is not the point. The point is that we are
partisans of the Charter; partisans of United Nations
resolutions, partisans of United Nations principles. When
principles are challenged, when decisions are violated, when
the authority of the Security Council is truncated and
defied, objectivity becomes meaningless. What is the
meaning of the resolution we have just adopted, one which
reflects the sentiments of the overwhelming majority of the
members of the Council2 It means that the overwhelming

majority of the members of the Council, including those
who had reservations not on the merit of the document but
on the absence of certain elements, have rallied to preserve
the Council’s image, its authority and to support the
performance of UNIFIL. The word “objectivity” caMot
crop up here; it is meaningless; one cannot isolate the word
“objectivity” from elements that have not been raised here.
What is at stake is the authority of the Council; what is
challenged is a resolution of the Council; what is defied is
UNIFIL, the project of the Coon& We are partisans of
UlVIFIL, partisans of the Charter, partisans of the
authority of the Council.
333: The representative of Israel quoted from a
s newspaper of Kuwait. This is not a new quotation. I heard
him many times using the same quotation. Well, I am glad
that our press in one way or another contributes to his
: statements. But using one quotation for many years gives us
certain credit. He and his delegation, and perhaps all the
Zionist organizations doing research work, suffer from a
dearth of criticism against us, against Kuwait, my country,
and I note the lack of abundance of quotations which he
could use against us. One quotation has been used for many
years; it has become hackneyed; it has become mundane; it
has become ineffective. Other quotations should be used;
but he has not used any. His delegation suffers from a

dearth of quotations, notwithstanding all the assistance it
receives from the Zionist
in thii country.
- organizations
334. Fiiy,
I heard his remark about the effectiveness.of
UNIFIL and the maintenance of its image in, to use his
words, fulfiiig
its mandate.
hold him to these words. I
- I -_____
hope thatl%Govemment
willcooperate for the fulfilment
of the Force’s mandate, in order to save us the troubleof
having to come back again after two or three months and
have an unnecessary exchange of remarks. The fulfilment of
the mandate of UNIFIL will come about if the Government
of Israel cooperates with UNIFIL. This fact has been
reflected in all the documents submitted by the SecretaryGeneral. I hope that the representative of Israel will stick to
his words when he prays for the fulfilment of the mandate of
- UNIFIL.
335. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers. I
should like at this time to express my appreciation to all
members of the Council and the Secretary-General and
others associated with him for the manner in which the
consultations on this diflicult matter were carried out and
the constructive spirit in which they all sought to arrive at a
satisfactory conclusion within a very tight time-frame in
terms of the renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL.
_
1171emeeting rose at 9 p,m

-- .
Litho

in United

Nstions. New York

Price:

$U.S. 4.00

-

~___

__^_

79.70002-December

.-~~

1981-2.250

-.-
