A/58/PV.83

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

83rd plenary meeting
Thursday, 8 April 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Saint Lucia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Boris
Trajkovski, President of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

constitute Macedonian society. He also worked
tirelessly towards membership of his country in the
European Union and NATO, thus promoting
international
peace,
security
and
economic
development.

The President: This morning, it is our sad duty
to pay tribute to the memory of the late President of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, His
Excellency Mr. Boris Trajkovski, who passed away on
Thursday, 26 February 2004.

Death has robbed us of this international
statesman at the time when the world needed him most.
May God Almighty rest his soul and those of the
members of his delegation in eternal peace. Our
condolences go to the bereaved families.

On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to convey our condolences to the
Government and the people of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and to the bereaved family of
His Excellency Mr. Boris Trajkovski.

The President: I give
representative of Viet Nam.

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The President: I
representative of Uganda.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I am addressing the
Assembly on behalf of the African Group.
We are gathered here today to pay tribute to the
memory of the President of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, His Excellency Boris
Trajkovski, and the members of his delegation, who
perished in a plane crash. He is remembered for putting
in place measures and policies designed to promote
harmony among the various ethnic groups that

the

floor

*
0
4
3
0
4
3
7
*

the

Mr. Nguyen Duy Chien (Viet Nam): On behalf
of the Asian Group, the delegation of Viet Nam has the
honour to pay tribute to the memory of Mr. Boris
Trajkovski, the late President of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, who lost his life in a plane
crash more than a month ago.
We would like to extend our deepest condolences
and sympathy to the people and the Government of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The demise
of President Trajkovski is a great loss to the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The Asian Group
shares the pain of the people of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia on the sudden passing of their
President.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-30437 (E)

to

A/58/PV.83

Mrs. Ninčić (Serbia and Montenegro): On behalf
of the Group of Eastern European States, I would like
to extend to the citizens and the Government of
Macedonia our deepest and most sincere condolences
in the wake of the tragic death of President Boris
Trajkovski on 26 February 2004.
President Trajkovski will be remembered as a
statesman and patriot who served the interests of his
people in an exemplary manner, demonstrating great
leadership to preserve unity and consolidate the
situation in his country in most difficult circumstances.
Guiding the peace process, President Trajkovski was
instrumental in the signature and implementation of the
Ohrid Agreement, which re-established peace and
stability.
He left many friends all over the world,
particularly in the region of South-East Europe, which
lost a visionary committed to creating a new image of
the region, who substantially contributed to the
rapprochement
among
its
countries
through
cooperation and the promotion of tolerance. As a man
of peace and dialogue, he was dedicated to the
advancement of regional stability and was universally
appreciated as one of the most broad-minded leaders in
our part of the world. He firmly believed that the
Balkans can and has to be a part of a united Europe and
a better place where all its citizens can live together in
harmony. In the four years he served as President,
Boris Trajkovski was a good friend to all countries in
the region and an outstanding partner in discussions on
Balkan and European issues.
The Group of Eastern European States pays
tribute to this courageous politician who fought to
ensure that the values of democracy and an open and
multi-ethnic society would prevail in his country,
bringing it closer to the European Union and other
Euro-Atlantic structures.
Boris Trajkovski dedicated his life to the
prosperity and well-being of his people. We are
convinced that his political legacy will be remembered
with gratitude and will be built upon by the future
generations of his country.
The President: I call on the representative of the
United States of America, who will speak on behalf of
the host country.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): On
behalf of the host country, I wish to say that we

2

appreciate this opportunity to pay tribute to the
memory of a great leader: the late President of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Boris
Trajkovski.
President Trajkovski was a close friend of the
United States, where he studied theology before he
began his political career. He leaves behind a legacy of
friendship that has never been closer or stronger. But
more important, he was a statesman with vision, who
championed tolerance and reconciliation in his country
during some of its most perilous moments. During the
armed clashes of 2001, the President helped unite his
diverse country and prevent an escalation of ethnic
conflict as seen elsewhere in the Balkans. He did so by
promoting dialogue and inclusion for all the citizens
and ethnic groups in the Republic of Macedonia. He
was instrumental in the signature and implementation
of the Ohrid Agreement, which enshrined these
principles and re-established peace and stability.
He often faced intense criticism, but the success
of his country and its continued stability and rapid
movement towards inclusion in Euro-Atlantic
institutions are a lasting testament to his wisdom and
foresight. He will be greatly missed, but he leaves
behind a nation that is strong and resilient.
I extend my deepest condolences to President
Trajkovski’s wife, Vilma, his daughter Sara and son
Stefan, and other family members and friends. I also
extend my sympathies to the people of the Republic of
Macedonia, who have lost a great leader but who have
gained much through his leadership and who, we trust,
will continue on the path of peace, reconciliation and
prosperity that he helped lay out for them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.
Mr. Nikolov (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): My delegation would like to express its
gratitude for the tributes and condolences expressed by
the representatives of the Group of African States, the
Group of Asian and the Group of Eastern European
States. I would also like to thank the representative of
the United, Ambassador Stuart Holliday, who spoke on
behalf of the host country.
President Trajkovski was a statesman with a clear
European vision for our country and for the region. He
was firmly dedicated to a better future for the people of

A/58/PV.83

the Republic of Macedonia and to its integration into
the European family. President Trajkovski was a great
supporter of the United Nations and the principles of
the Charter, especially peace, non-violence and
reconciliation. He was also a strong and clear supporter
of the work and activities of the United Nations
agencies, especially the United Nations Development
Programme and UNICEF.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations

The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,
wishes to include in the agenda of the current session
an additional item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”?
It is was decided.
The President: The item is therefore included as
agenda item 167.
In his note, the Secretary-General further requests
that the item be allocated to the Fifth Committee. May
I take it that the General Assembly, as requested by the
Secretary-General, wishes to allocate this item to the
Fifth Committee?

The President: I should like to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to documents
A/58/688/Add.4 and Add.5 in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communications
contained in documents A/58/688 and Add.1 to Add.3,
Kenya and Venezuela have made the necessary
payments to reduce their arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.

The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 120, 121, 127, 129, 131 together with 132, 134
and 119.

May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in those
documents?

I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Fouad Rajeh of Saudi Arabia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work:
request for the inclusion of an additional item
Note by the Secretary-General (A/58/235)
The President: As indicated in his note, the
Secretary-General has the honour to request, pursuant
to rule 15 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, the inclusion in the agenda of the fiftyeighth session of the General Assembly of an
additional item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
Owing to the nature of the item, unless there is an
objection, may I take it that the General Assembly
agrees that the relevant provision of rule 40 of the rules
of procedure, which would require a meeting of the
General Committee on the question of the inclusion of
this item on the agenda, could be waived?
It was so decided.

It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee

Mr. Rajeh (Saudi Arabia), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee (spoke in Arabic): It is my honour to
present to the General Assembly the reports of the
Fifth Committee, which include the recommendations
on issues requiring further action during the resumed
plenary session of the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 10 March to 2
April in nine plenary meetings and 20 informal
consultations.
Under agenda item 120, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2002-2003”, the Fifth
Committee, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/58/572/Add.2, recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution entitled
“Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on support costs
related to extrabudgetary activities in organizations of
the United Nations system”. The Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote.
Under agenda item 121, entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005”, the
Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly,

3

A/58/PV.83

in paragraphs 10 and 11 of its report contained in
document A/58/573/Add.1, the adoption of a draft
resolution entitled “Special Court for Sierra Leone”
and a draft decision entitled “Capital master plan”. The
Committee adopted the draft resolution and the draft
decision without a vote.
Under agenda item 127, entitled “Human
resources management”, the Fifth Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph 9
of its report contained in document A/58/750, the
adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Human
resources management”. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote.
Under agenda item 129, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, the Fifth Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/58/751, the adoption of a draft resolution
entitled “Joint Inspection Unit”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
Under agenda items 131 and 132, entitled
“Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994” and “Financing of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”, the Fifth Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6
of its report contained in document A/58/752, the
adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Review of the
Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia”. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
Under agenda item 134, entitled “Administrative
and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations”, the Fifth Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraphs 8
and 9 of its report contained in document
A/58/582/Add.1, the adoption of a draft resolution
entitled “Implementation of paragraph 3 of General
Assembly resolution 57/323” and a draft decision
entitled “Participation of United Nations Volunteers in

4

peacekeeping operations”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution and the draft decision
without a vote.
Under agenda item 119, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Fifth
Committee recommends to the General Assembly, in
paragraph 7 of its report contained in document
A/58/571/Add.2, the adoption of a draft decision
entitled “Questions deferred for future consideration”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee which are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
I therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.

A/58/PV.83

Agenda item 120 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/58/572/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The draft
resolution is entitled “Report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on support costs related to extrabudgetary
activities in organizations of the United Nations
system”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/283).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
120.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/58/573/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report and on
the draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 11 of the same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Special Court for Sierra Leone”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/284).
The President: We next turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Capital master plan”. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/566).

The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
121.
Agenda item 127
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/750)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. I now call
on the representative of Saudi Arabia, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position before action is taken
on the draft resolution.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to thank the members of the Bureau of the
Fifth Committee and Mr. Harold Agyeman, who
coordinated efforts on the draft resolution under
discussion today. I express my appreciation for his
commitment and wise leadership as he conducted
consultations on the sensitive concept of domestic
partnership, or same-sex marriage.
Same-sex marriage is a taboo in all religions. It is
a grave sin and a great mistake to believe that the
ultimate goal in life is to satisfy one’s desires, because
such a belief marginalizes the role of religion in one’s
life and alienates one from the commonly agreed
principles of societies. Such a belief gives free rein to
the concept of individual freedom. Satisfying needs,
even instincts, leads us to violate all sacred thought.
Such extreme thinking alters societal concepts and
human relations, runs counter to common sense and the
requirements of coexistence and threatens the family
unit.
My delegation strived to reach consensus in the
Fifth Committee, prompted by a desire not to obstruct
the work of the Committee. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia would like to place on record its understanding
of the concept of marriage, which can be only a
contract between a man and a woman. That concept,
shared by most countries, is consistent with holy
religions and underpins humankind’s dignity.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would like to place
on record that all interpretation of operative
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution should be
compatible with the spirit of the United Nations
Charter with respect to the traditional concept of the

5

A/58/PV.83

family, and should be in accordance with regulation
12.3 of the Staff Regulations and Rules.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report
(A/58/750).
The Fifth Committee adopted the resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

carefully reviewed in order to bring them into
conformity with the purposes and intentions of the
Staff Regulations and Rules. That is a clear demand,
which should be implemented faithfully, accurately and
promptly.
Fifth, any amendments to the Staff Regulations
and Rules should be submitted for the General
Assembly’s approval, in accordance with the
provisions of the Staff Regulations and Rules.

The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.

Sixth, all interpretation of the Staff Regulations
and Rules should be in conformity with the intentions
and purposes of the provisions of the Staff Regulations
and Rules. Member States should be informed of such
interpretations sufficiently prior to the expected date of
entry into force.

Mr. Elnaggar (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): In
keeping with our position, which we made clear during
the discussion of agenda item 127, “Human resources
management”, in formal and informal meetings of the
Fifth Committee, the delegation of Egypt would like to
state the following points.

Seventh, we hope that paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
resolution adopted by the Assembly will be
implemented accurately, faithfully and promptly.
Further, we underline our intention to follow this
matter closely and our readiness to raise this issue
again should circumstances so warrant.

First, the resolution the Assembly has just
adopted reflects the positive, constructive spirit that
should prevail among Member States in addressing the
real and legitimate concerns of a sizeable number of
Member States, regardless of their positions on a
specific issue.

Eighth, the General Assembly notes in
paragraph 1 a practice employed by the Secretariat
when dealing with staff. While we stress the need to
refrain from discrimination and double standards when
dealing with staff members of varying nationalities, we
consider it essential that Member States be informed of
all such practices and the basis for them, as well as the
means of their implementation, in total transparency, so
that we are all able to discuss them and examine their
legal, procedural and substantive aspects with a view to
the possibility of endorsing some or all of them. We
believe that that would be the best way to guarantee the
codification of those elements that we agree upon and
to prevent a deadlock such as we encountered when the
Secretary-General’s bulletin was issued. In that
context, we request that Member States be given a
report on the implementation of such practices in all
their aspects so that we can all reconsider them.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/285).

Second, in adopting this resolution, the General
Assembly wishes to reaffirm its mandate and its ability
to assume the role entrusted to it and wishes to prevent
any attempt to bypass the Assembly.
Third, the Secretary-General’s bulletin referred to
in the resolution (ST/SGB/2004/4) has caused dismay
among many countries of various religious and cultural
traditions. The cause of dismay is that the bulletin
contains concepts and terms not in conformity with the
Staff Regulations and Rules or with the terms they use
to define spouses and the family in the traditional
manner to which we are accustomed.
Fourth, the resolution the Assembly has just
adopted is clear and categorical and leaves no room for
doubt or misinterpretation with respect to its rejection
of any newly coined terms that run counter to that
consensus. The General Assembly has requested that
the Security-General’s bulletin be reissued, taking into
consideration the genuine concerns expressed by
Member States. The bulletin’s contents are to be

6

Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation joined the consensus on the resolution
just adopted by the General Assembly. I would like,
however, to make the following remarks in explanation
of my delegation’s position on the resolution.
We attach great importance to human resources
management as a crucial element of the Organization’s
ability to deliver its services in an efficient and

A/58/PV.83

effective manner. The United Nations Staff Regulations
and Rules, as agreed upon by Member States, govern
personnel policy for the staffing and administration of
the Secretariat. The legitimacy and credibility of the
work of the Secretariat in the administration of
personnel matters is dependent on its adherence to the
terms and provisions contained in the Staff Regulations
and Rules. Clearly, any change or amendment to the
Staff Regulations and Rules should be considered by
the General Assembly for necessary action;
accordingly, any interpretation of their provisions
should be consistent with their intent and purposes and
should be brought to the attention of Member States
regularly.
The contents of bulletin ST/SGB/2004/4, entitled
“Family status for purposes of United Nations
entitlements”, caused serious concern to my delegation.
While no decision has been made by the General
Assembly to change the scope of the definition of the
family for the purposes of entitlements, the contents of
that bulletin introduce new terms and concepts that are
alien to the letter and spirit of the United Nations Staff
Regulations and Rules. More important, the contents of
the bulletin are not in conformity with the many
references to the terms “husband” and “wife” as
specified in the Staff Regulations and Rules. As a
matter of consistency with those important Regulations
and Rules and as a matter of principle, marriage, which
is only between a man and a woman, forms the basis of
the institution of the family. Therefore, determining the
personal status of the staff members for the purpose of
entitlements should not deviate from the letter and
spirit of the Staff Regulations and Rules.
In this context, any administrative measure that
dilutes or is inconsistent with the principle to which I
referred constitutes an amendment to the Staff
Regulations and Rules and, therefore, requires
consideration and action by the General Assembly. We
emphasize that, in reviewing the contents of and
reissuing the bulletin, those concerns and views should
be given proper attention and full respect by the
Secretariat.
The reason for this explanation of position is a
sense of moral duty to preserve and strengthen the
dignity of the thousands of men and women who,
tirelessly and with dedication, perform their duties as
members of the Secretariat. We respect all of them and
we will continue to do so in the future.

Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): My delegation is
taking the floor to place on record its position on the
draft resolution adopted on item 127, “Human
resources management”, as contained in document
A/58/750.
The delegation of Pakistan regards the institutions
of the family and marriage — as a union between a
man and a woman — as sacrosanct. We therefore had
reservations about the text of the Secretariat bulletin of
20 January 2004, which introduced concepts such as
domestic partnerships, on which there is no consensus
in the international community. We are pleased that the
problem that arose as a result of the issuance of that
bulletin has been addressed through a consensus
resolution. We joined the consensus on the
understanding that the revised bulletin will not contain
any controversial or divisive terms which do not enjoy
the consensus of the international community and that
such controversial terms will not be universalized
through administrative measures, such as that bulletin.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 129
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/751)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/286).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 129?
It was so decided.

7

A/58/PV.83

Agenda items 131 and 132 (continued)
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/752)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Review of the
Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/287).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda items 131 and 132?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/58/582/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the

8

Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report and on the
draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 9 of the same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution entitled
“Implementation of paragraph 3 of General Assembly
resolution 57/323”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/288).
The President: We next turn to the draft decision
entitled “Participation of United Nations Volunteers in
peacekeeping operations”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/567).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
134.
Agenda item 119 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/58/571/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft decision is entitled “Questions deferred
for future consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft
58/564 B).

decision

was

adopted

(decision

The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
119.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.
