ll.

47

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Requests the Special Committee to give the highest
priority in 1982 to:
(a) Mobilizing support for sanctions against South
Africa;
(b) Reviewing the implementation of United Nations
resolutions on apartheid, especially those for the promotion
and effective monitoring of military, nuclear and oil embargoes against South Africa;
(c) Publicizing all developments concerning military.
nuclear, economic, political and other collaboration with
the racist regime of South Africa;
(d) Promoting the participation of writers, artists and
other cultural personalities in the international campaign
against apartheid,
(e) Promoting the world campaign for the unconditional
release of all persons imprisoned or restricted for their opposition to apartheid,
3. Decides to make a special allocation of $300,000 to
the Special Committee for 1982 from the regular budget of
the United Nations for the cost of special projects to be
decided on by the Committee in order to promote the international campaign against apartheid, in particular:
(a) Organization and co-sponsorship, and financial assistance, to international and national c0nferences and seminars against apartheid;
(b) Assistance to enable national liberation movements
to participate in such conferences:
(c) Promotion of the widest observance of international
days against apartheid and of international campaigns
against apartheid;
(d) Studies by experts on apartheid;
4. Requests Governments and organizations to make
voluntary contributions or provide other assistance for the
special projects of the Special Committee, particularly in
order to promote the effective observance of the International Year of Mobilization for Sanctions against South
Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Special Committee, to make urgent and necesary administrative arrangements for effective services to the Committee, as indicated in paragraphs 413 to 415 of its report;
6. Requests all Governments, specialized agencies and
other institutions in the United Nations system and other
organizations to co-operate with the Special Committee in
the discharge of its responsibilities.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /981
0
INVESTMENTS IN SOl.JTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/206 Q of 16 December 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, 102
Convinced that a cessation of all new foreign investments
in, and financial loans to, South Africa would constitute an
important step in international action for the elimination of
apartheid, as such investments and loans abet and encourage
the apartheid policies of that country,
Welcoming the actions of those Governments that have
taken legislative and other measures towards that end,
Noting with regret that the Security Council has not yet
taken steps towards that end, as requested by the General
Assembly in its resolutions 31 /6 K of 9 November 1976,
32/105 0 of 16 December 1977. B/183 0 of 24 January

1979, 34/93 Q of 12 December 1979 and 35/206 Q of
16 December 1980,
Again urges the Security Council to consider the matter
at an early date with a view to taking effective steps to
achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in, and
financial loans to, South Africa.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

p
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 10~
to which is annexed the report of the Committee of Trustees
of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
Gravely concerned at the continued and increased repression against opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa, and the institution of numerous trials
under arbitrary security legislation, as well as continued
repression in Namibia,
Reaffirming that increased humanitarian assistance by the
international community to those persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and Namibia is appropriate and essential,
Recognizing that increased contributions to the Trust Fund
and to the voluntary agencies concerned are necessary to
enable them to meet the increased needs for humanitarian
and legal assistance,
I. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee
of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian and legal
assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and Namibia, as well
as assistance to their f~milies and to refugees from South
Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that have contributed to the Trust
Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged in rendering
humanitarian and legal assistance to the victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination;
3. Appeals for generous and increased contributions to
the Trust Fund;
4. AlsJ appeals for direct contributions to the voluntary
agencies engaged in assistance to the victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination in South Africa and Namibia.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /981

36/226.

The situation in the Middle East

A
The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled ''The situation in the
Middle East",
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
11 November 1981, 10"
Welcoming the world-wide support extended to the just
cause of the Palestinian people and the other Arab countries
in their struggle against Israeli aggression and occupation
in order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
'"' A/361619 and Corr. I.
0
' " A/.16/655-S/14746. For the printed text, see Official Record,· of the
Securi/_\' Council, Thirlv•si.Hh Year, Supplemenl for October, Nol'ember
and /)ecembrr 198 I

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

48

in the Middle East and the full exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable national rights, as affirmed by previous resolutions of the General Assembly relating to the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East,
Gravely concerned that the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, still remain
under Israeli occupation, that the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations have not been implemented and that the
Palestinian people is still denied the restoration of its land
and the exercise of its inalienable national rights in conformity with international law, as reaffirmed by resolutions
of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, 107 to all the occupied Palestinian
and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem,
Reiterating all relevant United Nations resolutions which
emphasize that the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law and that Israel must withdraw
unconditionally from all the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories, including Jerusalem,
Reaffirming further the imperative necessity of establishing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region,
based on full respect for the Charter and the principles of
international law,
Gravely concerned also at recent Israeli actions involving
the escalation and expansion of the conflict in the region,
which further violate the principles of international law and
endanger international peace and security,
l. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem, in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the principles
of international law and the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, and demands the immediate, unconditional
and total withdrawal of Israel from all these occupied
territories;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that the question of Palestine
is the core of the conflict in the Middle East and that no
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region will be
achieved without the full exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable national rights;
3. Reaffirms further that a just and comprehensive settlement of the situation in the Middle East cannot be
achieved without the participation on an equal footing of
all the parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization as the representative of the Palestinian
people;
4. Declares once more that peace in the Middle East
is indivisible and must be based on a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution of the Middle East problem, under the
auspices of the United Nations, which ensures the complete
and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian
and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, and which enables the Palestinian people, under
the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to
exercise its inalienable rights, including the right to return
and the right to self-determination, national independence
and the establishment of its independent sovereign State in
Palestine, in accordance with the resolutions of the United
Nations relevant to the question of Palestine, in particular
General Assembly resolutions ES-7/2 of 29 July 1980 and
36/120 A to F of lO December 1981;
5. Rejects all partial agreements and separate treaties
in so far as they violate the recognized rights of the Palestinian people and contradict the principles of just and
107

United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 75. No. 973. p. 287.

comprehensive solutions to the Middle East problem to ensure the establishment of a just peace in the area;
6. Deplores Israel's failure to comply with Security
Council resolutions 476 (1980) of 30 June 1980 and 478
( 1980) of 20 August 1980 and General Assembly resolution
35/207 of 16 December 1980, determines that Israel's decision to annex Jerusalem and to declare it its "capital",
as well as the measures to alter its physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and status, are
null and void and demands that they be rescinded immediately, and calls upon all Member States, the specialized
agencies and all other international organizations to abide
by the present resolution and all other relevant resolutions,
including Assembly resolution 36/120 E;
7. Condemns Israel's aggression and practices against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories
and outside these territories, particularly in the Palestinian
refugee camps in Lebanon, including the expropriation and
annexation of territory, the establishment of settlements,
assassination attempts and other terrorist, aggressive and
repressive measures, which are in violation of the Charter
and the principles of international law and the pertinent
international conventions;
8. Strongly condemns Israeli annexationist policies and
practices in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, the establishment of settlements, the confiscation of lands, the diversion of water resources, the intensification of repressive
measures against the Syrian citizens therein and the forcible
imposition of Israeli citizenship on Syrian nationals, and
declares all these measures null and void as they constitute
violations of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
9. Strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon and the continuous bombardment and destruction
of its cities and villages, and all acts that constitute a violation of its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and the security of its people and prevent the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 425 ( 1978)
of 19 March 1978, including the full deployment of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon up to the internationally recognized borders;
I0. Calls for strict respect of the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon and supports the efforts of the Government of Lebanon, with regional and international endorsement, to restore the exclusive
authority of the Lebanese State over all of its territory up
to the internationally recognized boundaries;
11. Deplores Israeli violations of the airspace of various
Arab countries and demands their immediate cessation;
12. Considers that the agreements on strategic cooperation between the United States of America and Israel
signed on 30 November I 981 would encourage Israel to
pursue its aggressive and expansionist policies and practices
in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem, would have adverse effects on
efforts for the establishment of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East and would threaten the
security of the region;
13. Calls upon all States to put an end to the flow to
Israel of any military, economic and financial resources that
would encourage it to pursue its aggressive policies against
the Arab countries and the Palestinian people;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council periodically on the development of the
situation and to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session a comprehensive report covering the developments in the Middle East in all their aspects.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

B

The General Assembly,
Gravely alarmed by Israel's decision of 14 December
1981 to apply Israeli law to the occupied Syrian Arab Golan
Heights,
Reaffirming that acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions,
Reaffirming once more the applicability of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 107 to the occupied Syrian
territory,
Recalling its resolutions 35/ 122 A to F of 11 December
1980,
1. Declares that Israel's decision to apply Israeli law
to the occupied Syrian Arab Golan Heights is null and void
and has no legal validity whatsoever;
2. Determines that the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949, continue to apply to the Syrian
territory occupied by Israel since 1967;
3. Strongly deplores the persistence of the Israeli policy
of annexation, which escalates tension in the region;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind
forthwith its decision and all administrative and other measures relating to it, which constitute a flagrant violation of
all relevant principles of international law;
5. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies and "ther
international institutions not to recognize that decision;
6. Requests the Security Council, in the event of Israel's
failure to implement the present resolution, to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly and the Security Council on the implementation of the present resolution not later than 21 December
1981.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/244.

Enlargement of the Executive Board of the
United Nations Children's Fund 108
The General Assembly,
Convinced that a strengthened and expanded United Na-

49

pation of Member States in the work of the Executive Board
of the Fund,
Recalling its resolution 417 (V) of I December 1950,
which established the importance of constituting the Executive Board with due regard to geographical distribution
and to the representation of the major contributing and recipient countries,
Noting that the composition of the Executive Board was
last considered by the General Assembly at its eleventh
session, when the Assembly adopted resolution 1038 (XI)
of 7 December 1956, replacing paragraph 6 (a) of resolution
417 (V),
I . Decides, without prejudice to arrangements which
may be made in other bodies, to enlarge the membership
of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund to forty-one members, to be elected from States Members of the United Nations or members of specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency, subject
to the following conditions:
(a)
Nine seats for African States;
(b) Nine seats for Asian States;
(c) Four seats for Eastern European States;
(d)
Six seats for Latin American States;
(e) Twelve seats for Western European and other
States;
(j) One seat to be rotated among the five regional
groups, in the following order:
(i) African States;
(ii) Latin American States;
(iii) Asian States;
(iv) Western European and other States;
(v) Eastern European States;
(g) Without prejudice to the terms of the States already elected, elections to these forty-one seats shall be for
a term of three years and retiring members shall be eligible
for re-election;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to elect,
at its first regular session of 1982, the additional eleven
members of the Executive Board. 109
I 10th plenary meeting
28 April 1982

tions Children's Fund necessitates the increased partici10
•

See also sect. V, resolution 36/ I 97.

""' See Economic and Social Council decision 1982/126 of 6 May 1982.
