UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

~ CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2546/Rev. 1) ................................

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President. ............................

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.........................................~

.......

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/16574) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

1

s.

-’

.. ,.

.NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures; Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations‘document;
Documents of the -Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally ‘published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the. document mdicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
I
I
The ‘resolutions of ~the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.
.. .

‘,.

‘.,

2546th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 1 June 1984, at 10.00 a.m.
President:

Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information
of
Kuwait and the representative of Saudi Arjabia to take
places at the Council table, and I invite the representatives of Bahrain, Djibouti, Ecuador, the.Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, Jordan, Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Panama, Qatar, Senegal, Somalia, the
Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

of

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2546/Rev.l)

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Al-Sabah
(Kuwait) and Mr. ShihabitSaudiArabia)
took places at
the Council table; Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain), Mr. Farah
Dirir (Djibouti), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. van Well
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Kuroda (Japan),
Mr. Salah (Jordan), Mr. Ould Hamody (Mauritania),
Mr. Mrani
Zentar (Morocco),
Mr. Ali (Oman)
Mr. Kam (Panama), Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar), Mr. Sarre’
(Senegal), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mr. Birido (Sudan),
Mr. Bouziri (Tunisia), Mr. Giikce (Turkey), Mr. AlQasimi (United Arab Emirates)
and Mr. Sallam
(Yemen) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives
of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16574)
The meeting

was called to order at 11.05 a.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT:
At the outset of my presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June, I wish to
express my own thanks and the thanks of the Council as
a whole to my predecessor. Ambassador Troyanovsky
is the dean of the Council. He has shown us all how to
do the job of President. Patience, humour and fairness
were the hallmarks of his tenure. I hope to emulate him,
but I suggest that my colleagues on the Council might
refrain from praising me-at least until I have done so.

.’

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to info&i members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Liberia in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

2. I am glad to note that recently the Council has
shown an increasing sense of corporate responsibility.
This is an asset for the whole United Nations. I hope we
can work during June to increase our sense of collegiality and to promote effective action to deal with the
serious situations before us. I also hope that we can
observe English hours.
Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Jones (Liberia) took the place reserved for her at the side of the
I
Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the text of a draft resolution submitted by
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates [S/16594].

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/16574)

6. I should also like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/16595, which contains the
text of a letter dated 30 May 1984 from the representative of Democratic Yemen to the Secretary-General.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings {2541sl to 2.5&d and
2545th meetings], I invite the Deputy Prime Minister

7. The first speaker is the representative of Liberia.
I invite her to take a place at the Council table and to
make her statement.
1

8. Mrs. JONES (Liberia): The delegation of Liberia
congratulates you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
duties of President of the Council for the month of June.
We feel confident that with your renowned wisdom and
capable leadership you will indeed help us to achieve a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in the Gulf States.

15. Notwithstanding
the precarious state of affairs in,
the Gulf States, there appears to be a serious contradiction: while peaceful nations are calling for the cessation
of hostilities in the region, the crisis presents an opportunity for peace-making and profit-making.
Are we in
danger of being told that war and peace should coexist?

:._‘.

9. My delegation also congratulates your predecessor
for his able and distinguished contribution to the peace
process in the world during the previous month.

,‘.
:.

10. The Government and people of Liberia view with
deep concern the escalation of hostilities in the Gulf
States. Yet it comes as no surprise that the conflict in
the region is reaching a state of prolonged military
engagement and insecurity.

16. The Government
of Liberia regrets that ships
flying Liberian flags have been hit and damaged and
that such action has caused the loss of revenue in our
economy. It is therefore to be expected that those involved in such attacks will be equally prepared to make
reparations for their actions. My Government appeals
to them to desist from further attacks on ships flying the
Liberian flag.

‘.
::

-_
.

17. Further, the Government
of Liberia joins all
peace-loving States in calling for a’peaceful settlement
of the dispute among the Gulf States. The right of
innocent passage, free trade and navigation in the region should be respected by all of them. My Govemment further calls upon the Council to take appropriate
measures to prevent this regional conflict from escalating further and appeals to all Gulf States to respect
Council resolutions calling for the cessation of hostilities.

11. The unequal distribution of natural resources on
our planet, especially those resources considered so
vital for the development of the economies of the world,
upon which our very lives have become so dependent,
and which so often seem to be in jeopardy, creates
conditions of economic strangulation
in an already
critical world economic order.
12. Those nations that have been blessed and are
indeed fortunate to be the inheritors of the vital forces
of life, such as energy, rightly or wrongly jealously
guard their. hegemony over those resources and the
exclusive right to determine their availability,
accessibility and distribution to the rest of humanity. Indeed,
mankind has always begged for the privilege of obtaining those vital resources upon which life depends. It
will suffer the dilemma of deprivation until this age-old
struggle to sustain life on earth has been transformed
from poverty to an opportunity to free itself from such
dependency.

18. It is a world-wide scenario that the areas of conflict and crisis in the world today are among neighbours,
indeed very close neighbours. Nevertheless, the whole
world has become one vast neighbourhood
with the
possibility that a regional conflict may engulf even
those nations that are not parties to a dispute. My
delegation therefore calls upon the Council to create the
right conditions for a peaceful and positive settlement
of the dispute among the Gulf States.
19. Mr. MI Guojun’(China)
[interpretationfrom
Chinese]: Mr. President, although you have asked us to
refrain from doing so, I should like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. With your rich diplomatic experience and
your outstanding qualities, I am confident you will ably
guide the work of the Council in the month of June to
success.

13. All peace-loving nations have become fearful of
the extent to which the situation in the Gulf States
will escalate. The Organization’s cherished principle of
good-neighbourliness
has been completely abandoned.
In addition, disregard for the principle of neutrality in
the region gives cause for serious concern regarding the
danger and serious jeopardy to which the lifeblood of
our economies is being exposed.

20. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
express our thanks to the retiring President; Ambassador Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, for his smooth
handling of the affairs of,the Council in May.

14. The quest for energy is an eternal quest of mankind. It is a serious business indeed-so
serious and
profound that it makes the difference between our being
classified as developed or developing nations, superPowers or third-world nations. The fundamental basis
of these nomenclatures is the amount of energy available and accessible to change our economies from subsistence economies to modem and industrialized economies. Unless and until mankind has broken this yoke
of dependency on a few finite sources of energy to do its
work, it must learn to live and continue to beg for them
and tight for them if need be. It would be far better if we
could all simultaneously learn the critical need for interdependence for the survival of our economies and our
very lives.

21. Of late there has been a sudden change in the
situation in the Gulf region, and the war between
Iran and Iraq has extended to repeated attacks on oiltankers and ships in the region, thereby posing a threat
to navigation and trade and foreboding the danger of
intemationalizing
the war. The whole international
community is deeply concerned about these developments, and so is China. The parties concerned have
referred this matter to the Council, hoping that this
dispute can be settled through diplomatic channels,
which is a desirable move. The Chinese delegation
hopes that the Council will make its due contribution in
this regard.
2

22. All the Gulf States are developing countries belonging to the third world. They should live together in
peace and amity. We earnestly appeal to all the parties
concerned to exercise restraint, not to take actions that
would further aggravate and complicate the situation,
and to work actively for the settlement of the dispute
through peaceful negotiations so as to avoid superPower interference.

28. The complaint of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates concerning
Iranian attacks on ships en route to and from the ports
of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia is one of the most difficult
and delicate issues with which the Council has had to
deal in recent times, since it affects the vital interests
not only of the littoral States in the region of the Persian
Gulf, but also those of the whole world. I need not recall
the importance of the Gulf region to international peace
and security in general and to the stability of the world
economy in particular.
. ...’
29. The Netherlands
Government
is deeply concerned at the recent escalation of hostilitiesin
the Gulf
region. We appeal to both parties to exercise utmost
restraint. In a recent common dkmarche at Baghdad
and Tehran, the 10 States members of the European
Community expressed their concern and underlined the
risks of a very serious further deterioration of the situation. The latest hostilities have included attacks on
ships en route to and from the ports of Kuwait and
Saudi Arabia. Since these events could endanger international peace and security in the region, it is of crucial
importance that there be no further interference with
international shipping in the Gulf. The safety of navigation in the Gulf is the sine qua non without which the
essential flow of oil exports from the region will be
seriously jeopardized.

23. We maintain that free passage on the high seas in
the Gulf and the right to trade should be respected. The
belligerent countries should cease all hostilities in the
Gulf, refrain from attacking ships of countries not parties to the war and respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the other littoral countries. The Gulf
States should work together to ensure safety of passage
and freedom of navigation in the Gulf, which are in
conformity with the basic interests of those States.
24. There is no denying the fact that the recent incidents in the Gulf are the extension and development of
the war between Iran and Iraq. With regard to this war,
since the very day of its outbreak we have been urging
both sides to put an end to it as early as possible and
reconcile their differences by peaceful means. Both
Iran and Iraq are friendly to China. As friends, we wish
in all sincerity to appeal to them once again to turn
hostility into friendship. As the Chinese saying goes:
both would benefit from peace while neither would
remain unscathed in fighting. Peace will benefit not
only the two countries but also the stability’in the Gulf
region and the Middle East as a whole, not to mention
the world. In short, people throughout the world will be
happy if peace is restored to that region.

30. The present complaint refers to recent attacks on
ships en route to and from ports of States that are
not party to the hostilities. However deplorable these
events are, the Council should not forget that these are
not the only hostilities involving neutral shipping in
the Gulf. According to Lloyd’s shipping intelligence,
during the past three years more than 60 ships-two
thirds of them commercial vessels from nations not
involved in the war-have been attacked in the Gulf. It
should be noted that three of these attacks-fall within
the category referred to in the complaint of Bahrain and
the other Gulf countries.

25. The Council is again seized of matters relating to
the war between Iran and Iraq. Consistent with its
position in the past, the Chinese delegation again hopes
that the Council will take actions conducive to overcoming the crisis in the Gulf region and bringing about
the participation
of both belligerent parties in the process of peaceful negotiations.
26. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands):
At the very
outset, allow me to say, Sir, how glad we are to see you
presiding over this important meeting of the Council on
the first day of your mandate. In the course of our
membership of the Council, we have worked closely
together on many occasions, and my delegation has
thus come to appreciate your great professional and
human qualities. Moreover, you represent a country
with which the Netherlands, since its appearance on the
world scene as an independent State, has had so many
quarrels that by now I can only think of our two nations
as being almost inseparable.

31. As to the legal aspects of the attacks on shipping in
the Gulf, let me observe that under international
law
belligerents may take measures to restrict shipping to
and from ports of the other belligerents. Such measures
do, of necessity, affect the rights of third States under
whose flags such shipping is conducted. Imperfect as it
may be in this field, international law nevertheless contains certain restrictions as to the implementation
of
such measures. Deliberate attacks and, at the same
time, because of the means employed, indiscriminate
attacks against merchant shipping in whatever part of
the Gulf fall clearly outside the scope of the permissible
use of armed force.

27. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Troyanovsky,
for the exemplary
manner in which he carried out his duties as President
of the Council during the at times all-too-lively
and
difficult month of May. Again, we had ample opportunity to admire his ability as a diplomat and to appreciate
his fairness and style.

32. What should the Council do to remedy the present
situation?
33. As a first priority, the legitimate concern of the
littoral States that are not party to the hostilities should
be satisfied. They are justifiably
seeking assurances
3

‘.-.
:-.
_*_
:..
:.:_
_‘_
:
:
_’
:.:
:_
:,.
.‘.
.‘.
:.
:.:_

:.

:.:. .
:.:.
-.

from the Council that their territorial integrity shall be
fully respected and that there shall be no recurrence of
attacks on international commercial shipping en route
to and from their ports. As has already become clear
during this debate, their concerns are fully shared by
other nations not involved in the war and whose vessels
were attacked or are under threat of attack while navigating the high seas of the Gulf for commercial and
peaceful purposes. For that matter, the Netherlands
would consider any attack on an innocent vessel flying
the Netherlands flag in whatever part of the Gulf as an
unfriendly :actand a serious violation of the right of free
navigation and commerce in international waters.

ever, we would have preferred a clearer expression by
the Council of the necessity to end all hostilities in the
Gulf. In this connection, we recall the Council’s call of
October of last year to cease immediately all hostilities
in the Gulf. Moreover, we attach particular importance
to operative paragraph 1of the present draft resolution,
which calls upon all States to respect the right of free
navigation in the Gulf. This right should not be interpreted selectively. We also welcome the call upon all
States in operative paragraph 3 to exercise the utmost
restraint and to refrain from escalating the conflict. We
urge both belligerents to heed that call. Finally, we
strongly hope that the Council’s call not to interfere
with shipping en route to and from States that are not
party to the hostilities will be scrupulously respected.

34. Secondly, we cannot ignore the fact that the situation in the Gulf will remain highly unstable unless all
hostilities in that region come to an end. Unfortunately,
the Council’s call of October last year [resolution 540
(1983)] immediately to cease all hostilities in the Gulf
has not been heeded by the belligerents. Freedom of
navigation is a right that should be respected equally by
all concerned parties in the Gulf. Only then can we
expect an effective cessation of all hostilities there to
materialize. Such a cessation of all hostilities in the Gulf
would at the same time open a window to a comprehensive cease-tire and a peaceful solution to the conflict.

.38. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL (France)
[interpretation
from French]: Mr. President, we are
doubly pleased to see ‘you guiding the work of the
Council: not only because of the excellent relations that
exist between ‘our two countries, but-on a more personal level, because of the high regard we all have
for your courtesy, intelligence and imagination. These
qualities will undoubtedly enable you to discharge your
functions this month with excellent results.
39. I wish to thank our colleague, Mr. Troyanovsky,
who so efficiently, and in so exemplary a manner, presided over the Council last month. I also pay a tribute
to his well-known affability, good humour and charm
-remarkable traits from which
,. we have all benefited.
40. The States members of the Gulf Co-operation
Council have complained to the Council following
Iranian attacks on commercial ships en route to and
from the ports of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. We find that
complaint well grounded. Indeed, it is .a very serious
matter, of interest not only to those States but to the
international community as a whole. The attacks in
question took place against non-belligerent States in an
area outside the zone of. conflict, and in some cases
under the direct sovereignty of some of them. The
Council must therefore condemn those attacks which in
themselves call for a clear and unambiguous response
on the part of the international community.

35. The war between Iran and Iraq has now lasted for
almost four years, and the dire consequences for both
belligerents need not be spelt out here. This war now
endangers international peace and security in the Gulf
region. In order to reverse the present escalating spiral
of events; what is required, above all, is to promote
a peace process in which both parties become fully
engaged. During our many previous consultations on
this war, the Netherlands delegation has consistently
tried to pursue this goal. We regret that previous decisions of the Council have failed to bring about conditions that could have induced both parties to seek a
peaceful settlement of their conflict. It is, however,
imperative that the international community continue
its efforts to persuade both belligerents by persuasion
and quiet diplomacy to end all violence and to seek a
comprehensive, just and honourable settlement acceptable to both sides. In this connection, we continue to
attach great importance of the mission of good offices of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Olof Palme, who are perhaps in a unique position
to bring about a peaceful settlement to the dispute.

41. The States members of the Gulf Co-operation
Council have themselves established a clear distinction
between attacks against two of them in their own sovereign domain and acts of war resulting from the continuing tragic conflict between Iran and Iraq. At issue
are two different matters: on the one hand, the conflict
-the continuation and widening of which we are the
first to deplore-and, on the other hand, the totally
unwarranted violations of the most legitimate rights and
interests of third States.

36. However, if the present spill-over of the war into
the Gulf is not reversed and if the conflict ‘escalates
even further, then the Council might have to contemplate appropriate measures under the Charter as soon
as circumstances require.
37. In conclusion, the Netherlands will vote in favour
of the draft resolution introduced by the States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council. We welcome
the fact that this draft resolution unambiguously calls
upon all States to respect the territorial integrity of the
littoral States that are not party to the hostilities. How-

42. This conflict between Iran and Iraq has lasted for
too long; it must be limited until it can ultimately be
brought to a halt. At the same time, since it involves the
freedom of navigation and commerce for all the Gulf
States, France would remind the Council of the rel4

I

evance and topicality of resolution 540 (1983). It is
essential to ensure that the text retains full authority, in
spirit as well as in its conclusions. It behoves the United
Nations, the Secretary-General, and all Member States
to follow up on that resolution as provided for therein.
43. France, for its part, is prepared to spare no efforts
to arrive at such a result, so that the conflict may finally
come to an end, as the President of the French Republic
stated on 29 May, “through an honourable settlement”
between the two warring countries. The process of
restoring peace, so earnestly desired by the international community, could begin, and an end be put to
the suffering of those two great nations.
44. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): For the second
time during Pakistan’s membership of the Security
Council it is my privilege, Sir, to pay tribute to the
quality of your leadership, to which your experience,
statesmanship and style impart a special distinction.
Your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council ensures the successof its deliberations during
this month. I also wish to express our deep appreciation for the outstanding manner in which the work of
the Council was guided by Ambassador Troyanovsky
during his presidency of the Council last month, when
many difficult issues came before the Council for consideration.
45. The Council has beenseized of the Iran-Iraq conflict and its attendant dangers for almost four years
since the outbreak of this tragic fratricidal war. In the
course of the consideration of this issue, the Council
has produced five presidential statements and adopted
four resolutions, none of which, as is evident from the
recent developments, has had the desired impact on the
course of the war.
46. There is not a Member State which can regard the
Iran-Iraq conflict with detachment. The impact of the
conflict is not limited to the two embattled nations; nor
will its consequences be felt only in the region in which
the war is being fought. In this sense, the Iran-Iraq
conflict is truly global in its magnitude.
47. When the Iran-Iraq war was last debated in the
Council [2493rd meeting], we had, in our statement,
taken special note of this ever&present threat of the
expansion of the war and the danger of its sparking off
agreat-Power confrontation in the region, if not igniting
a world-wide conflict.
48. The continuation and possible expansion of this
tragic war are matters of profound concern to Pakistan.
Our concern flows from a multiplicity of considerations: historical and cultural, in view of our age-old
links with the two belligerent States and the other
Islamic countries, inhabiting a region distinguished by
an unparalleled creativity in the fields of religion;‘philosophy and ideas, which has enlightened our civilization; humanitarian, because the sufferings and untold

.

-.-..

misery which this conflict has inflicted on innumerable
innocent men, women and children in Iran and Iraq fill
us with deep sorrow and compassion; practical and
humane because of our acute awareness that wanton
destruction of God-given resources, the bounties of the
earth and the munificence of nature, which should have
been devoted to the welfare of the peoples of the two
countries and the banishment of poverty, hunger and
disease, is a sin for which not only Iran and Iraq but
countries beyond the region will have to pay; political
and strategic because we realize that the vital interests
which the super-Powers profess to have in’the region
may bring about an expansion of the war, ,with consequences too daunting to contemplate.
49. The dragon’s teeth, sown in the recent past, are
beginning to sprout one by one. The war on land has
expanded into the waters of the Gulf, where attacks on
international shipping have assumed alarming proportions. The excessesbeing committed in the course of an
ever-escalating conflict will not bring advantage to any
of the contending countries. On the other hand, they
are bound to inflict lasting damage on both.
50. The most recent attacks on Saudi and Kuwaiti
ships, which are the subject of the complaint brought
to the Council by the States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, represent a new dimension in the
escalating conflict, with implications far beyond the
region itself. Their immediate impact on the safety of
international shipping in the Gulf bears the threat of
disrupting the global economy and bringing about direct
super-Power involvement in a conflict which has
hitherto been confuted to the region.
.f.
51. While it is necessary to continue pursuing the
manifold initiatives, both within and outside the-united
Nations, to bring about a speedy and honourable settlement of the conflict, an even more immediate imperative is to prevent its further expansion by first ensuring
the safety of neutral ships in the Gulf region. For this
purpose, we wish to emphasize, in unequivocal terms,
the absolute need for the strict observance of the following code of conduct by the belligerents: first, respect for freedom of navigation for all neutral ships in
the Gulf; secondly, immediate cessation of all attacks
on neutral ships; thirdly, respect for the inviolability of
territorial waters of States which are not party to the
hostilities.
52. We feel particular concern over attacks on the
Saudi and Kuwaiti ships not only because the attacks
are a clear violation of international law but also because they would bring about a qualitatively new situation by dragging into the conflict those States of the
Gulf which had until now maintained a declared policy
of neutrality.
53. We have closely studied the statement made at
the beginning of the current debate by Sheikh al-Sabah,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Information of Kuwait [2541sr meetitig],\ and have

noted the concerns of the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council at the expansion of the war in the
Gulf region. He has highlighted the risk of foreign
intervention and has emphasized the desire of the Gulf
Co-operation Council to pursue peace through diplomacy and dialogue while refraining from resort to force.
On behalf of the Gulf Co-operation Council States, he
has asserted their eagerness to continue exercising selfrestraint and to exert every possible effort with all the
other parties to restore peace and stability in the region.
This positive approach needs to be pursued, in the
mutual interests of all peoples in the region, with patience, determination
and a sense of commitment.

tion of Kuwait [ibid.], the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Qatar [ibid.], the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bahrain [2543rd meeting], as well as the representatives of other countries, on the item which is now on the
agenda. Of course, our attitude is one of understanding
and of sympathy for the profound concern of the States
of the Persian Gulf-as that expanse of water is customarily referred to in my country-concerning
the
tense situation prevailing in the region, which directly
affects their legitimate national interests.
59. This serious concern over the state of affairs in the
Persian Gulf region and over its future, is a note which
was clearly struck in the statements of many Member
States in the course of the recent meetings of the Council. In our view, these feelings are entirely justified and
well founded. For more than three years now an armed
conflict between Iran and Iraq, two neighbouring nonaligned countries, has continued to take a toll of thousands of human lives and tremendous material damage
on both sides and has come to be a serious destabilizing
factor in the situation in the region. Furthermore, this
conflict threatens to assume even more dangerous and
destructive proportions. Ever since this senseless and
tragic conflict broke out, the Soviet Union has in no
uncertain terms called for its early cessation and has
asserted the need for a political settlement-by
peaceful means, around the conference table-f
the controversial issues separating Iran and Iraq.

54. The draft resolution submitted by the States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, in pursuance
of their complaint concerning attacks on Saudi and
Kuwaiti ships in international
waters, calls upon the
Security Council to pronounce itself on a specific
aspect of the conflict between Iran and Iraq. The countries which have sponsored the draft resolution are not
parties to the conflict and expect a reaffirmation from
the Council of the right of free navigation and of the safe
passage of ships to and from their ports in the Gulf
region. This expectation, which is embodied in the draft
resolution in document S/16594, is legitimate and calls
for a positive response from the Council.
55. The draft resolution addresses itself to a specific
aspect of the problem; but it is our hope that its adoption will contribute towards ensuring the safety of navigation in the region and towards preventing any further
escalation of the Iran-Iraq conflict and its intemationalization.”

60. Of course, the Soviet Union is by no means indifferent to what is happening in that region, which is in
immediate proximity to its own borders. Motivated by
the desire to create in the region a situation of tranquillity and normality, the Soviet Union as far back as
1980, when the destructive conflict was just beginning
to gain momentum, put forward a proposal to all interested States to conclude agreements on mutual obligations likely to guarantee the sovereign rights and security of countries-primarily
those of the region.

56. Our quest, however, is not limited to the containment of the conflict; we desire to see it come to a speedy
end. In this spirit, we once again call on Iran and Iraq to
leave the battlefield and come to the negotiating table to
construct a peace which they and their neighbours so
badly need.

61. Such agreements, as we saw it at that time, could
have included such measures as the obligation not to
create military bases in the region or islands of the
Persian Gulf or to deploy there any nuclear or other
weapons of mass destruction.
Provision could also
have been made for an agreement prohibiting the threat
or use of force against States of the region and intervention in their internal affairs. Of great positive significance would undoubtedly have been the obligation to
respect the non-aligned status of those countries and
not to enlist them in military groupings having the participation of nuclear-weapon States.

57. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation from Russian]: Sir, you have
become President of the Council in the course of the
consideration of this item. It is, as it were, as if you had
to leap on a train while it was already in motion. Nevertheless, all the indications leave us no doubt that with
your great experience, your diplomatic abilities and the
high qualifications of your assistants, the work of the
Council under your leadership will be successful in the
month of June. The Soviet delegation wishes to assure
you that you can,count on its co-operation. When, at
the beginning of this meeting, you proposed the observance of English hours, I hope you did not intend that
henceforth the Council would be working on Greenwich mean time-that
is, with a five-hour time difference.

62. Finally, the Soviet proposal urovided for working
towards agreement to re’spect the-right of States of the
region to their natural resources and not to create any
obstacles to normal commerce or the use of sea lanes
linking the countries of the Persian gulf region with the
rest of the world. There can be no doubt that all these
measures could have served as a reliable guarantee of
peace and security in the region.

58. The Soviet delegation has listened attentively to
the statements in the Council of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Informa6

63.. As the Council will recall, the Soviet Union supported the previous decisions of the Council relating to
a settlement of the Iran-Iraq conflict. The Soviet Union
has also consistently favoured the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices and other constructive international efforts designed to move the conflict in the
direction of a political settlement. It can only be regretted that none of those efforts has so far proved
successful.

national and maritime law. It has evolved over many
years based on actual practice by States and is universally acknowledged as an international convention and
a binding treaty obligation which is laid down in the
Geneva Convention on the High Seas of 1958’ and the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
1982.* In particular, the 1982 Convention clearly provides for the obligations of States to observe freedom of
navigation on the high seas, in the economic zone and in
international
straits. This is connected with the international legal regime governing the seas and oceans.
Strict observance of that binding principle isin keeping
with the interests of all States and peoples and serves
both the objective of maintaining peace and security at
sea and international
peace as a whole.

64. Recent events have made it abundantly clear how
easy it is for the sparks from the conflagration to be
carried over to neighbouring States, thus heightening
the danger of a spread of the conflict.
65. Indeed, the serious situation that has arisen makes
it incumbent upon States to exercise -the utmost circumspection and restraint so as to prevent any further
spread of tension in the region. Nevertheless,
there
are forces at work which even now are not averse to
playing with fire and are hatching-and
even openly
advertising-plans
for armed intervention in the region.
It would appear that the lessons of the recent inglorious
end of the marine expeditionary force in Lebanon have
not been properly digested by those who would settle
complicated political problems by means of aircraftcarriers but, in so doing, fail to take into account the
interests and aspirations of the States and peoples concerned.

70. In so far as the draft resolution submitted by six
States of the Persian Gulf is concerned, the Soviet
delegation intends to vote in favour. However, in so
doing we express the hope that this decision on the
part of the Council, upon which Member States of the
Organization
have placed fundamental responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
will be a reliable shield against the expansion and increase of armed conflict and will be a step towards a
political settlement. In this regard, we should particularly like to point to operative paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution, which calls upon all States to exercise the
utmost restraint and to refrain from any act which may
lead to a further escalation and widening of the conflict.

66. What we are witnessing here is an outright attemut
to mount a massive demonstration of milit&y force to
buttress claims to the Persian Gulf as one more area of
“vital interest” of a State situated at the opposite end of
the world. Events in recent days have amply proved the
serious danger posed to the countries: of the region by
the United States attempt to exploit the existing situation in order to impose upon those countries its military
co-operation, which in essence amounts to diktat and
hegemony.

7 1. We also note with satisfaction the unambiguous
assertions on the part of members of the GulfCo-operation Council to the effect that they intend to strive to
avoid any foreign intervention in the region and reject
any patronage which is imposed upon them.
72. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the UNITED
KINGDOM.
73. My Government, in common with the other members of the European Community, is deeply concerned
at the escalation of the Iran-Iraq conflict. Despite the
efforts which have been made by the Council the situation has worsened. The terrible destruction and loss of
life continues unchecked. There is an increasing threat
to the stability of the region and to the international
economy. As the representative of the United States
said:

67. As the Soviet Union has repeatedly stated, any
’ outside armed intervention
in events occurring in the
region of the Persian Gulf is inadmissible,
no matter
what the pretext. It should be absolutely clear to
everyone that an expansion of this conflict as a result of
intervention by imperialist States can only lead to an
even more dangerous development of events.
68. This time, the scenarios for new acts of adventurism are being evolved on the pretext of ensuring the
security of international shipping. It is noteworthy that
the noisiest arguments about freedom of navigation
have been made by precisely those who only recently,
and for all the world to see, mined Nicaraguan ports and
tried to argue, even here in the Council, as well as
elsewhere, that such actions were somehow permissible under international law.

“The acceleration of attacks against shipping in the
Gulf, particularly attacks against shipping going into
or out of the ports of non-belligerent States, not only
threatens those States but indirectly poses a potential
threat to world price levels and . . . inflation.”
[2545th meeting, para. 23.1
My Government opposes all actions contributing to a
continuation of the conflict. It also opposes actions in
contravention
of international
law which have escalated the conflict and widened it to the Gulf. The matter
now before the Council is one aspect of this escalation.

69. International
law demands strict and unswerving
observance of the principle of freedom of navigation.
This is one of the most important principles of inter7

74. The United Kingdom fully supports recourse by
the Gulf Co-operation Council States to the Security
Council. Britain is bound to the Gulf States by many
ties of history and friendship. Our relations with them
are close and cordial. We have listened sympathetically
and with great concern to the statements made here by
the Ministers of Kuwait [254Zst meeting], Qatar [ibid.]
and Bahrain [2543rd meeting] and by the representatives of Saudi Arabia [25#1st meeting], the United
Arab Emirates [2543rd meeting] and Oman [ibid.].
They have described the new and dangerous situation
resulting from attacks by Iran upon innocent merchant
shipping &i route to and from Saudi Arabian and
Kuwaiti ports. The attacks which have taken place in
international waters and in the territorial sea of the
States concerned are in clear breach of international
law. They are both reprehensible and unjustified. We
applaud the restraint the Gulf States have shown in this
very difficult situation. The international community
should show support for them.

and access to foreign ports for peaceful trade. We
deplore any threats to navigation, whenever and
wherever they occur.” [2529th meeting, para. 169.1
For the United Kingdom, this is a fundamental principle. It must therefore apply equally to the Gulf.
.78. The draft resolution concentrates for understandable reasons on one particular act of escalation, but
clearly this does not mean that it condones other attacks on merchant shipping in the Gulf. We are therefore particularly pleased that the draft resolution in its
revised form contains a clear and general reaffirmation
of the right of free navigation. This right is laid down in
international law, and we look to all States of the region
to respect it. In our view neither side has the right to
attack neutral shipping indiscriminately, whatever its
destination. The breach of international law is flagrant
if the shipping attacked is in transit to the ports of
third countries and compounded if the attacks take
place in the territorial waters of the third countries.
Such attacks violate the sovereignty of the coastal
States as well as the rights of the flag State.

75. It is understandable that, in their recourse to the
Security Council, the Gulf States should seek as far as
possible to isolate themselves from the Iran-Iraq conflict and to direct their complaint towards attacks which
seek to involve them directly in that conflict. This is
reflected in the draft resolution they have put forward.
We agree that such attacks must be condemned, and we
call for an immediate end to them. They affect not only
the interests of the Gulf States but those of the whole
international community as well. We all have an interest in freedom of navigation and a vital concern in the
free flow of shipping to and from these States, including
the flow of oil. It is right that the Gulf should be insulated from the conflict. It is also right that the principle
of freedom of navigation should be reasserted. As the
Deputy Prime Minister of Kuwait put it, there should be
“a guarantee of the freedom of navigation in the Gulf
region, in the interest of all countries of the region and
the entire world” [254Zst meeting, paru. 24.

79. The United Kingdom calls for an end to all attacks
on the shipping of third States. There must be a return
to stable conditions in the Gulf region. Equally, the
United Kingdom keenly wishes to see an end to the
conflict between Iran and Iraq, which has brought so
much tragic loss of life to both nations and so much
waste of their resources. It is the continuation of this
conflict that has led to the current instability. Both sides
must be prepared not only to refrain from escalating the
conflict but also to bring it to a close. Any intransigence
over a peaceful settlement must be put aside in the
interests of the people of Iran and Iraq, of the Gulf
region and of the international community in general.
The United Kingdom is ready to give its full support to
any efforts to mediate between the parties for a peaceful
settlement, including those of the Secretary-General.

76. The Council has already taken a position in its
resolution 540 (1983). That resolution, as several speakers-including the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain-have recalled, affirms the right to free navigation
and commerce and calls upon the belligerents to cease
all hostilities in the region of the Gulf. That affirmation
remains valid. We do not interpret the present draft
resolution as intending in any way to affect that.

80. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT of the
Council.
81. I call on the representative of Egypt, who wishes
to make a statement on a point of procedure.
82. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt): I have asked to speak on a
point of procedure, so I should like, if I may, to reserve
my right to congratulate you, Sir, and the retiring President, Ambassador Troyanovsky, at a later stage.

77. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain told
the Council that the question submitted by the six
States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council can
be summed up in the fact that there is a threat to
international freedom of navigation in the waterways of
the Gulf. As a maritime nation of long standing the
United Kingdom considers the principle of freedom of
navigation as of paramount importance. As we said in a
recent debate here on another matter:

[The speaker contin&ed

in Arabic.]

83. Rule 38 of the Council’s provisional rules ofprocedure states that “proposals and draft resolutions may
be put to a vote only at the request of a representative
on the Security Council”. The delegation of Egypt
would therefore like formally to request that the
draft resolution submitted by Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates be
put to a vote.

“we are committed to freedom of navigation, including innocent passage through the territorial sea
8

84. Of Course, it is up to you, Mr. President, to
schedule the vote at whatever time you deem appropriate; but we would express the hope that the voting
take place as soon as possible, especially since the draft
resolution before us is the result of a lengthy and strenuous process of negotiation during which the sponsors
responded to the greatest extent possible to a number of
important suggestions.

that we have witnessed the growing threats to commercial shipping in the region. The attacks against ships of
countries of the Gulf littoral, namely Kuwait and Saudi
Arabia, are undoubtedly to be deplored. Equally to be
deplored are all attacks against commercial shipping of
third countries in those waters. Ships of many countries, including my own, have been exposed to the
growing danger and have been the objects of such attacks. Freedom of navigation and security of shipping
in the Gulf should be safeguarded at all costs.
92. Even though the provisions of the draft’resolution
are not explicit enough to meet all our concerns, we are
supporting them in the conviction that, in totality, they
do amount to an unequivocal and categorical affirmation of the principle of freedom of navigation and commercial shipping and free and safe access and transit of
ships of all countries, including of course those of the
littoral. The language of operative paragraphs 4 and 5 of
the draft resolution cannot and should not be interpreted as condoning or permitting other attacks against
commercial shipping in the whole of the region. It is
essential that the necessary restraint be observed and
that the right of free navigation as provided by international law be scrupulously respected by the parties to
the conflict. That is the intent and purpose of operative
paragraph 1.

85. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with rule 38 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, the representative of Egypt has requested that the draft resolution in document S/16594 be put to the vote. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
86. I shall now call upon those members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
87. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Naturally, I should like
to begin by offering you, Sir, the warmest congratulations of my delegation on this, the first day of your
presidency of the Council. The United Kingdom and
India have traditional and historic ties of friendship,
and we are fellow members of the Commonwealth
fraternity. We have no-doubt that your eminent personal
qualities and intellectual acumen, as well as your wellknown diplomatic skills and abilities, which, I might
add, we had the pleasure of experiencing for several
years at first hand while you were your country’s High
Commissioner
to India, will stand us in good stead
during the current month.

93. The issue the Council has been asked to address
is,, of course, the attacks on commercial shipping. At
the same time, however, we cannot but note that what
is happening now is related to the ongoing conflict
between Iran and Iraq. It is but one more development
in the series of actions and reactions in this long and
unfortunate war. It is a war that should never have
begun, has gone on far too long and should not continue any further. The longer it lasts, the greater the
temptation to resort to unacceptable methods of warfare and impermissible actions, bringing about not only
the danger of further escalation of the fighting and the
widening of the conflict but also the grave potential of
external involvement,
which could only be to the detriment of the countries of the region, including the
parties to the conflict.

88. May I also take this opportunity to congratulate
and pay a tribute to Ambassador Troyanovsky for the
admirable and, let me add, always amiable and serene
manner in which he handled the presidency of the
Council during the very difficult month that has just
ended.
89. Since the question of attacks on shipping in the
waters of the Gulf was brought to the Council by the
delegations of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, my delegation
has followed the course of the discussions within and
outside the Council with close attention. We share the
widespread concern of the international
community
over this latest escalation of tension in the region.

94. Iran and Iraq are India’s close and reliable friends
of long standing and are our fellow members in the
Non-Aligned
Movement.
The conflict between them
has caused us profound anguish. It is not only destructive of them both; it also weakens the unity and
solidarity of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries
-unity
and solidarity
that are essential if the
Movement is to play an effective role in our common
struggle for peace and development. As current Chairman of the Movement, India has been striving to bring
that war to an end. I should like to recall the words of
the Prime Minister of India and current Chairperson of
the Movement,
Mrs. Indira Gandhi, who said in her
statement at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983:

90. In the face of the seriousness of the situation,
Council action should be directed primarily to defusing
tensions and preventing a further deterioration of the
situation through a widening of the conflict between
Iran and Iraq and the possible intervention of outside
Powers, with all the implications for international peace
and security. My delegation’s approach to the draft
resolution in document S/16594 will be determined by
these considerations.
91. We uphold the principle of freedom of navigation
as sacrosanct all over the world, including the region of
the Gulf. It is therefore with deep regret and concern

“Iran and Iraq are both members of the NonAligned Movement, which has amongst its principles
9

that all differences amongst member States should be
resolved by peaceful means.

98. As on previous occasions, my delegation inter-.
venes with great regret to express once more deep
concern at the extremely grave situation in the Gulf
region still confronting the Council. Almost daily for
the past four years, the Maltese Government has repeatedly stressed the inherent dangers and unfortunate repercussions of the conflict between Iran and
Iraq. Regrettably, hostilities continue unabated, with
appalling waste of human and material resources on
both sides, which in turn engender waves of sympathy
not only from the relatives of the victims but also from
ordinary people throughout the world.

“We are convinced that an end to the Iran-Iraq
conflict would contribute to strengthening the unity
and solidarity of the Movement.”
“It is the universal desire that’the fighting must
stop at once and the two sides come to an honourable, just and enduring peace through negotiations and, peaceful means.” [See S/15675 and Cot-r.2
and 2, Fnnex, p. 56.1
95. It is a matter of deep regret to all of us that the
conflict continues to rage on and has indeed escalated in
recent weeks. The draft resolution before the Council
deals with one aspect of this escalation. As we all know,
this draft resolution has been the subject of intensive
negotiation over the last few days. Several non-aligned
members of the Council made certain suggestions regarding the original draft which were, by and large,
welcomed. Some of these suggestions have been incorporated in the revised draft that is before us. Some
others have not been found acceptable by the sponsors.
We of course understand the concerns of those who
made the suggestions as well as the concerns of those
who did not find it possible to accept some of them. On
the whole, we would have liked to see the draft resolution acquire greater balance and deal also with other
aspects, with a view to making it more constructive and
generally acceptable and more likely to lead to security
of international
shipping and freedom of navigation in
the Gulf as well as an end to the conflict, which we all so
ardently desire. Nevertheless, even as it stands, the
draft resolution would, we hope, assist in de-escalating
the situation and keeping the Gulf free and safe for
commercial shipping. For those reasons my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

99. Instead of a cessation or at least an abatement of
hostilities, a new and dangerous element has now been
introduced through the latest phase of air attacks on
neutral civilian shipping. This has tended to aggravate
tensions not only in the Gulf region itself but also
beyond. The fact that commercial
ships of non-belligerent third parties have been the target of attacks
is the latest grim reminder of the dangerous situation
prevailing in the Gulf region and calls for our immediate
attention to the complaint lodged by the countries
concerned.
100. On this occasion, Malta cannot remain quietly
concerned, since the latest actions infringe important
principles of international
law, in particular the fundamental principle of freedom of commercial navigation, with inevitable economic repercussions that will
affect the whole world.
101. The Government
of Malta particularly
understands the anxiety of the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council not to get involved in the hostilities
of their neighbours, and we respect that position. We
have listened very carefully to their statements and
their declared intentions before the Council. We welcome the presence among us of the Ministers of
Kuwait, Bahrain and Qatar. The issue they have raised
can be kept separate from the main collective effort
required from all peace-loving countries to persuade
the two belligerents to accept an early cessation of
hostilities under the auspices of the Security Council
with simultaneous mediation to secure a just and honourable peace.

96. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President, you know the
feelings of friendship and the high esteem I have for you
and for your country, so I shall only say that the generous words you were good enough to address to me
last November are even more accurately applicable to
you than they were to me. Those words were in fact
justified by the wisdom of your opening statement this
morning concerning the work of the Council as a whole
and your predecessor’s role in the exercise of the functions of the presidency of the Council last month. It was
a particularly difficult one and Ambassador Troyanovsky rose superbly to the occasion. I know that he would
have wished to do even more and to tackle other subjects, but that was clearly not possible. I should like to
thank him for having performed his task so well last
month.

102. This week of intensive negotiations
has now
produced a text calling for action by the Council today.
In view of the limited objective which the proponents of
the draft resolution set themselves, we can readily understand that some other important elements necessary
for an overall balance in the draft resolution had to be
omitted.

97. If there is one small issue, Sir, on which I would
disagree with you, it is the question of hours. If we
were to keep Maltese hours, I assure you we would do
even better and serve as a practical example of AngloMaltese co-operation and Council efficiency-based,
however, on New York time. It might even include the
bonus of a short afternoon siesta for good behaviour.

103. In this connection, we feel obliged to make it
clear that the restrictive formulations
appearing in
operative paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the draft resolution
can in no way be interpreted to derogate in any way
from the universally accepted norms of international
behaviour or the general principles of international law.
We do so especially at this time when some tendency
10

exists to attempt to qualify the application of international law in particular situations which have already
been discussed in the Council.

and economic consequences in terms of the burden it
may impose on a number of countries that are already
buckling under the weight of the world economic crisis.

104. We wish to stress, therefore, that our interpretation of the paragraphs in question is that they apply
equally to all commercial shipping in all regions of the
world, irrespective of origin or final destination of the
commercial shipping and the area of navigation, in
accordance with international law.

112. The vote that the Upper Volta will shortly cast
should be understood solely as part of its determination
to condemn energetically any act, whatever its source,
that is not in accordance with the obligation of all Member States to abide by the principles of the Organization. That vote cannot and should not be interpreted as
in any way indicating that we take a stand infhe conflict
that is destroying two members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, because the position it reflects
is well known, having been set forth clearly on various
occasions.

105. We also stress that the obligation of all States to
exercise maximum restraint and to refrain from any act
that might further escalate or widen the conflict is paramount.
106. We remain fully committed to the efforts of all
parties in the search for an overall peaceful solution,
with the primary responsibility falling on the States of
the region. To them, and to the parties concerned, we
repeat our pledge of maximum effort and co-operation
within our modest means. We hope the time will soon
come-the sooner the better-for the cessation of hostilities and an honourable settlement.

113. The draft resolution contained in document
S/16594 would certainly have been more balanced had
certain proposals on the part of the non-aligned countries been taken into account. As a well-known author
quite rightly said, perfect reason eschews extremism and requires sobriety with wisdom. Every great
thought can be a benefit to each of us, not only to those
who are crossing swords, but also, without doubt, even
more so to those who are helping them to persist in
these extreme measures.

107. In the light of this explanation, Malta will vote in
favour of the draft resolution now before us.

114. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put the draft
resolution contained in document’S/16594 to the vote.

108. Mr. BASSOLE (Upper Volta) [inferpretation
from French]: As you take up the presidency of the
Council, Sir, I am happy to convey to you on behalf of
the delegation of the Upper Volta, our best wishes for
successin your work. We are sure that your profound
knowledge of major world problems and your distinguished qualities as a-diplomat will help you in this.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Upper Volta.

109. I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Comrade Oleg Troyanovsky, for the effectiveness
and competence with which he guided the Council’s
proceedings last month.

Against:
Absraining:

None.
Nicaragua, Zimbabwe.

110. The lengthy debates which the Council has been
holding on the letter ofcomplaint addressed to its President by the representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
have made abundantly clear not only the gravity but
also the complexity of the situation prevailing in the
Gulf.

115. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call upon those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
following the voting.

111. It might appear utopian to attempt to examine
this situation in isolation from the more general context of a war of mutual destruction between two members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Nevertheless, that is the course chosen by my country,
since the new dimensions which the conflict between
Iran and Iraq is now assuming cause us profound concern, for more than one reason. Not only is this war
wreaking economic and human havoc on both peoples
but its consequences are threatening to spread beyond
its boundaries: political consequences in terms of outside interference, which we glimpse on the horizon,

116. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE (Zimbabwe): Allow me
first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of June. Your well-known diplomatic skills and many 1
other excellent qualities of leadership give us justifiable confidence that the Council will be in safe hands
during the period of your presidency. I should also like
on behalf of my delegation to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Comrade Oleg Troyanovsky, the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for
the most efficient manner in which he guided the deliberations of the Council last month. :

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions [resolution 552 (1984)].

11

122. We sincerely hope that this resolution will contribute to a solution to the tragic predicament facing the
peoples of the region. However, since we continue to
be convinced that the main issue, the main problem in
the region is the Iran-Iraq conflict, we also sincerely
hope that in an honest effort to address the immediate
issue, the immediate problem, the Council has not rendered the search for a peaceful solution to the real and
wider issue much more difficult. That is our very sincere hope. We do respect the decision of those that
voted in favour of the resolution.

117. We have asked to speak to offer a brief explanation of our vote. The entire world community is deeply
disturbed by the escalating situation in the Gulf region
today. It is understandable, therefore, that the six countries members of the Gulf Co-operation Council should
be so alarmed as to appeal to the Security Council for
help. Indeed, our delegation had hoped that the Council
would be able to seize the opportunity not only to
address the very justified complaint of the six States
members of the Gulf Co-operation Council but also to
look at the complaint within its wider, and I dare say,
proper perspective, that is, to see and analyse current
events in the Gulf region as representing yet another
very ugly dimension of the ongoing war between Iran
and Iraq that threatens to entangle the entire Gulf region, something most of us have always feared.

123. Mr. MI Guojun (China) [interpretation from
Chinese]: Consistent with the principle that the right to
freedom of navigation on the high seasand international
sea lanes should be guaranteed, and that ships of nonbelligerent parties must not come under attack, the
Chinese delegation voted in favour of the resolution
just adopted by the Council.

118. The fears of the international community are
justified, since the entanglement of other Gulf region
countries not only represents a first step towards a
,dangerous widening of the Iran-Iraq conflict but also
threatens to destabilize the whole region. Since the Gulf
region is so vital to the stability of the economic wellbeing of most of the world, we are concerned that,
unless this ongoing war between Iran and Iraq is
brought to an end, its rapid spread in the Gulf region
may soon threaten world stability and peace.

124. China takes a strictly neutral position with regard
to the war between Iran and Iraq. We sincerely hope
that a cease-fire can be effected as soon as possible
between the two sides and that their disputes will be
settled through peaceful negotiations. Any action the
Council takes must be conducive to bringing about the
participation of the two sides in a process of peaceful
negotiations.

119. In our opinion, the Council should have appealed
to both Iran and Iraq to end this senselesswar, which
has already cost, and continues to cost, both countries,
which are Members of the Organization, so dearly and
so heavily ‘in human blood and in financial and economic terms. Equally the Council should have called
upon both parties to the conflict strictly to respect the
right of free navigation and commerce in international
waters and the sea lanes in the Gulf region, including
sea lanes for shipping en route to and from States not
parties to the conflict--and the emphasis should be on
“equally”.

125. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) [interfrom Spanish]: First of all, Sir, I wish to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. You come from a country
which has a long and rich diplomatic experience, and in
order to do you justice, I must add that your qualities
honour that tradition. We are fully confident that in
your hands the work of the Council will be successful.

pretation

126. I also wish equally to congratulate Ambassador
Troyanovsky of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who, with no less distinguished qualities and dip
lomatic skills and experience, guided our work last
month. His equanimity and skills place the name of his
great nation at a very high level indeed.

’ 120. Therefore, we had hoped that the resolution just
adopted would have been an opportunity for the Council to speak with one voice to both countries. Unfortunately, however, this was not so. As is now well
known, our delegation is one of those that decided to
abstain from giving the resolution our support. We took
this view because we felt that the resolution failed to
take an even-handed approach to the wider issue before
the Council: the war between Iran and Iraq.
I
‘121. It *will be recalled-indeed, many delegations
here have already said so-that our delegation, and
many others, endeavoured right up to the very last
moment to steer the Council away from the temptation
to adopt a decision likely to create more difficulties and
impediments in the world community’s long-term and
overriding objective: the search for ajust and peaceful
end to the tragic war between Iran and Iraq. These
endeavours, however, were unsuccessful, and so the
Council has adopted this resolution.

127. A number of brother countries have come to the
Council to express their deep concern over the events
taking place in the Gulf region and to request of this
highest organ appropriate measures to reserve such a
dangerous situation and guarantee safety and the full
exercise of the right of free navigation and commerce in
the waters of that region. The international community,
and Nicaragua in particular, share these wishes and
concerns. For that very reason, we must rid that region
of the spectre of foreign intervention, abiding by the
principles and international norms contained in the
Charter and avoiding any pretext which might be an
invitation to intervention.
128. Nicaragua, together with the brother countries
that have expressed their consternation, shares these
fears and also shares the faith they have in the princi12

ples of the Charter and in the Security Council as the
highest organ entrusted with ensuring international
peace and security. In that spirit, in the past few days,
we worked hard with an important group of countries
members of the Council-basically non-aligned countries-with a view to finding the most appropriate way
in which to have the necessary calm and quiet restored
to the Gulf region. We also kept in close touch with the
co-sponsors of the draft resolution, and we must recognize that they did take into account several of our
.
concerns.

by the United States Central Intelligence Agency. Several cargo ships of various nationalities-among them
some of the same nationalities as those that have been
damaged in the Gulf-were also damaged in our waters.
We are therefore aware of the value and the importance
of the principle,of free navigation and commerce; we
are therefore aware of the value and importance of free
transit and safety in the seas;thus, our concern for the
Council at this time fully to reiterate the validity of
this principle for all countries and in all situations. We
deeply regret that this kind of reafftrmation we had
wished was not duly formulated in the resolution that
was just adopted.
,
135. My delegation wishes clearly to establish that the
Government of Nicaragua reiterates its total commitment to the full applicability of the principle of free
navigation and commerce. That we refrained today
from supporting the resolution as a whole and abstained
in the voting should not be interpreted otherwise.
Something similar applies to the formulation of the
principle of respect for the territorial integrity of all
States.

129. It escapesno one that the problem facing us is of
a delicate and complex nature. It has arisen as the result
of a war between two brother countries that has gone on
for almost four years and that is being exacerbated with
grave consequences for their economies and their
peoples. Our position on this tragic war is well known;
it fully coincides with the principles that inspire the
efforts undertaken by the Non-Aligned Movement to
put an end to this conflict through a peaceful, just and
honourable settlement for both countries.
130. The international community and all non-aligned
countries are clamouring for an end to this painful and
senselesswar. The continuation of the war does not
benefit the brother peoples of Iran and Iraq or the
countries of the Gulf. That is why it is imperative for us
to work for peace. That war not only destroys both
peoples but also divides the Arab nation, favouring the
interests of its true enemies and impeding the full realization of its fundamental objectives.

136. It was with extreme concern and indignation that
we heard a few days ago public statements that did not
discount the possibility of foreign intervention in the
Gulf region. The well-grounded fear expressed by several speakers in the course of the debate can only be
brought to an end through a clear reiteration of the
universal principle of respect for the territorial integrity
of all States and, in particular, of all States in the Gulf
region. In our view, the formulation of the principle
contained in the resolution just adopted leaves the door
open for foreign Powers to intervene directly in the
countries party to the conflict. My country can under
no circumstances accept such action, which is precisely
what is being attempted in Central America, specifically against Nicaragua.

131. The Council has already dealt with this situation
on several occasions, but without success. It has not
always been possible for this organ to maintain a position according to which, instead of deepening wounds
and exacerbating the conflict, it would seek to heal the
wounds on both sides and to narrow the gap between
points of disagreement with a view to arriving at the
final settlement everyone wishes.

137. We consider the appeal for respect for the territorial integrity of non-belligerent States to be of great
importance, but we firmly believe that the applicability
of that principle must extend to other countries even
when they are at war, as is the case with Iran and Iraq.
Under no circumstances should we give any foreign
Power the pretext for a possible future intervention in
Iran or Iraq. We do not think the present formulation of
that principle promotes a’ peaceful settlement of the
fratricidal war; what is worse, it gives rise to great fear
on our part as to the future of that conflict.

132. This time we have been faced with the task of
finding a formula to de-escalate the conflict to a minimum-a formula which, in addition to enhancing the
principles of international law, in particular those of
free navigation and commerce and respect for the territorial integrity of States, would restore normalcy to
the Gulf region and peace to the countries that have
come to the Council in search of a solution.
133. We fully appreciate the concerns of some of the
co-sponsors of the .draft resolution over the present
escalation of hostilities in their own waters, and we
appeal to the belligerent parties to respond to those
concerns and also without restriction to respect free
navigation and commerce in the Gulf waters, indeed in
the waters of all the littoral States.

138. Nicaragua earnestly wished to be able to vote in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by a group of
countries with which we share the ideals and concerns
of the Arab world, of which they are a part. We would
have wished the text to contribute constructively to
solving the serious problem of the Iran-Iraq war. However, for the reasons expressed here, and out of a desire
to maintain a position consistent with positions that we
have adopted in connection with General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions on the Iran-Iraq war, we
had to abstain in the vote, very much to our regret.

134. A few weeks ago my country, Nicaragua, also
brought before this lofty body the situation that had
arisen in our main ports as a result of their being mined
13

139. We believe that in so doing we have been consistent with the principles of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and with the positions that our
Movement
has supported; indeed, we feel we have
been consistent with our policy of neutrality and of
full co-operation in the search for real solutions to the
senseless war between Iran and Iraq.

you on behalf of all the States members of the Gulf
Co-operation Council on your assumption of this high
office. We trust that your competence will make it
.possible for you to conduct the affairs of the Council
in such a way as to lead to a successful conclusion in
the interest of international
peace and security.
147. I also take this occasion to express our appreciation and gratitude to your predecessor, our friend
Mr. Troyanovsky, the Permanent Representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for his sincere
efforts and the great wisdom with which he guided the
deliberations of the Council during the past month.
Indeed, his patient and prudent efforts have played a
great role in our accomplishments.

140.

Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) [interpretation
from
Arabic]: At the outset of this brief statement, in commenting on ,Egypt’s vote in favour of the resolution,
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your reassumption of the presidency of the Council. I need not
reaflirm our full confidence in your great diplomatic
skill or our certainty that the aforementioned
skill will
contribute to success in the Council’s deliberations this
month, which coincides with the beginning of the holy
month of Ramadan. Thus, all, of us, and especially
Muslims, hope that the Council will witness a period of
calm, even for a while.

148. In my statement during the opening of discussions of the issue under consideration, I said that:
“We come here not out of weakness or fear, but
rather out of faith in the need to settle international
disputes in accordance with the principles embodied
in the Charter-by
methods that will obviate the
resort to force, with all its devastating effects on
national construction, which we developing nations
need so badly in order to fulfil the aspirations of our
peoples for a better future. Our appearance here is in
itself an assertion of our desire to keep conflicts away
from our region and to provide ways and means of
preventing the devastating war that will surely strike
the region if it is not seriously and responsibly prevented by the world at large.” {254Zst meeting,
para. 26.1

141. While we congratulate you, Sir, I am confident
that you share my sentiments when I express our appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Troyanovsky, who conducted the work of the Council with his
habitual competence, thus facilitating our work during
a period of intense effort, the burden of which fell
largely upon him until the last moments of May.
142. The resolution just adopted by the Council was
the result of strenuous efforts and intense, continuous
contact between the members of the Council and the
co-sponsors of the draft and others who, in a responsive
and co-operative spirit, proved their sincere desire to
work for the restoration of stability, security and peace
in the Gulf region. Those States responded positively to’
the great majority of the proposals submitted to them.

149. Today, by adopting the draft resolution we submitted, the Council has again reaffirmed the role assigned to it in the Charter, and by their co-operation its
members have once again proved their loyalty and devotion to the principles all mankind has accepted as its
constitution.
The States that adopted the resolution
have sent the message to the world that the language of
peace must prevail and that world stability and prosperity, can be achieved only by determined collective
effort.

143. Egypt voted in favour of the resolution, proceeding from its fervent hope that its adoption would
contribute positively to putting an end to the escalation
of the conflict and restoring confidence in the possibility of progress towards a negotiated comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Iran-Iraq conflict. In that connection,
we envisaged continuous
efforts, both within and without the United Nations,
to create conditions conducive to a favourable response to the appeals of the international
community
and acceptance of a cease-fire in an impartial context.

150. The State of Kuwait once again affirms that,
together with its sister States in the Gulf Co-operation
Council, all peace-loving
nations and regional and
international organizations, it will do its utmost to bring
a quick and just end to this war and restore peace to
this vital region of the world.

144. This is the practical approach to solving the
problem. The basis for seeking an alternative to war
exists, and we must attempt to give it substance.

151. Having adopted this resolution, the Council is
now called upon to do everything possible to ensure
its implementation.
Thus, we thank the SecretaryGeneral, express appreciation of his efforts in this
respect and anticipate that he will follow up the implementation of this resolution. We reaffirm our constructive co-operation with him in his efforts to carry
out his mission in accordance with the provisions of the
resolution.

145. The PRESIDENT:
The Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information
of
Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
has asked to speak. I call upon him.
146.

Mr. Al-SABAH
(Kuwait) [interpretation
from
Allow me, Sir, on the first day of your presidency of the Council for this month, to congratulate

Arabic]:

152. On behalf of all the States members of the Gulf
Co-operation Council, I wish to thank our friends the
14

members of the Security Council for their sincere efforts and for the wisdom and concern they have demonstrated during the consideration of this complaint. Let
us work together now in all sincerity to translate this
resolution into the reality representing the will of the
Security Council, which is the organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security.

which includes high-altitude, indiscriminate carpet
bombing that is inflicting enormous casualties upon the
innocent and defenceless Afghan civilian population.
Apparently the Soviet representative is not aware of ,
these events, or perhaps he prefers to ignore them. May
I suggestthat he address his counselling about the tragic
effects of violence and military force to his own authorities?

153. I must not fail to thank also the States that participated with us in the general discussion of this vital
issue. The participation of those nations has demonstrated world concern regarding the need for peace and
stability in our region, with its impact on international
peace and security.

158. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who, wishes to
exercise his right of reply.
I
159. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): I must say that I sympathize with the
representative of the United States in his predicament.
The points which we made in our statement are hard to
deny. It is hard to deny that there has been the mining of
Nicaraguan ports. It is hard to deny that such action is a
violation of international law and freedom of navigation. It is hard to deny that the region of the Gulf
has been proclaimed a region of United States vital
interests. It is hard to deny that there are plans afoot
for a possible intervention in that region.

154. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on the representative of the United States of America who has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
155. I&. SORZANO (United Statesof America): I am
sure, Sir, that we shall have plenty of opportunities to
congratulate you on the assumption of the presidency
of the Council and also to compliment Ambassador
Troyanovsky on the excellent manner in which he fulfilled his ‘responsibilities last month.

160. Not being able to deal with these issues, the
representative of the United States has indulged in
rhetoric on extraneous issues, and I believe it would
have been better if he could have made some commitment about the United States not intervening and
not getting involved in the region with which we are
dealing.
,-.
I.
161. The PRESIDENT: The Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

156. We regret that the Soviet Union has apparently
returned to the attitudes of the cold war to such an
extent that it does not merely walk out of disarmament
talks but now foists its tired rhetoric upon the Security Council, irrespective of the serious issuesbefore it.
We had hoped it would be otherwise, in the mistaken
expectation that our own restraint would encourage the
Soviet delegation not to distract the Council from the
issues before it.
157. Now, however, the Soviet representative has
alluded to the deaths of our valiant Marines who were in
Lebanon on a mission of peace to help that beleaguered
nation which has suffered for so long emerge from years
of violent strife. The Soviet representative alleges that
the United States has not learned the lesson that violence and military force do not solve problems. If1 may
say so, this is an astonishing claim coming from the
representative of a country that is invading a small,
neighbouring, previously non-aligned State and at this
very moment is conducting a vicious military campaign

The meeting

rose at 1.10 p.m.

NOTES

’ See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 450, No. 6465.
z Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law ofthe Sea, vol. XVII, document AKONF.62022.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UMTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libtairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
K.4K

COMO

IlO.-ISWITh

CONSEGUIR

IKt&AIfHH

OPI-AHZiX4I~SfZi

PUBLICAClONES

OI‘,?,E:~HHEHHI.I.S

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIWR

UNIDAS

Las pubhcaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidotas
en
tcdas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

90-61313-February

l993-2.050
