VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Condemns the policy of "bantustanization" and reiterates its support for the oppressed people of South Africa
in their just and legitimate struggle against the racist minority regime of Pretoria;
7. Further condemns South Africa for its increased
oppression of the Namibian people, for the massive militarization of Namibia and for its armed attacks on the frontline States with the aim of destabilizing their Governments;
8. Also condemns strongly the recent invasion and occupation of part of the territory of Angola by troops of the
racist Pretoria regime;
9. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign States
constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries themselves are criminals, and calls upon the Governments of all
countries to enact legislation declaring the recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their territories, and
the transit of mercenaries through their territories, to be
punishable offences, and prohibiting their nationals from
serving as mercenaries, and to report on such legislation to
the Secretary-General;
10. Strongly condemns the continued violations 9f the
human rights of the peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of the
illegal occupation of Namibia, and South Africa's attempts
to dismember its territory, the perpetuation of the racist
minority regime in southern Africa and the denial to the
Palestinian people of their inalienable national rights;
11. Also condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries
whose political, economic, military, nuclear, strategic, cultural and sporting relations with the racist minority regime
in South Africa encourage that regime to persist in its supression of the aspirations of peoples for self-determination and
independence;
12. Again demands the immediate application of the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, imposed
under Security Council resolution 418 (1977), by all countries, particularly by those countries that maintain military
and nuclear co-operation with the racist Pretoria regime and
continue to supply related materiel to that regime;
13. Takes note with satisfaction of the Paris Declaration
on Sanctions against South Africa, the Special Declaration
on Namibia and the reports of the technical and political
committees adopted by the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris from 20 to 27
May 1981; 7
14. Demands the immediate implementation of General
Assembly resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 , on
Namibia;
15. Further calls for a maximization of all forms of
assistance given by all States, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to the
victims of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid
through their national liberation movements recognized by
the Organization of African Unity;
16. Strongly condemns all Governments which do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence
of all peoples still under colonial and foreign domination
and alien subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa and the
Palestinian people;
17. Strongly condemns the ever-increasing massacres
of innocent and defenceless people, including women and
children, by the racist minority Pretoria regime in its desperate attempt to thwart the legitimate demands of the
people;
7

A/CONF.107/8, sect. X and annexes X and XI

161

18. Strongly condemns the expansionist act1v1t1es of
Israel in the Middle East and the continuous bombing of
Palestinian civilians, which constitute a serious obstacle to
the realization of the self-determination and independence
of the Palestinian people;
19. Strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon and the continuous bombardment and destruction
of its cities and villages, and all acts that constitute a violation of its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, and the security of its people, and hinder the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978)
of 19 March 1978;
20. Urges all States, competent organizations of the
United Nations system, specialized agencies and other international organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian people through its representative, the Palestine
Liberation Organization, in its struggle to restore its right
to self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
21 . Demands the immediate and unconditional release
of all persons detained or imprisoned as a result of their
struggle for self-determination and independence, full respect for their fundamental individual rights and the observance of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 8 under which no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
22. Demands the immediate release of children detained
in Namibian and South African prisons;
23. Reiterates its appreciation of the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and foreign
rule continue to receive from Governments, United Nations
agencies and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for
a maximization of this assistance;
24. Urges all States, specialized agencies and competent organizations of the United Nations system to do their
utmost to ensure the full implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples
under colonial, foreign and racist domination in their just
struggle for self-determination and independence;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the widest possible
publicity to the struggle being waged by oppressed peoples
for the realization of their self-determination and national
independence;
26. Decides to consider this item again at its thirtyseventh session on the basis of the reports that Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations have been requested to submit
concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial territories and peoples.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/10.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights, of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
International Covenants on Human Rights,'1 as well as in
'Resolution 217 A (Ill)
Resolution 2200 A ( XXI). annex

0

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

162

the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to selfdetermination by peoples under colonial, foreign or alien
occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood
and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats
of foreign military intervention and occupation, which are
endangering, or have already resulted in the suppression of,
the right to self-determination of an increasing number of
sovereign peoples and nations,
Further expressing grave concern that, as a consequence
of the persistence of such actions, millions of people have
been and are being uprooted from their homes as refugees
and displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent necessity
of concerted international action to alleviate their conditions,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation
of the right of peoples to self-determination and of other
human rights as a result of military intervention and foreign
aggression and occupation, adopted by the Commission on
Human Rights at its thirty-sixth 10 and thirty-seventh
sessions, 11
Reiterating its resolution 35/35 B of 14 November 1980,
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General of
1 October 1981, 12
1. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right
of all peoples, including those under colonial, foreign and
alien domination, to self-determination is a fundamental
condition for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights and for the preservation and promotion of such
rights;
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military
intervention, aggression or occupation, since these have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of other human rights in certain parts of
the world;
3. Calls upon those States responsible to cease immediately their military intervention and occupation of foreign
countries and territories, and to cease all acts of repression,
discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, particularly
the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed for
the execution of these acts against the peoples concerned;
4. Deplores the plight of the hundreds of thousands of
refugees and displaced persons who have been uprooted by
the aforementioned acts and reaffirms their right to return
to their homes voluntarily in safety and honour;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give special attention to the violation of human
rights, especially the right to self-determination, resulting
from foreign military intervention, aggression or occupation:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this issue
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, under
the item entitled "Importance of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human
rights".
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /980.
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980113 and Corr. I), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
11
Ibid., /981. Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr. I), chap. XXVIII,
sect. A.
12

A/C.3/3614.

36/11.

Status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November
1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3225 (XXIX)
of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
31/79 of 13 December 1976, 32/11 of 7 November 1977,
33/101 of 16 December 1978, 34/26 of 15 November 1979
and 35/38 of 25 November 1980,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 13
on the status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 14
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States that have ratified the Convention or
acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification
of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and
implementation of its provisions are necessary for the
realization of the objectives of the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Requests States that have not yet become parties to
the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to consider the possibility of making the declaration provided for
in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to submit
to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance with Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/12.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/40 of 25 November 1980 on
the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination and 36/11 of 28 October 198 I on the status
of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 14 as well as its other relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme
for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, 15
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its twenty-third and
twenty-fourth sessions, 16 submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Emphasizing that it is important for the successful struggle
against all practices of racial discrimination, including the
vestiges and manifestations of racist ideologies wherever
they exist, that all Member States should be guided in their
internal and foreign policies by the basic provisions of the
Convention,
Mindful of the obligation of the States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Welcoming the continued co-operation of the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination with the competent specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies,
especially with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
" A/36/453.
14
Resolution 2106 A IXX). annex.
" Resolution 3057 (XXVIII). annex.
'" Official Records of rhe General Assemhlv. Thirty-.,·ixrh S,·ssion. Supplement No. /8 (A/36/18).
