S/2014/438

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 June 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 28 February to 26 June 2014

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my most recent
report of 26 February 2014 (S/2014/130).
2.
The area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) remained generally calm and stable. The cessation of hostilities was
interrupted on 14 March, when the Israel Defense Forces conducted heavy artillery
shelling into Lebanon and directed tank fire at two houses in Kafr Killa in response
to a roadside explosion that hit its patrol in the area of Shab`a Farms south of the
Blue Line. Three Israel Defense Forces soldiers sustained light injuries from the
explosion and, in Lebanon, two houses were significantly damaged from tank fire.
UNIFIL immediately liaised with both sides to contain the incident and quickly
restore the calm. Overall, the parties displayed resolve to maintain calm along the
Blue Line and affirmed their commitment to the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), despite the lack of progress on their outstanding obligations under the
resolution and the absence of movement towards a permanent ceasefire.
3.
The security situation in Lebanon saw notable improvement following the
adoption by the new government of security plans for Tripoli and the Bekaa. Since
early April, the Lebanese Armed Forces, in close coordination with other Lebanese
security agencies, began implementing the plans in Tripoli, where 32 people had
been killed in the latest round of violence, and in the eastern Bekaa region. Though
the Lebanese Armed Forces sustained casualties, it continued to deploy robustly.
That has led to the successful interdiction of people and materiel associated with
terrorist activities and to curbing violence in Lebanon. Three terrorist attacks did,
however, occur: on 16 March, a suicide car bomb in Nabi Othman killed four
people; on 29 March, a similar attack in Arsal killed three people; and on 20 June,
another such attack in Dahr el-Baidar killed one person.
4.
Cross-border shelling and shooting from the Syrian Arab Republic into
Lebanon continued, causing at least two fatalities, nine injuries and material
damage. There were also at least 23 airstrikes by Syrian Government aircraft on
Lebanese territory, in which four people were killed and three were injured. The
14-56320 (E)

010714

*1456320*

S/2014/438

Lebanese Armed Forces reported continued smuggling of weapons across the
Lebanese-Syrian border.
5.
Ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic led to a further influx of Syrian
nationals seeking shelter in Lebanon. As at 11 June, there were 1,093,603 registered
Syrian refugees assisted by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and partners, including 49,559 in the UNIFIL area of
operations, an increase of approximately 197,906 since my most recent report. With
over 1 million refugees, Lebanon has the highest per capita concentration of
refugees in the world.
6.
The inclusive government of “national interest” led by Prime Minister
Tammam Salam agreed its policy statement on 14 March and won a vote of
confidence in Parliament on 20 March. The two-month presidential election period
started on 25 March. After one parliamentary session in which no candidate won
sufficient votes to secure election and three scheduled sessions that failed to achieve
a quorum, the constitutional period for the election ended without a new president of
the Republic being elected. Upon the expiration of the term of President Michel
Sleiman, the powers of the presidency transferred to the Council of Ministers under
the leadership of Prime Minister Salam, in accordance with the Constitution.
7.
On 5 March the International Support Group for Lebanon met in Paris at an
event hosted by French President François Hollande and attended by President
Sleiman and foreign ministers. The Group has continued to advocate greater
international support to key areas affected by the Syrian conflict in Lebanon, and to
underline international unity in support of stability and the continuity of State
institutions in Lebanon during the formation of the government and presidential
election processes. In the context of the agenda of the Group, the Government of
Italy held a ministerial conference in Rome in support of the Lebanese Armed
Forces on 17 June.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
8.
During the evening of 14 March, an Israel Defense Forces patrol vehicle was
hit by a roadside explosive device in the Shab`a Farms area (Sector East),
approximately 1 kilometre (km) south of the Blue Line. Shortly thereafter, the Israel
Defense Forces fired at least 10 rounds of 155-millimetre artillery into Lebanon’s
Bastara (Sector East) area at a distance of up to 2 km north of the Blue Line and two
rounds of 120-millimetre direct tank fire into two houses in Kafr Killa (Sector East),
located 12 km away from the explosion. Immediately after the first incident,
UNIFIL engaged both parties, including through the liaison and coordination
channels, urging their restraint, defusing tensions and facilitating the restoration of
the cessation of hostilities.
9.
In a letter to UNIFIL on 18 March, the Israel Defense Forces protested the
incident that it described as “directionally focused fragmentary chargers set off
against the Israel Defense Forces by Hizbullah”. In a media interview on 7 April ,
Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah claimed responsibility for the attack against the

2/16

14-56320

S/2014/438

Israel Defense Forces. On 9 April, the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations wrote to me (S/2014/254) to protest the attack as a severe violation
of resolution 1701 (2006), and referred to the responsibility of the Government of
Lebanon in this regard. On 14 April, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations also wrote to me (A/68/848-S/2014/278) to condemn the Israeli
fire as a “flagrant act of aggression” by Israel in violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
10. UNIFIL completed its investigation into the incident and shared its findings
with the parties. Notwithstanding the claim of responsibility for the explosive attack
by Hizbullah, the UNIFIL investigation has not found any material evidence to
establish the identity of the perpetrators or that they operated across the Blue Line.
Furthermore, UNIFIL has not confirmed any connection between the houses
targeted by the Israel Defense Forces in a residential area of Kafr Killa and the
roadside explosion.
11. The Israel Defense Forces continued its occupation of the northern part of the
village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. Israel has not responded to the
UNIFIL proposal regarding security arrangements aimed at facilitating the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the area, which was submitted to both
parties on 25 June 2011, and approved by the Lebanese Armed Forces. UNIFIL
continued to raise the issue with the Israeli authorities, who did not provide any new
information. On 13 occasions, UNIFIL observed Israel Defense Forces personnel
carrying out operational activities in the occupied area of northern Ghajar.
12. Violations of Lebanese airspace, mostly by unmanned aerial vehicles and
fixed-wing aircraft, continued almost daily in violation of resolution 1701 (2006)
and of Lebanese sovereignty. UNIFIL protested all violations to the Israel Defense
Forces, calling upon the authorities to cease them immediately. The Government of
Lebanon also protested against the violations, while the Government of Israel
continued to claim that the overflights were necessary security measures.
13. Tension rose along the Blue Line on 11 May, after an Israel Defense Forces
excavator, while undertaking maintenance works along the technical fence, extended
its boom above the technical fence to clear vegetation close to the B lue Line in the
vicinity of Naqoura. Public statements by Lebanese officials, supplemented by
reports in the Lebanese media, decried the Israel Defense Forces activities as
violations of resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL immediately engaged both parties,
calling on the Israel Defense Forces to provide sufficient notice before conducting
maintenance works close to the Blue Line, and requesting the Lebanese Armed
Forces to exercise restraint. The Israel Defense Forces interrupted its work in the
area, and the parties have since agreed that UNIFIL would complete the works in
that sensitive stretch. The Israel Defense Forces agreed to provide UNIFIL more
advanced notice to ensure adequate coordination with the Leb anese Armed Forces,
and is proceeding with maintenance works in other sections of its technical fence
along the Blue Line. On 18 May, the Lebanese Armed Forces in a statement to the
media claimed that “the arm of an Israeli bulldozer violated the Lebanese territories
in the area of Labouneh for a distance of 1 metre in the air.” On 19 May, the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations protested the works
carried out by the Israel Defense Forces on 11 May and further alleged that on
12 May debris was shoveled north of the Blue Line into Lebanese territory by Israel.

14-56320

3/16

S/2014/438

UNIFIL has found no evidence of any Blue Line violation in this context and
continues to monitor the situation in close coordination with the parties.
14. During the reporting period, UNIFIL confirmed that the Israel Defense Forces
violated the Blue Line on three occasions, and the Lebanese Armed Forces on one
occasion. On 17 March, UNIFIL observed three Israeli soldiers briefly crossing the
Blue Line in area 14B along Ghajar. UNIFIL protested the violation to the Israel
Defense Forces, who denied the violation. On 26 March, the Lebanese Armed
Forces informed UNIFIL that it had observed several Israeli soldiers crossing the
Blue Line in the vicinity of B30 (Sector East). The Israel Defense Forces, in a letter
dated 19 May, confirmed the violation, stating that it was “inadvertent and
unintentional”.
15. On 17 April, UNIFIL observed four Israeli soldiers crossing the Blue Line in
the vicinity of Bastara, where the Blue Line is not visibly marked, towards
shepherds before returning south of the Blue Line. The soldiers did not heed calls
and gestures from UNIFIL personnel who were standing at a distance. UNIFIL
protested the violation to the Israel Defense Forces, who denied the violati on. Later
that day, in the same area, the Israel Defense Forces apprehended two Lebanese
shepherds, aged 15 and 17, south of the Blue Line. UNIFIL contacted the Israel
Defense Forces and facilitated the release of the shepherds the same evening. On
8 May, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations protested
the apprehension.
16. On 13 May, two members of the Lebanese Armed Forces did not heed the calls
of UNIFIL to step back and briefly crossed approximately 7 metres south of the
Blue Line, while taking pictures in the area of Naqoura.
17. UNIFIL observed brief crossings of the Blue Line, mainly by Lebanese
shepherds and farmers. Most violations occurred in the Shab`a Farms area, Blida
(Sector West) and Rumaysh (Sector West). UNIFIL soldiers at the locations warned
the civilians involved not to cross the Blue Line. UNIFIL protested against the
violations to the Lebanese Armed Forces, recalling that it is the primary
responsibility of the Lebanese authorities to ensure full respect for the Blue Line in
its entirety.
18. UNIFIL completed its investigation into the 29 December rocket launching
incident and shared its findings with the parties. As part of its recommendations,
UNIFIL urged the Lebanese authorities to pursue their investigations into the
incident, with a view to identifying and apprehending the perpetrators, and bringing
them to justice. UNIFIL also asked the Lebanese Armed Forces, assisted by
UNIFIL, to intensify efforts to ensure that there are no armed personnel, assets and
weapons other than those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL between
the Blue Line and the Litani River. UNIFIL recommended that the Israel Defense
Forces should refrain from retaliation in such instances except where clearly
required in immediate self-defence.
19. On a few occasions, UNIFIL observed civilians carrying unauthorized
weapons in the area of operations, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). In all
cases, UNIFIL attempted to make contact with the persons involved and informed
the Lebanese Armed Forces. On 3 May, a UNIFIL patrol observed a suspicious car
with a passenger holding a pistol in the vicinity of Sribbin (Sector West). On
12 May, UNIFIL saw a civilian with a weapon under his belt, riding a scooter in the

4/16

14-56320

S/2014/438

vicinity of Bint Jubayl (Sector West). On 18 May, a passenger in a vehicle raised a
pistol towards the UNIFIL guard at United Nations position 5 -10 in the vicinity of
Al Hinniyah. The guard also raised his gun to deliver a warning before the car drove
away.
20. During the traditional hunting season, UNIFIL noted an increase in the number
of individuals carrying hunting weapons in the area of operations, with more than
100 instances reported. The majority of the cases were observed in the areas of
Meiss ej-Jebel (Sector East) and Blida. In every instance, UNIFIL patrols moved to
stop the hunting activity. The Lebanese Armed Forces has primary responsibility for
ensuring that the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River is free of any
armed personnel, assets and weapons other than those of the Government of
Lebanon and of UNIFIL.
21. With the exception of the incidents cited above, UNIFIL did not receive
specific information or credible evidence regarding the illegal presence or the
unauthorized transfer of armed personnel or weapons in its area of operations, nor
did UNIFIL activities lead to the discovery of any arms caches or unauthorized
military infrastructure. Open source reports of security incidents indicate that armed
persons and weapons remain present inside Palestinian refugee camps. In
accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL does not proactively search for weapons in the
south. As described in my previous reports, UNIFIL cannot enter private property
unless there is credible evidence of a violation of resolution 1701 (2006), including
an imminent threat of hostile activity emanating from the specific location. Where
specific information is received regarding the illegal pr esence of armed personnel or
weapons inside its area of operations, UNIFIL, in cooperation with the Lebanese
Armed Forces, remains determined to act with all means available within its
mandate and to the full extent provided for in its rules of engagement.
22. UNIFIL conducted an investigation into a bush fire that had occurred in the
vicinity of B19 (Sector East) on 24 December 2013, destroying a cultivated area of
approximately 46,000 square metres. In a protest letter on 26 December 2013, the
Lebanese Armed Forces had imputed responsibility for the origin of the fire to
operational activity performed by the Israel Defense Forces. The UNIFIL
investigation did not substantiate the involvement of a person or group in the setting
of the fire, and therefore did not determine any violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
23. An investigation also was launched into the impact of an unidentified object,
alleged to be a bullet, on a car driven by a civilian, recognize d later as a UNIFIL
national staff member, on 2 March near Ramyeh (Sector West). The impact shattered
the rear windshield of the car. None of the three occupants was injured. At the time
of the incident, the car was at a position generally in line with the orientation of an
Israel Defense Forces firing range located in the vicinity, south of the Blue Line.
Based on the available evidence, UNIFIL was unable to determine conclusively
whether a violation of resolution 1701 (2006) had taken place. UNIFIL
recommended that the Israel Defense Forces undertake a review of all shooting
range facilities close to the Blue Line in order to mitigate risks and avoid potential
residual hazards on Lebanese territory.
24. The strength of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River remained at the level of approximately two brigades. UNIFIL
and the Lebanese Armed Forces continued to carry out their daily coordinated
activities between the Blue Line and the Litani River. UNIFIL conducted on average

14-56320

5/16

S/2014/438

10,000 activities monthly, out of which approximately 10 per cent was carried out in
close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
25. There were, since my last report, 17 instances during which UNIFIL patrols
encountered unfriendly or hostile behaviour from local civilians. In 11 of those
cases, stones were thrown, at times causing minor material damage to UNIFIL
vehicles. On 11 March, three vehicles blocked a UNIFIL patrol in Shaqra (Secto r
East), after which approximately 10 civilians tried to open the hood of one of the
UNIFIL vehicles. On 13 April, in the vicinity of Yarin (Sector West), civilians
blocked the road in front of a UNIFIL patrol, and damaged one of the patrol vehicles
with sticks and stones. On 24 April, a UNIFIL patrol vehicle in a narrow road in
Blida (Sector East) was surrounded by a crowd of civilians who started throwing
stones at UNIFIL and Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers, resulting in slight injuries to
four peacekeepers and slight damage to the vehicles. On the same day, in the
vicinity of Yarin (Sector West), a UNIFIL patrol discovered that a UNIFIL, not
permanently manned, position had been vandalized during the night.
26. In four instances equipment was stolen. On 20 March, a UNIFIL patrol vehicle
was stopped by two civilians in El Adeisse (Sector East). Once UNIFIL personnel
opened the window, one of the civilians took a camera and drove away. The
equipment has not been recovered. On 26 March, in the vicinity of Rum yah (Sector
West), a UNIFIL patrol was approached by two civilians, one of whom snatched a
pair of binoculars from a UNIFIL soldier before fleeing. On 17 April, in the area of
Bastara (Sector East), in the presence of Lebanese Armed Forces, a civilian snat ched
a camera from a UNIFIL soldier. The camera was retrieved, but the memory card
was not.
27. On 6 March, a convoy of four UNIFIL patrol vehicles in the vicinity of Mafraq
el-Jibbayn (Sector West) was blocked by a civilian vehicle. As the convoy attempt ed
to leave the location, one of the vehicles was blocked by a group of civilians until
the Lebanese Armed Forces escorted it out of the area. On 20 March, an Observer
Group Lebanon patrol was stopped by a roadblock in Al Khiam (Sector East) by a
municipal policeman and a group of civilians, denying access to the market area. In
all the above cases, UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces whose
intervention in most instances led to the resolution of the incident.
28. UNIFIL relations with the local population remained largely positive. UNIFIL
undertook regular outreach and liaison activities with the communities present in the
area of operations, including in coordination with United Nations funds, agencies
and programmes, and international and Lebanese non-governmental organizations.
Quick impact projects were implemented by troop-contributing countries and
through the UNIFIL budget, including the provision of water and power supply
equipment, and capacity-building activities. Medical, dental and veterinary
assistance was provided to the local population. Medical services also were
provided to Syrian refugees in the area of operations.
29. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continued to carry out its dual mandate of
maritime interdiction operations in the area of maritime operations and training of
Lebanese Navy personnel. As at 15 May, the Maritime Task Force hailed 1,334 ships
and the Lebanese Navy and Customs officials inspected 263 vessels to verify that
there were no unauthorized arms or related materiel o n board. The Maritime Task
Force conducted 85 training activities with the Lebanese Navy at sea and onshore.

6/16

14-56320

S/2014/438

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
30. UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements with both parties continued to
serve as the foundation of UNIFIL work in implementing resolution 1701 (2006),
safeguarding the cessation of hostilities, ensuring full respect of the Blue Line, and
protecting security and stability in southern Lebanon. The par ties continued to
engage constructively with UNIFIL, with daily effective liaison activities at the
tactical, operational and strategic levels, and in regular meetings of the tripartite
forum. There was no progress, however, in establishing a UNIFIL office in Tel Aviv.
31. Since my most recent report (S/2014/130), there were two tripartite meetings
on 24 March and 7 May, where most of the incidents and issues described above
were addressed. The parties continued to concur on the importance of the tripartite
mechanism to maintain communication channels, prevent tensions and escalation
when incidents occur, especially in the light of the situation in the region, and
demonstrated their readiness to work with UNIFIL to this end. The importance of
moving towards agreed solutions for practical localized understandings in sensitive
areas along the Blue Line also was discussed and options explored in this regard.
32. Following discussions at the 24 March meeting in the co ntext of the 14 March
incident, UNIFIL increased its presence along the Blue Line in the Shab`a Farms
area to deter possible illicit activities.
33. In line with previous agreement reached at the tripartite forum, UNIFIL, in
close coordination with the parties, undertook seasonal clearance work on the
Wazzani riverbed along the Blue Line to de-escalate tensions in this sensitive area.
34. UNIFIL continued to work with the parties to erect visible markers along the
Blue Line. As at 3 June, UNIFIL had cleared 307 points from mines, measured
235 points, constructed 216 points and verified 194 points.
35. As part of UNIFIL efforts to support the implementation of the strategic
dialogue plan, the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander invited all
UNIFIL contingent commanders and their countries to promote the strategic
dialogue process and consider ways in which they might be in a position to provide
vital support to the Lebanese Armed Forces within the UNIFIL area of operations
both on land and at sea. The strategic dialogue plan is an integral part of the
Lebanese Armed Forces’ five-year capabilities development plan, which is
supported by the International Support Group for Lebanon. The strategic dialogue
permanent committee met on 25 April to review the process and decided to
nominate a maritime subcommittee and activate the training sub-committee.

C.

Disarming armed groups
36. Hizbullah continued to acknowledge publicly that it maintains a substantial
military capacity separate from that of the Lebanese State, which it claims serves as
a deterrent against potential aggression from Israel. The Government of Israel
asserts that these weapons, including large quantities of missiles, constitute a
serious threat. President Sleiman continued to advocate the approach to the control
of Hizbullah’s arms contained in the National Defence Strategy proposal that he
presented under the National Dialogue in September 2012. On 31 March and 5 May,
President Sleiman chaired National Dialogue sessions attended by Prime Minister

14-56320

7/16

S/2014/438

Salam, Speaker Berri and other leaders, though not by Hizbullah or the Lebanese
Forces. Participants reaffirmed the need to consider how best to take forward the
national defence strategy proposal and to abide by Lebanon’s policy of
disassociation pursuant to the Baabda Declaration of 2012.
37. Arms outside the control of the State continued to threaten stability in
Lebanon. Despite a drop in the frequency and size of attacks on civilians, twin
suicide bombs on 19 February killed six people in south Beirut; and a suicide bomb
at an army checkpoint in Hermel killed two soldiers and one civilian. On 16 March,
a suicide car bomb attack in Nabi Othman, eastern Bekaa, killed four civilians; and
on 29 March another suicide attack at an army checkpoint outside Arsal killed three
soldiers. Abdullah Azzam Brigades claimed responsibility for the Beirut and Hermel
attacks, while the Free Sunnis of Baalbek Brigade claimed responsibility for the
latter two attacks. On 8 April, two soldiers were killed in an atta ck on a patrol in
Akkar. On 20 June, a suicide car bomb attack at a security checkpoint in Dahr
el-Baidar killed a member of the Internal Security Forces.
38. A greater degree of stability appears to have been established in Tripoli.
Another round of violence between the Sunni neighbourhood of Bab al-Tabbaneh
and the neighbouring Alawite area of Jebel Mohsen from 13 to 23 March had
resulted in 32 dead, with reports of heavy weaponry being used. On 1 April, upon
the recommendation of the High Defence Council, the Lebanese Armed Forces
began implementation of a new security plan for Tripoli involving increased
deployment, including in previously inaccessible areas; the dismantling of barriers;
and the indictment of at least 120 individuals suspected of involv ement in the
violence. More than 170 wanted individuals have been arrested and at least 20 have
turned themselves in since the plan was implemented. There have been violent
incidents on at least three occasions during raids by the Lebanese Armed Forces to
apprehend wanted individuals, but overall the security situation in Tripoli has
improved significantly.
39. Also since 1 April, the Lebanese Armed Forces and security agencies began
implementation of a security plan for the Bekaa, with focus on combating the
widespread criminal, drug and arms smuggling networks. It involved the issuance of
dozens of arrest warrants against persons suspected of belonging to terrorist groups
or for carrying out terrorist attacks. The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed
additional troops to the Arsal area, undertook robust activities to interdict
individuals and materiel associated with suspected terrorist activities, and arrested a
significant number of fugitives. The army also arrested Syrian individuals in the
Bekaa border area for illegally entering Lebanon. Several unofficial checkpoints of
Hizbullah in the Bekaa were removed. The Tripoli and Bekaa security plans were
implemented in close cooperation and coordination among the Lebanese security
agencies, with strong political support from the Government.
40. There has been no progress in the dismantling of military bases maintained by
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC) and
Fatah al-Intifada. In 2006, it was decided in the National Dialogue that these bases
should be dismantled. Their existence continues to compromise Lebanese
sovereignty and impede the ability of the State to monitor and control effectively
parts of the Lebanese-Syrian border.
41. On 28 March, leaders of Palestinian factions in the Palestinian refugee camps
in Lebanon signed a memorandum of understanding to insulate the camps in

8/16

14-56320

S/2014/438

Lebanon from regional and local tensions, including through cooperation together
and with Lebanese security agencies. Despite this positive step, several camps
witnessed increased intra-Palestinian violence during the reporting period. On
1 April, shooting in the Beddawi camp injured one Palestinian individual; on
7 April, clashes in the Mieh Mieh camp resulted in eight people killed; and on 9 and
21 April, two individuals were separately killed by masked gunmen in the
Ein el-Hilweh camp. On 11 and 14 May, clashes erupted again in the Ein el -Hilweh
camp, resulting in the death of at least one person. On 19 May, there was an
assassination attempt against a commander in the Fatah Movement.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
42. Representatives of the Government of Israel have consistently alleged that
there are significant, ongoing arms transfers to Hizbullah across the Lebanese Syrian border. The United Nations takes these allegations seriously, but it is not in a
position to independently verify them. Representatives of the Government of Israel
have continued to express grave concern at the prospect of the transfer of advanced
weapons systems to Hizbullah.
43. On 27 February, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon informed me that
on 24 February Israeli military aircraft had violated Lebanese airspace, raiding the
outskirts of Janta town and firing several missiles within Lebanese territory, in
violation of resolution 1701 (2006). There has been no claim of responsibility for
the strike and the United Nations has no specific information of its own in this
regard. Hizbullah subsequently acknowledged that a strike had occurred inside
Lebanon and stated it would respond in due course. In an interview on 7 April,
Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah stated that the incident of 14 March referred to in
paragraph 9 of the present report was carried out by Hizbullah in retaliation for the
Janta incident.
44. During the reporting period, there were repeated incidents of shooting, cross border shelling and rockets fired into Lebanon from the Syrian Arab Republic,
causing a number of injuries and material damage. There were frequent airstrikes by
Syrian aircraft on Lebanese territory around Arsal, including a series of strikes in
early March that killed at least four people. Also in March, 27 shelling incidents
occurred along the northern and eastern borders of Lebanon, killing two people.
While the rate of airstrikes and shelling from the Syrian Arab Republic has since
slowed, there were at least 41 cross-border shelling incidents, demonstrating the
continued risk to Lebanese civilians in border areas.
45. The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed in border areas to counter the
movement of armed elements between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, and
have had success interdicting smuggling activities and arresting suspects wanted on
terrorist charges. On several occasions, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrested Syrian
nationals in possession of arms, ammunition and other military equipment while
entering Lebanon. The Lebanese Armed Forces and the Internal Security Forces also
seized a number of stolen cars in the Bekaa reportedly involved in terrorist-related
activities. On 27 March, the Lebanese Armed Forces killed Sami al -Atrash, a
suspect in connection with several car bombings, including that of 9 July 2013 in
Beirut’s southern suburb. On 3 April, the army arrested Sheikh Musheer Khodr for
suspected links to terrorist activities. On 12 April, the army arrested Ali Khodr

14-56320

9/16

S/2014/438

Jaafar for suspected attacks against the security agencies in Lebanon, and Ahmed
al-Atrash, who stands accused of setting up booby-trapped cars. On 25 May,
Lebanese security forces arrested Sheikh Omar Bakri Fustoq, who was charged with
terrorism and instigating sectarian strife. On 15 May, five judges were appointed to
investigate 12 terrorism incidents that took place in Beirut, Tripoli and Hermel
between July 2013 and February 2014.
46. Armed elements reportedly remain present around Arsal between Lebanon and
the Syrian Arab Republic, and there have been further security incidents in the town.
On 29 March, a woman and a child were killed when Lebanes e soldiers opened fire
on their car after it failed to stop at a checkpoint in Arsal. On 30 April, five
Lebanese soldiers were injured by Syrian gunmen on the outskirts of Arsal. On
16 May, three police officers were injured during a raid in Arsal. Several other
shooting incidents at border checkpoints also occurred.
47. Hizbullah again publicly acknowledged their continued involvement in the
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic and held funerals for Hizbullah fighters killed
there. Other Lebanese elements are also reported to be engaged in fighting alongside
the Syrian opposition. President Sleiman continued to call for all parties to adhere to
the policy of disassociation agreed in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012,
including in the most recent meetings of the National Dialogue on 31 March and
5 May. In its ministerial statement of 15 March, the government of Prime Minister
Salam adopted the policy of disassociation from regional crises.
48. On 22 April, after fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic caused an influx of
approximately 4,500 Syrian refugees into the Lebanese enclave of Tfail, which is
almost completely surrounded by Syrian territory, the Lebanese authorities
organized a relief convoy to deliver humanitarian assistance to almost 6,000
civilians. Access to the area is extremely difficult. A further such delivery has taken
place since and was facilitated locally, including with Hizbullah.
49. On 3 May, the Lebanese authorities implemented further restrictions to the
entry of Palestine refugees coming from the Syrian Arab Republic. The Minister of
the Interior informed the United Nations at the time that this action was temporary.
The United Nations continues to express concern about such restrictions, as well as
the decision by Lebanon’s security agencies to stop renewing residency permits for
Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic already in Lebanon.
50. The Government established a committee chaired by the Prime Minister and
including the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Ministers of the Interior and of
Social Affairs to address refugee-related issues, including the possible establishment
of camps and limitations on access to Lebanon. On 31 May, the Minister of the
Interior announced that Syrian refugees who returned to the Syrian Arab Republic
after 1 June would lose their refugee status in Lebanon. UNHCR informed
registered Syrian refugees in Lebanon of the decision, while expressing appreciation
for the concern of the Government that refugee status be reserved for those in need
of international protection. UNHCR reaffirmed to the Government that, in
accordance with international law, a return to the Syrian Arab Republic would not in
itself mean a person no longer had a fear of persecution or a serious risk to his or
her life.
51. Some 80 per cent of Syrian refugees in Lebanon are women and children.
Problems arise in securing birth registration for Syrian refugee children born in

10/16

14-56320

S/2014/438

Lebanon. A weak legal framework, limited resources and social barriers prevent
refugees at risk from receiving adequate protection. As elsewhere, refugee women
and children in Lebanon are disproportionately affected by sexual and gender -based
violence, including early marriage, child labour and survival sex.
52. Owing to the dispersal of refugees across some 1,700 locations, community
outreach by Government, United Nations and other agencies requires significant
allocation of resources and time. In all areas of assistance to refugees and
protection, outreach and support for host communities, the limited avail ability of
resources is now an acute issue. Lebanon’s share of the Regional Response Plan for
2014 remains only 22 per cent funded. With the approval on 8 April of a governance
structure involving the World Bank, the United Nations and the Government, the
multi-donor trust fund established to help Lebanon address the impact of the Syrian
conflict is now operational.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
53. Seven manual mine clearance teams, one explosive ordnance disposal team
and one mechanical mine clearance team from UNIFIL, validated by the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) team, were deployed in the UNIFIL area of
operations from 28 February to 21 May. UNIFIL cleared more than 1,307 square
metres of hazardous areas to provide access to Blue Line points, found and
destroyed 116 anti-personnel landmines and reached seven Blue Line points. The
UNMAS team conducted validation events, quality assurance visits of operational
and explosive ordnance awareness training.
54. The Lebanese Mine Action Centre reported that, from 1 February to 30 April,
it had cleared 627,607 square metres of hazardous areas, including minefields and
battle areas, and destroyed 493 cluster munition items, 71 unexploded ordnance and
21 anti-personnel landmines. On 7 May, an accidental detonation of a cluster
munition in the UNIFIL area of operations resulted in one Lebanese civilian fatality.

F.

Delineation of borders
55. No progress was made in delineating or demarcating the Lebanese -Syrian
border, including in areas where it is uncertain or disputed, as called for in Security
Council resolutions 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006).
56. There has still been no reaction from either Israel or the Syrian Arab Republic
to the provisional definition of the Shab`a Farms ar ea contained in my report of
30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641).

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
57. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings at the Lebanese Military Court
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating s erious attacks against
UNIFIL peacekeepers. The case of the 2007 attack remains open, pending new
evidence. With regard to the two serious attacks perpetrated in 2008, a new hearing
was scheduled on 11 November before the Military Court of Appeal in one ca se,

14-56320

11/16

S/2014/438

while in the other pending case, a verdict was issued at the Permanent Court of first
instance on 2 May sentencing one of the perpetrators to forced labour and three
years of imprisonment. In relation to two cases of serious attacks in 2011, the
investigation is ongoing in one case, and in the other case further investigation is
subject to the emergence of new evidence. In a case of terror intent opened in
January 2014, suspects were detained and are under investigation.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
58. As at 8 June, the total military strength of UNIFIL was 10,112, including 407
women, from 37 troop-contributing countries. The civilian component consisted of
282 international and 680 national staff, including 81 and 155 women, respectively.
A total of 52 United National Truce Supervision Organization military observers,
including two women, are also part of UNIFIL.
59. There are 57 operational positions in the area of operations. One vacated
United Nations position (UNP 2-2 in Sector West) was handed over to the Lebanese
Armed Forces. On 7 April, UNIFIL temporarily deployed one Cambodian mine
clearance team to assist the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus in
Cyprus. As at 8 June, the Maritime Task Force consisted of two frigates, including
one carrying a helicopter, a corvette with a helicopter and five fast patrol boats.

V. Observations
60. I welcome the overall calm that has continued to prevail along the Blue Line
and in southern Lebanon, notwithstanding the protracted conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Sustaining this calm and building upon it is essential for Lebanon’s
stability and for regional security. I commend the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Israel Defense Forces for their commitment to safeguarding the cessation of
hostilities in spite of the serious incident that occurred on 14 March, and for their
cooperation with UNIFIL, in particular their utilization of the liaison and
coordination arrangements. I am encouraged by the parties’ willi ngness to engage
with UNIFIL on establishing practical localized solutions.
61. Nonetheless, the incident of 14 March in the UNIFIL area of operations
underlines that the calm cannot be taken for granted. I condemn the attack against
an Israel Defense Forces patrol south of the Blue Line, later claimed by Hizbullah,
and the Israel Defense Forces’ subsequent fire into Lebanon, both of which
constitute serious breaches of the cessation of hostilities and of resolution 1701
(2006). These incidents could easily have led to further escalation. I recall the
obligations of the parties to respect the integrity of the Blue Line and protect the
cessation of hostilities. Once again, I call on the parties to respect th e cessation of
hostilities, and reiterate the expectations of the United Nations that a party that has
been attacked should immediately notify UNIFIL, and should not respond unless in
immediate self-defence. I welcome the quick restoration of the cessation of
hostilities thanks to the parties’ utilization of the UNIFIL liaison and coordination
arrangements. I urge the parties to continue to work towards fulfilling their
respective obligations under resolution 1701 (2006), and to make full use of the
de-confliction tools UNIFIL places at their disposal.

12/16

14-56320

S/2014/438

62. Major obligations under the resolution remain outstanding and require action
by both parties. The imperative to remove unauthorized weapons from the UNIF IL
area of operations remains a long-term endeavour. I remain concerned at the lack of
progress towards achieving a permanent ceasefire, as envisaged in resolution 1701
(2006). My Special Coordinator and UNIFIL have continued to emphasize with the
parties their obligation under the resolution to work towards this goal by taking
tangible steps and laying the groundwork for future progress. Given the regional
challenges, both Israel and Lebanon would benefit from consolidation of the calm
across the Blue Line. I encourage them to consider ways to make progress on the
objectives of a permanent ceasefire and long-term solution.
63. I remain concerned that the violations of Lebanese airspace by Israel continue
unabated, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006). I call
again upon the Government of Israel to cease all overflights of Lebanese territory
and territorial waters. The occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of the northern
part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line constitutes
a continuing violation of resolution 1701 (2006). I recall again Israel’s obligation to
withdraw its armed forces from northern Ghajar, in accordance with the resolution.
64. Visible marking of the Blue Line continues to be an essential confidence building measure, which contributes to preventing inadvertent ground violation s. I
encourage the parties to address the contentious points in a constructive and
pragmatic manner, and to actively seek localized practical solutions in problematic
areas. Both sides, notwithstanding their respective reservations, have undertaken to
respect the Blue Line, as identified by the United Nations, in its entirety. I am
concerned in particular about violations of the Blue Line carried out by armed
forces personnel. Full respect for the integrity of the Blue Line is a critical factor in
maintaining stability and calm in the area. Any deliberate violation of the Blue Line
is unacceptable.
65. I remain concerned at incidents impeding freedom of movement of UNIFIL
and instances of aggressive behaviour towards UNIFIL personnel. While their
number remains marginal in comparison to the overall level of UNIFIL activities,
some of these incidents have the potential to compromise UNIFIL effectiveness in
executing its tasks under resolution 1701 (2006). It is the primary responsibility of
the Lebanese authorities to ensure that UNIFIL can operate unhindered in its area of
operations.
66. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of
the State continues to restrict the ability of the State to exercise full authority over
its territory and poses a threat to Lebanese sovereignty and stability, in contradiction
with the country’s obligations under resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
President Sleiman, throughout his tenure, repeatedly underlined the importance of
agreeing on a national defence strategy that would help address the issue. While the
recent National Dialogue sessions made positive reference to the policy of
disassociation and the need to take forward the National Defence Strategy proposal,
it is disappointing that some parties boycotted the latest sessions. I strongly
encourage a return to full participation in the Dialogue and to its addressing the
issue of arms and other issues to build upon the Baabda Declaration. I again call for
the implementation of earlier decisions of the Dialogue, including for the
disarmament of non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of the military bases of
the PFLP-GC and Fatah al-Intifada.

14-56320

13/16

S/2014/438

67. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic continues to have an adverse impact
on Lebanon. I deplore the cross-border violations of Lebanese territory from the
Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the movement of armed fighters and materiel
between the countries. The lack of progress in delineating and demarcating the
Lebanon-Syrian Arab Republic border is no justification for violations of Lebanese
sovereignty by any party. I am encouraged by the steps the Government of Lebanon
has taken to improve security along the border, including the deployment of troops
and equipment to key areas in eastern and northern Lebanon and robust efforts to
interdict those trying to undermine stability in the country. I c all upon the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and all parties fighting there to cease
violations of the border and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006)
and 1701 (2006).
68. I condemn the continued participation of Lebanese citizens in the conflict i n
the Syrian Arab Republic in breach of the policy of disassociation adopted by the
Government of Lebanon and of the principles of the Baabda Declaration of
June 2012, which were agreed by all political leaders of Lebanon. I call again on all
Lebanese parties to step back from the Syrian conflict, consistent with their
commitment in the Baabda Declaration, and I urge them instead to act in the
interests of Lebanon in line with the policy of disassociation.
69. The reduction in violence and terrorist attacks in the reporting period is a
positive development. The Government deserves credit for its security plans, and the
security forces should be commended for their inter-agency coordination and their
achievements. But the threat of instability remains, and i t is important that the unity
be sustained. In Tripoli in particular, which has suffered recurring rounds of
violence since 2008, it is vital that there be follow-up in terms of reconciliation,
repairs to property and economic and social assistance in order to consolidate the
respite afforded by the security plan so far.
70. These successes notwithstanding, the reporting period witnessed further acts of
violence against civilians and attacks against the Lebanese Armed Forces. These
reflect the continued unacceptable proliferation of weapons outside the authority of
the State. I call on Member States to uphold their obligation under resolution 1701
(2006) to prevent the sale or supply of arms or related materiel to entities or
individuals in Lebanon. Continued broad political support is also needed for the
security and judicial authorities to combat impunity in respect of acts of violence.
The increased efforts by the authorities to bring to justice those re sponsible for
violence are welcome, and an indicator of their commitment to combat impunity.
The continuation of the trial in the Special Tribunal for Lebanon sends a similar
message.
71. The achievement of the leaders of Lebanon in forming an inclusive
government and the success in turn of the Government, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Salam, in undertaking important steps in the field of security and
breaking longstanding impasses, for example, with regard to government
appointments, has been positive. My Special Coordinator joined with others,
including on behalf of the International Support Group for Lebanon, in encouraging
the leaders of Lebanon to sustain and build on that constructive engagement ahead
of the end of President Sleiman’s term on 25 May. The achievements of President
Sleiman during six critical years in office were substantial, and I pay tribute again to

14/16

14-56320

S/2014/438

his cooperation with the United Nations, in particular in respect of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006).
72. It is deeply regrettable that the Lebanese Parliament failed to elect a successor
to President Sleiman within the constitutional timeframe. A prolonged vacancy in
the highest office of the Lebanese State does not strengthen confidence and stability
in Lebanon. I myself, the International Support Group for Lebanon and the Security
Council, in its presidential statement of 29 May 2014 (PRST/2014/10), have urged
the leaders of Lebanon to work to ensure that the election ta kes place as soon as
possible and without external interference. It is vital, meanwhile, that ministers
continue to work together effectively and that all in Lebanon support Prime Minister
Salam to ensure that necessary decisions can be taken and that the State remains
able to address the many challenges facing it. I also stress the need for timely
preparations to ensure that parliamentary elections take place in accordance with
Lebanon’s tradition of freedom and democratic practice. The United Nations
remains ready to help with technical support for the parliamentary election process.
Lebanon needs a functioning presidency, Government and parliament. The
international community needs an effective partner in Lebanon.
73. The Security Council and the international community have repeatedly
commended Lebanon for its open-border policy for refugees fleeing the fighting in
the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the efforts of the Lebanese authorities to meet
the needs of these refugees. Without prejudice to the ri ght of Lebanon to manage its
border, it remains essential that civilians fleeing the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic who are indeed in need of safety and protection are granted access and not
returned in circumstances where their lives would be at risk. As the Government
continues to review its policy with regard to refugees, the United Nations will
continue to work closely with Government interlocutors with a view to ensuring that
refugee-related issues are addressed effectively and in line with inter national
humanitarian law.
74. Hosting the largest number of refugees per capita in the world, Lebanon
exhibits remarkable generosity under challenging circumstances. Additional funds
are needed to meet the needs of the most vulnerable, including women and girl
refugees at risk, and to mitigate the severe stresses on host communities and public
services. I encourage the international community to fully consider the risks if
Lebanon is not supported sufficiently to meet these immense challenges, and I
remind Member States of their collective burden-sharing responsibilities. Much
work has been done to facilitate such support, including the development of the
stabilization road map. I welcome the activation of the multi -donor trust fund with
the help of the World Bank, and strongly encourage donors to contribute to it, or
through the other mechanisms available, to ensure that Lebanon is adequately
supported.
75. I again commend the Lebanese Armed Forces for its continued commitment
and strong cooperation with UNIFIL in its area of operations and for its robust and
effective role in addressing security challenges elsewhere in the country. I welcome
the intensive effort to strengthen the Lebanese Armed Forces in response to the five year capabilities development plan and the strategic dialogue. It is encouraging that
work in this area is moving forward. I thank the Government of Italy for hosting the
ministerial conference in support of the Lebanese Armed Forces on 17 June. I
welcome the outcome of the conference, including the progress signalled in the

14-56320

15/16

S/2014/438

French-Lebanese agreement generously financed by Saudi Arabia. I encourage
Member States to contribute further to the strengthening of the Lebanese Armed
Forces, drawing on the capabilities development plan and throu gh the strategic
dialogue.
76. I thank the Member States participating in the International Support Group for
Lebanon for their continued commitment, as evidenced by their participation in the
5 March meeting hosted by President Hollande in Paris, as well as that in Rome.
The sustained unity and energy of the Group has helped to generate momentum on
key assistance and support for Lebanon. I look forward to working closely with it in
the coming period.
77. The security situation in the Palestinian refugee ca mp of Ein el-Helweh is of
concern. I welcome the efforts of camp leaders to work with the Lebanese
authorities to maintain order. The need to improve the living conditions of Palestine
refugees in Lebanon, without prejudice to the resolution of the refugee question in
the context of a comprehensive peace settlement, is ever more urgent. I encourage
donors to be forthcoming in support of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), including to enable it to assi st
Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic. Recent restrictions by the
Lebanese authorities on the entry of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab
Republic are a serious protection concern. I reiterate the call of UNRWA for easing
access at the border, including for family reunification, transit and on humanitarian
grounds.
78. Regrettably, progress has still not been made with regard to the Shab`a Farms
area in accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006). I call, once again, on
the Syrian Arab Republic and Israel to submit their responses to the provisional
definition of the Shab`a Farms area that I provided in October 2007 ( S/2007/641).
79. For both Lebanon and Israel the development of their oil and gas reserves is a
national priority. I encourage both countries to continue efforts to address the
delimitation of their respective maritime exclusive zones and the exploration and
exploitation of their natural resources in a manner that facilitates this and does not
give rise to tensions. The United Nations continues to follow this issue closely, given
its importance for security, and remains ready to assist in this matter, should both
parties so request.
80. In the face of a fourth year of conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, Lebanon’s
continued resilience is striking. As pressures continue to mount, the country remains
under serious threat if efforts do not continue to address current challe nges. The calm
prevailing across the Blue Line makes a vital contribution to the stability of Lebanon,
and to the security and well-being of the peoples of both countries. Longer-term
security and stability call for an end to conflict in the region, includ ing progress
towards a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
81. I wish to express my appreciation to all countries contributing troops and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization. I pay a particular commendation to the outgoing UNIFIL
Head of Mission and Force Commander Paolo Serra, who has provided excellent
service and leadership for the past two-and-a-half years. I also commend the military
and civilian personnel of UNIFIL, as well as the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon, Derek Plumbly, and the staff of his Office, all of whom continue to play
a critical role in helping to promote stability along the Blue Line and in Lebanon.

16/16

14-56320
