S/PV.9364

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9364

th meeting
Thursday, 29 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab/Mrs. Nusseibeh. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Kumanga
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18632 (E)
*2318632*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs; Mr. Max
Blumenthal, journalist, founder and Editor-in-Chief of
The Grayzone; Mr. Chay Bowes, scholar specializing in
small arms and munitions; and Mr. Sergey Radchenko,
Wilson E. Schmidt Distinguished Professor, Johns
Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: Since the previous briefing to
the Security Council on this topic (see S/PV.9325), in
May, the provision of military assistance to the Armed
Forces of Ukraine has continued, in the context of fullscale invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation.
Information on transfers of weapons systems and
ammunition flows from Governments are available
through open sources. Those transfers have included
heavy conventional weapons, including battle tanks,
armoured combat vehicles, combat aircraft, helicopters,
large-calibre artillery systems, missile systems and
uncrewed combat aerial vehicles, as well as remotely
operated munitions and small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition. There are reports that the supply
of arms and ammunition has accelerated and expanded
ahead of the reported counteroffensive by Ukrainian
forces. There are also reports of States transferring, or
planning to transfer, weapons such as uncrewed combat
aerial vehicles and ammunition to the Russian armed
forces for use in Ukraine. Moreover, media outlets have
reported on the transfer of major conventional arms,
including artillery rocket systems, to other armed
groups involved in the war in Ukraine.
The supply of weapons into any armed conflict
situation raises significant concerns about the potential
2/25

29/06/2023

escalation of violence and the risks of diversion. Measures
to address the risk of diversion to unauthorized end users
and for unauthorized uses are essential for preventing
further instability and insecurity in Ukraine, the
region and beyond. Such measures include pre-transfer
diversion risk assessments, end-user certificates and
non-retransfer clauses, effective legal and enforcement
measures and post-shipment verifications. To prevent
the diversion of weapons, supply chain transparency
and cooperation and information exchange among
importing, transit and exporting States is required, as
well as concrete measures such as marking and tracing,
effective accounting and record-keeping practices,
the physical safeguarding of arms and ammunition,
customs and border control measures and diversion
monitoring and analysis.
As I mentioned many times before, transparency
in armaments is a crucial confidence-building measure
that can serve to reduce tensions and ambiguities
among Member States. The United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms is a key instrument in that regard.
Moreover, the Arms Trade Treaty, the Firearms Protocol
and the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, with its International
Tracing Instrument, are some of the arms control
instruments that have been established by States to
prevent the diversion of conventional arms and regulate
the international arms trade.
I take this opportunity to welcome the recent
conclusion of work by the Open-Ended Working
Group on Conventional Ammunition and commend the
elaboration of a new global framework for through-life
conventional ammunition management. The framework
is a much-needed instrument to more effectively
counter the diversion of conventional ammunition of all
types, which continue to fuel instability, insecurity and
conflict across the world.
I reiterate my call to States to join relevant
treaties and agreements and to fully implement their
legal obligations and political commitments under
conventional arms control instruments to which they
are party, to minimize the risk of the diversion of arms
and ammunition. The establishment of the unified
weapons register by the Ukrainian Ministry for Internal
Affairs and Police, designed to digitize registration,
accounting and control activities associated with
civilian firearms circulation, is a timely initiative to
minimize diversion risks.
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The impact of the intensifying war in Ukraine on
civilians continues to be an area of serious concern.
From 24 February 2022 to 18 June 2023, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
recorded 24,862 civilian casualties in Ukraine, with
9,083 killed and 15,779 injured. The actual figures are
likely to be considerably higher.
The vast majority of civilian casualties are a result
of the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects.
The missile attack in central Kramatorsk on 27 June,
which killed 12 people, is a case in point. The SecretaryGeneral has unequivocally urged all sides to avoid the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas, as such
use is highly likely to result in indiscriminate harm. I
take this opportunity to refer to the Political Declaration
on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians from the
Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the Use of
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas, adopted in
November 2022.
In addition to the thousands of civilians killed or
injured, the continued and intensified attacks against
critical infrastructure and essential services, including
energy infrastructure, health and educational facilities,
roads and bridges, are alarming. Mines and explosive
remnants of war have resulted in widespread land
contamination, rendering land unusable for agriculture,
while impeding the movement of people. The destruction
of the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant dam is
possibly the most significant incident of damage to
civilian infrastructure since the start of the war.
Under international humanitarian law, parties to an
armed conflict are prohibited from targeting civilians
and civilian infrastructure and have the responsibility to
take all feasible precautions in the conduct of military
operations to avoid, or at least minimize, incidental loss
of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to civilian
objects. The United Nations strongly condemns attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure and calls for
their immediate cessation.
The past 16 months have seen immense loss,
suffering and devastation in Ukraine. As the conflict has
intensified, diplomatic efforts and initiatives by Member
States seeking de-escalation and calling for a peaceful
settlement have also increased. The United Nations
stands ready to support all meaningful efforts to bring just
and sustainable peace to Ukraine. In that, we are guided
by international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant General Assembly resolutions, as
the Secretary-General has repeatedly emphasized.

S/PV.9364

The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Blumenthal.
Mr. Blumenthal: I thank Alex Rubinstein and
Wyatt Reed for helping me prepare this statement.
Wyatt Reid is a journalistic colleague of mine who,
in October 2022, happened to be in Donetsk when his
hotel was shelled by the Ukrainian military, with an
apparently United States-made Howitzer, nearly killing
him. He was 100 metres away. I am also here with my
friend civil rights activist Randy Credico, who was in
Donetsk more recently and witnessed regular HIMARS
attacks on civilian targets.
I am here not only as a journalist who has spent more
than 20 years writing books, producing documentaries
and writing articles about conflict and politics in several
continents, but also as an American taxpayer who has
been dragooned into funding a proxy war that has
become a threat to regional and international stability,
at the expense of my countrymen and countrywomen.
On 28 June, as emergency crews worked to clean up
yet another toxic train derailment in the United States,
this time on the Montana River, further exposing our
nation’s chronically underfunded infrastructure and its
threats to our health, the Pentagon announced plans to
send an additional $500 million worth of military aid
to Ukraine.
The development came as Ukraine’s army enters
the third week of a vaunted counter-offensive that CNN
describes as “not meeting expectations,” and even
Volodymyr Zelenskyy says is going slower than desired.
As Ukraine’s military failed to breach Russia’s primary
defence line, CNN reported on 12 June that Kyiv had
“lost” 16 United States-made armoured vehicles sent to
the country. What did the Pentagon do? It simply passed
that bill down to average United States taxpayers, such
as me, charging us another $325 million to replace
Ukraine’s squandered military stock. There was zero
effort to consult the United States public’s position on
the matter; and the vast majority of Americans likely
did not even know the exchange took place.
The policy I am describing, which sees Washington
prioritize unrestrained funding for a proxy war with a
nuclear Power in a foreign land, while our domestic
infrastructure falls apart before our eyes, exposes
a disturbing dynamic at the heart of the Ukraine
conflict — an international Ponzi scheme that enables
Western elites to seize hard-earned wealth from the

23-186323/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

hands of average United States citizens and funnel
it into the coffers of a foreign Government that even
Transparency International ranks consistently as one of
the most corrupt in Europe.
The United States Government has yet to conduct an
official audit of its funding for Ukraine. The American
public has no idea where its tax dollars are going. That
is why this week, we at The Grayzone published an
independent audit of United States tax dollar allocation
to Ukraine throughout fiscal years 2022 and 2023. Our
investigation was led by Heather Kaiser, a former military
intelligence officer who served in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Among many bizarre payments, we found a
$4.5 million payment from the United States Social
Security Administration to the Kyiv Government. We
found $4.5 billion worth of payments from the United
States Agency for International Development to pay off
Ukraine’s sovereign debt, much of which is owned by the
global investment firm BlackRock. That amounts to $30
taken from every United States citizen at a time when 4
in 10 Americans cannot afford a $400 emergency. We
found tax dollars earmarked for Ukraine padding the
budgets of a television station in Toronto, a pro-NATO
think tank in Poland and, believe it or not, even rural
farmers in Kenya. We found tens of millions to private
equity firms, including one in the Republic of Georgia,
as well as a $1 million payment to a single private
entrepreneur in Kyiv.
Our audit also revealed the Pentagon’s $4.5 million
contract with a company called Atlantic Diving Supply to
provide Ukraine with unspecified explosives equipment.
It is a notoriously corrupt company that none other than
Thom Tillis, the Chair of the Senate Armed Services
Committee, previously lambasted for its “history of
fraud”. Yet once again, Congress has failed to ensure
that those shady payments and massive arms deals are
properly tracked.
In fact, much of the military and humanitarian aid
shipped to Ukraine has simply vanished. Last year, CBS
News quoted the director of a pro-Zelenskyy non-profit
in Ukraine who reported that only 30 per cent of aid was
reaching the front lines in Ukraine. The embezzlement of
funds and supplies is at least as troubling as the potential
consequences of the illicit transfer and sales of militarygrade weapons. Last June, the head of INTERPOL
warned that the massive transfers of arms into Ukraine
means “we can expect an influx of weapons in Europe
and beyond” and that “criminals are even now, as we
speak, focusing on them”.
4/25

29/06/2023

This May, a group of anti-Kremlin Russian
exiles, outfitted with gear supplied by the Ukrainian
Government, was hailed by Western politicians for
carrying out terrorist attacks on Russian territory using
American-made Humvees. Although the group the socalled Russian Volunteer Corps is led by a man who calls
himself the “White King” and includes numerous open
admirers of Adolf Hitler, described as neo-Nazis in United
States mainstream media, the Western weaponization of
that militia against Russian forces and Russian civilians
has not prompted any outcry from Congress. And while
the Biden Administration has promised that it is keeping
tabs on the weapons sent, a State Department cable
leaked last December conceded that
“kinetic activity and active combat between
Ukrainian and Russian forces create an environment
in which standard verification measures are
sometimes impracticable or impossible”.
The Biden Administration not only knows that it
cannot track the weapons it is shipping to Ukraine, but
it also knows it is escalating a proxy war against the
world’s largest nuclear Power and daring it to respond
in kind. We know that because back in 2014 — and the
timeline is very important — NATO Secretary General
Jens Stoltenberg said that the war started following
a United States-backed coup d’état. President Barack
Obama rejected demands from Kyiv to send lethal
offensive weaponry because, as The Wall Street Journal
put it, he had a
“long-standing concern that arming Ukraine would
provoke Moscow into a further escalation that could
drag Washington into a proxy war”.
When Donald Trump entered office, in 2017, he
attempted to hold the line on Barack Obama’s policy but
was soon branded a Russian puppet by the Beltway press
corps and the Democratic Party for refusing to send
Raytheon’s Javelin missiles to the Ukrainian military.
His reluctance to send the Javelins became a central
theme of his impeachment and, predictably, he relented.
As the United States-made offensive weaponry
began to reach the front lines of Donbas, the collective
West exploited the Minsk accords to “give Ukraine
time” to arm up, as former German Chancellor Angela
Merkel put it. In January 2022, the United States
announced a $200 million arms package to Ukraine.
Follow the timeline. By 18 February, observers from
the Organization for Security and Cooperation (OSCE)
in Europe reported a doubling in ceasefire violations,
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

with OSCE maps showing the overwhelming majority
of targeted sites on the side of pro-Russian separatists
in Donetsk and Luhansk. Five days later, Russia
invaded Ukraine.
Since then, the United States and its allies have been
scurrying up the escalation ladder at every opportunity.
A former State Department official complained after
meeting with Ukrainian counterparts,
“[t]hings we couldn’t give in January because it was
escalatory were given in February [...] and things we
couldn’t give in February we can in April. That has
been the distinct pattern, starting with, for crying
out loud, Stingers”.
President Joe Biden himself said in March 2022,
“[t]he idea that we’re going to send in offensive
equipment and have planes and tanks […] don’t kid
yourself, no matter what you all say, that’s called
‘World War III’”.
Just more than a year later, Biden changed his tune,
backing a plan to provide F-16 fighter jets to Ukraine, after
pressuring Germany to send in the tanks he once feared
would provoke World War III. It would only take two
months from the time that Ukraine received Lockheedmade HIMARS from the United States for the Ukrainian
military to begin targeting critical infrastructure, using
them to strike the Antonovka bridge over the Dnipro
River and, once again, two months later in a test strike on
the Kakhovka dam, as the The Washington Post reported,
“to see if the water level of the Dnieper River could
be raised enough to stymie Russian crossings”.
Three weeks ago, the Kakhovka Dam was destroyed,
triggering a major environmental catastrophe, which
caused mass flooding and contamination of the local
water supply. Ukraine of course blames Russia for the
attack but has produced no evidence. Around the same
time, Ukraine also baselessly accused Russia of planning
a provocation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear plant, which
triggered a resolution by Senators Lindsey Graham
and Richard Blumenthal, who is of no relation to me,
calling on NATO to intervene directly in Ukraine and
attack Russia if such an incident occurred. The move by
Blumenthal and Graham thus established a de facto red
line for initiating United States military action, much
like the one set down in Syria which, as a former United
States diplomat commented to journalist Charles Glass,
“was an open invitation to a false flag operation.”

S/PV.9364

Will we see another Douma deception, but the
next time in Zaporizhzhya, with nuclear consequences?
Why are we doing this? Why are we tempting nuclear
annihilation by flooding Ukraine with advanced
weapons and sabotaging negotiations at every turn?
We have been told by people like Senator Dick Durbin
that Ukraine is literally in a battle for freedom and
democracy itself and that therefore anyone who opposes
military aid to Ukraine opposes the very defence of
democracy, according to the same logic.
Where is the democracy therefore in Volodymyr
Zelenskyy’s decision to ban opposition parties,
criminalize the media outlets of his legitimate political
opponents, to jail his top political rival and his deputies,
raid Orthodox churches and jail clergymen? Where
is the democracy in the Ukrainian Government’s
imprisonment of Gonzalo Lira, an American citizen,
simply for challenging the official narrative of Ukraine’s
war? And where is the democracy in Zelenskyy’s recent
decision to suspend elections in 2024 on the grounds
that martial law has been declared? The answer is that
Ukrainian democracy is harder to find these days than
the country’s Commander-in-Chief Valery Zaluzhny.
Senator Lindsey Graham has offered a much grimmer
and more on-the-mark rationale for supplying Ukraine
with billions of dollars in weapons. As the senator
boasted during a recent visit with Zelenskyy in Kyiv,
“[t]he Russians are dying … It’s the best money we’ve
ever spent.”
Graham has also said that Americans are ready
to fight this war down to the last Ukrainian. While
official casualty numbers are strictly classified, we
must worry that Ukraine is well on its way to fulfilling
the Senator’s ghoulish fantasies. As a Ukrainian soldier
complained this month to Vice News, we don’t know
what Zelenskyy’s plans are, but
“[i]t looks like extermination of its own
population — like of the combat-ready and
working-age population. That’s it.”
Indeed, military cemeteries in Ukraine are
expanding almost as rapidly as the northern Virginia
McMansions and beach-front estates of executives
from Lockheed Martin, Raytheon and assorted Beltway
contractors benefiting from the second-highest level of
military spending since the Second World War. They are
the real winners of the Ukraine proxy war, not average
Ukrainians, Americans, Russians or Europeans.
The winners are people like Secretary of State Tony

23-186325/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

Blinken, who spent his time between the Obama and
Biden Administrations launching a consulting firm
called WestExec Advisors, which secured lucrative
Government contracts for intelligence firms and the
arms industry. Blinken’s former partners at WestExec
include Director of National Intelligence Avril Haines,
Central Intelligence Agency Deputy Director David
Cohen, former White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki
and almost a dozen current and former members of
Biden’s national security team. Secretary of Defense
Lloyd Austin, for his part, is a former, and possibly
future, board member of Raytheon and a former partner
of the Pine Island Capital Partners, an investment
firm, which collaborates with WestExec and which
Blinken himself has advised. Meanwhile, the current
Permanent Representative of the United States to the
United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, is listed
as senior counsel at the Albright Stonebridge Group, a
self-described commercial diplomacy firm, which also
finesses Government contracts for the intelligence and
arms sectors, which was founded by Madeleine Albright,
infamously known for her comments that the deaths by
sanctions of half a million Iraqi children were worth it.
While middle-aged Ukrainian men are ripped off the
streets by military police and sent to the front lines, the
financially and politically connected architects of this
proxy war are planning to walk through the revolving
door to reap unimaginable profits once their time in the
Biden Administration is over. For them, a negotiated
settlement to this territorial dispute means an end to
the cash cow of close to $150 billion in United States
aid to Ukraine.
In conclusion, when the United States — my country
and a Permanent Member of the Security Council — has
fallen under the control of a bipartisan regime that
seeks to perpetuate a proxy war for, in the words of Joe
Biden, “as long as it takes”; which considers diplomacy
synonymous with unilateral coercive measures to “turn
the rouble to rubble,” as Biden has pledged to do; and
whose leadership subverts negotiations in order to
pursue profit, while refusing to properly inform its own
citizens what they are paying for and pushes the sons
and brothers of its supposed Ukrainian partners out
onto a killing field in order to bludgeon a geopolitical
rival; and when both Zelenskyy and members of the
United States Congress call for pre-emptive strikes on
Russia that have nothing to do with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Council must take
action to enforce the Charter. The Charter is clear that
the Security Council must use its authority to guarantee
6/25

29/06/2023

the pacific settlement of a dispute, particularly when
it threatens international security. That should not
only apply to Russia and Ukraine. The Council has an
obligation to strictly monitor and restrain the United
States and the illegal military formation known
as NATO.
The President: I thank Mr. Blumenthal for his
briefing.
I would like to remind briefers to limit their
interventions to 10 minutes.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bowes.
Mr. Bowes: Despite well more than a year of
frenzied and what is now recognized as a loosely
regulated supply of incalculable numbers of weapons
to Ukraine, sources within the country still maintain
that it needs an escalating volume of heavy and light
weapons and ammunition to conduct its operations. It is
now also glaringly apparent that what began as NATO
supporting a Ukrainian military that it had built since
the beginning of the civil war in the east in 2014 has in
real terms become a proxy conflict in which Ukraine
supplies manpower with ever-diminishing operational
capability to support a de facto NATO operation in
order to prevent a Russian military victory in Ukraine,
and thereby avert the potentially terminal impact such
a victory would have on the operational, political and
reputational survival of NATO itself. It is critical that
the reality of the situation is seen for what it actually is.
That is indeed the very real escalating concern of
NATO planners and their political funders, particularly
in the ever-hawkish Anglosphere, The same geostrategic
reality also, of course, drives the seemingly perpetual
escalation of military aid to Ukraine. All of that is
despite the tens of billions of dollars of weapons in
various states of operability already being delivered
to a country that the United States has described, as
recently 2019, as endemically corrupt and, in many
sectors of society, essentially lawless. It is crucially
important that we are clear as to the kind of country
to which such vast amounts of weapons are being
delivered. I would like to cite the United States 2019
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, published
by the Department of State’s Bureau of Democracy,
Human Rights and Labor. This is a shocking report
that maintains that unlawful and arbitrary killings and
torture are widespread, as is the abuse of detainees by
law enforcement personnel. It also mentions,
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

“harsh and life-threatening conditions in prisons
and detention centers; arbitrary arrest and detention;
substantial problems with the independence of the
judiciary; restrictions on freedom of expression, the
press, and the internet, including violence against
journalists, censorship, and blocking of websites”.
Control of the press is widespread. It goes on
to cite serious concerns regarding Government
corruption and crimes involving violence or the threat
of violence targeting persons with disabilities, ethnic
minorities — which I presume includes the Russianspeaking minority in the east of the country — and
the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
community. It is into that cauldron that the Western
Powers are pouring incalculable volumes of weapons
and munitions and money.
On the front lines, meanwhile, military progress
for the now serially depleted Ukrainian military is
undeniably strategically insignificant, particularly
in the context of the long-vaunted and publicized
counter-offensive, where all qualified and objective
independent and non-aligned analysts must agree
that Ukraine is failing to achieve even the necessary
initial breakthroughs against well-prepared and wellresourced Russian lines of defence. It is very interesting
to hear the paid expert contributors in Western media
encouraging an almost perverse stiff-upper-lip lookthe-other-way attitude when faced with the undeniably
brutal losses that Ukraine has undeniably suffered.
Those young men dying in their thousands are, in
my considered view, the most foremost victims of the
perpetual escalation in military aid to Ukraine. They are
attempting to advance in close order in daylight across
minefields into pre-zeroed artillery kill zones, often
in 30-year-old second-rate NATO-supplied armoured
personnel carriers, like the United States M-113 — a
lightly armoured steel box that first entered service in
1960 and is a veteran of another United States foreign
policy disaster, namely, the Vietnam War. They may be
accompanied by a handful of German Leopard tanks,
many of which are decades old and grossly unsuited to
the Ukrainian steppes, or maybe by what are supposed
to be mine-resistant vehicles, all of which have been
shown now to be exceptionally vulnerable to Russian
anti-tank warfare systems and attack helicopters, and
the brutal reality of in-depth Russian minefields.
All of that occurs with no meaningful air support,
let alone air supremacy, which Russia commands with
its in-depth air defence systems and a large fleet of

S/PV.9364

modern multi-role fighters. The idea that those assaults,
which are essentially amounting to suicidal full-frontal
attacks on in-depth prepared defences, are allowed to
continue is, in my view, deeply cynical and, I would
suggest, sinister. No modern NATO military strategist
or senior officer would suggest that those manoeuvres
are anything but an inhumane ticket to tragedy when
commanding their own troops, yet when it comes to the
young Ukrainian men mounting those assaults being
decimated, they are silent. They accept the Ukrainian
Government’s ban on reporting from the front lines on
the vast losses in men and material that evoke scenes
more similar to the Somme or Passchendaele.
The ideology that an increasingly depleted Ukraine
can indeed defeat Russia on the battlefield in eastern
and southern Ukraine, somehow reclaim Crimea and
subsume an unwilling ethnic Russian population back
into a chaotic and essentially failed State governed
from Kyiv is a delusion.
The quality of some of the equipment that the
United States has urged its smaller NATO allies to
donate to Ukraine is at best repairable and at worst
outright lethal — not to the Russian defenders, but to
the Ukrainian operators. Several of those incentive
deals have been done to entice NATO countries to
dump all their vehicles into a desperate Ukraine on the
promise of replacement with better, or at least younger,
equipment. In one case, Germany replaced 40 BMP1A1s — one of the oldest versions of that Soviet troop
carrier — for the Greek army, with 40 Marder infantry
fighting vehicles through a Ringtausch programme, the
Soviet air armour then being forwarded to Ukraine. The
same type of deals have been widespread regarding the
hasty requirement to feed Ukraine’s Soviet-era artillery,
such as the Grad multiple launch rocket system, with
post-Soviet States in Eastern Europe offering hundreds
of thousands of rounds of artillery and rockets to the
country in return for replacement systems.
Surely the morality of that is deeply questionable.
Of course, there is one fiscal beneficiary — and that
is of course the NATO military-industrial complex,
of which the United States is by far the biggest player
globally. A recent The New York Times article outlined
how profiteering and incompetence have further
complicated the chaotic landscape in Ukraine when it
comes to the flood of heavy and light weapons into the
country. According to that article,
“Ukraine has paid contractors hundreds of millions
of dollars for weapons that have not been delivered,

23-186327/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

and some of the much-publicized arms donated
by its allies have been so decrepit that they were
deemed fit only to be cannibalized for spare parts”.
Or, indeed, they have been scrapped. The Ukrainian
Government has revealed documents that show, as of
the end of last year, Kyiv had paid arms suppliers more
than $800 million for contracts that went completely or
partly unfulfilled.
Two of the individuals involved in the purchasing of
that equipment, according to The New York Times, said
that as of early spring, hundreds of millions of dollars
had been paid, including to State-owned companies,
for arms that never materialized. Volodymyr Havrylov,
Ukraine’s Deputy Defence Minister, said: “We did have
cases where we paid money and we did not receive”.
I would like to point out again that some of those
contracts are with State companies, according to The
New York Times.
It is very important that we try to show the sheer
scale and volume of weapons flooding into Ukraine
since last year. The United States alone has committed
well over $40 billion worth of military aid to the Kyiv
Government. The European Union and other States
have also contributed tens of billions into what we
know to be one of the least regulated States on Earth
when it comes to control of corruption and institutional
accountability. In addition, Ukraine has spent billions
of dollars of its own money on the private arms
market — possibly the most difficult area in which to
ascertain any kind of transparency.
It is worth recalling that, over the 20-year period of
the United States intervention in Afghanistan, the United
States Department of Defense paid various companies
about $108 billion in contracts for work performed in
the country, with one third of that contract spending
remarkably going to undisclosed recipients — domestic
and foreign businesses that are not uniquely identified
in the publicly available contracting databases. That
information is from a landmark piece of work done by
the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs
at Brown University in Rhode Island, United States of
America, as part of its “Costs of War” research project
on the Afghan misadventure.
Those vast sums would suggest to the novice taxpayer
that Ukraine is receiving high-technology supplies, but
in a reflection of the poor quality of Western donations
and the brutal battlefield attrition rate, as much as 30 per
cent of Kyiv’s arsenal is under repair at any given time.
8/25

29/06/2023

That, again, is according to a source reported by The
New York Times in a separate article. It also suggests that
a recent delivery of 33 self-propelled Howitzers donated
by the Italian Government were basically good only for
scrap. The Italian Defence Ministry had stated that the
vehicles had been decommissioned many years ago, but
Ukraine had asked for them to be overhauled and put
into operation anyway, given the urgent need for a means
to face Russian aggression.
A Pentagon Inspector General’s report released last
May also illustrates some of these serious issues. An
American unit was supposed to ship 29 high-mobility
multipurpose wheeled vehicles — a very small amount
of equipment — to Ukraine from a depot in Kuwait. The
cost of that action bears no remote link to any sort of
strategic imperative whatsoever. By the time it actually
arrived in Poland, only three of the vehicles were
actually battle-worthy. The tires were rotten and had to
be replaced at huge cost, basically choking up the whole
supply chain.
The same thing has happened with M-777 Howitzers,
which were a much-vaunted game-changer in the long
line of much-vaunted game-changers that were going to
turn the tide of the war in Ukraine, according to Western
media. Instead, the M-777 Howitzer has become a sitting
duck for Russian loitering munitions. We have verifiable
evidence that over 100 of those units have been destroyed
in the field in Ukraine. By the way, the Pentagon report
also says that at least one of the M-777 Howitzers was
in such bad shape that it would have killed the operators
trying to use it. That is in the Inspector General’s report
that was concluded in March 2022.
Similarly, Britain’s Defence Secretary Ben Wallace
has announced the planned transfer of AS-90 Howitzers
in Ukraine to great fanfare: “We stand with Ukraine”.
In fact, when we look into that transfer, we see that
those Howitzers were unserviceable or in varying states
of readiness and ended up being scrapped or used for
spare parts.
The haphazard distribution of small arms across
the country is probably just as disturbing, if not more
so, in the context of the Ukrainian conflict. Long
before the Russian military operation in Ukraine began
last February, various reports were highlighting the
dangers to civil society of the widespread distribution
of small arms and ammunition across the country. Max
Blumenthal has referred to some of those reports.
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

In February 2022 Ukrainian authorities, remarkably,
began to distribute tens of thousands of assault weapons,
rifles, grenades and millions of rounds of ammunition
to the general population. In one an incident alone, six
kilometres from the centre of Kyiv, thousands of weapons
were distributed to anybody willing to carry them. Some
18,000 portable assault weapons, rifles and pistols with
ammunition were handed out to untrained civilians
within days of the Russian intervention. That was
confirmed to the British Broadcasting Corporation by
Vadym Denysenko, Ukraine’s Interior Ministry adviser.
It is impossible to imagine or even speculate as to the
volume of illicit and official small arms now circulating
in the country, which is experiencing catastrophic
levels of dysfunction and destruction, criminality and
corruption. I do not need to cite the various INTERPOL
reports in that connection or Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu, who suggested that there are
Western anti-tank weapons now on the borders of Israel
in the hands of the enemies of Israel. I will not quote
those because they are widely known and have been
mentioned by other briefers.
That leads to my next point, which I am anxious to
make, regarding the potential destructive power of every
single military-grade weapon in the wrong hands — the
unthinkable destruction a single anti-aircraft weapon
could have on the periphery of any European airport. We
have all seen the tragic consequences of the brutal terror
attacks at the Bataclan theatre in Paris in November 2015,
where 130 innocent civilians died and 416 were injured.
The attackers carried Zastava M70 assault rifles, which
had been previously deactivated and reactivated for the
attacks. The M70 is a Serbian copy of the Kalashnikov
rifle, the most common weapon — now circulating in the
tens or hundreds of thousands in Ukraine. It is a lethal
and capable weapon — easy to use, easy to conceal and,
in the wrong hands, capable of delivering catastrophic
destruction and firepower.
Unfortunately, given the huge scale of saturation of
Ukrainian society with such weapons, it is absolutely
inevitable that significant numbers of those weapons have
been and will continue to be sold on the black market to
the highest bidders, particularly in a society racked by
conflict, societal breakdown and the ensuing lawlessness
that brings. It does not take vast numbers of weapons to
cause significant civil strife and lead to severe local and
potentially national escalation of conflict.

S/PV.9364

In my own country, British forces colluded with
loyalist paramilitary gangs through the 1970s, 1980s
and early 1990s to terrorize and murder hundreds
of innocent civilians over decades with relatively
minuscule amounts of weaponry — actually less than
hundreds of firearms. The Irish Republican Army
was able to mount a serious threat to the British State
itself with relatively small amounts of weapons and
explosives. Thousands were killed and injured during
a decades-long conflict sustained by a relatively small
arsenal of weaponry. When the Irish Republican Army
decommissioned its arsenal, it was found to have only
1,000 rifles, 2 tons of Semtex explosive and seven
surface-to-air missiles. Yet that was enough to mount
to sustained and significant threat to the British State.
As I have mentioned many times, more weapons
were handed out over a period of days to civilians in
Kyiv in the context of the Ukrainian conflict than these
numbers themselves. They are absolutely minuscule,
but they demonstrate the potential for a relatively small
armed group on either side to exert disproportionate
influence in any post-conflict period, which could lead
to the collapse of any accommodation or agreement. It
is the proliferation of those weapons that potentially
could lead to decades of instability, not only in other
parts of Europe and further afield, but in Ukraine itself.
Finally, and to wind up, I recently spent some time
in the city of Belgorod, which has come under sustained
attack from Ukrainian artillery and drones. I visited the
town of Shebekino and a large displaced persons centre
that the Government is providing to tens of thousands
of ordinary civilians who had to flee their homes due to
the indiscriminate shelling of civilian targets. I stood
with an 83-year-old woman as she asked me what she
had done to deserve a high-explosive Ukrainian drone to
target her home in a civilian terror attack in Voronezh.
I saw those villages burning. I heard the artillery
strike, and I have to tell the Council that weapons being
supplied by NATO and its allies to Ukraine are being
wilfully used to target civilian populations on a daily
basis in Donbas, Lugansk, Belgorod — all miraculously
invisible to the western media. It is incumbent on all
here that have any influence to convey the reality
of the conflict to their own people in order to avoid
the increasingly dangerous spiral of escalation that
leads us further towards the absolutes, at the expense
of compromise.

23-186329/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

I owe it to the men and women and children who
I met in the conflict zones, with whom I had the
privilege to speak, to convey the reality of increased
militarization in the region. I urge the Council to seek
accommodation and peace and to respect the democratic
mandate of those who have expressed it. Settlement will
come, and it is my absolute belief that it is up to those in
Washington D.C. and London, now fuelling the conflict
with endless escalatory military aid to Ukraine, to
decide where and when that settlement occurs, either
at the negotiating table or on the battlefield. In that
connection, we have an expression in Ireland — he who
pays the piper calls the tune.
The President: I thank Mr. Bowes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Radchenko.
Mr. Radchenko: It is an honour to speak to the
Council and to follow such eloquent presentations.
Russia is conducting a war of aggression against
Ukraine, a terrible war that has already cost many
tens of thousands of lives. Russia has resorted to
indiscriminate bombing of civilians. Its troops have
committed atrocities, including torture, rape and
killing. Russia has violated the principles of the United
Nations, which it helped craft at the end of the Second
World War. Just yesterday, Russia’s Foreign Minister,
Sergey Lavrov, claimed in an interview that no one
has ever sent him the list of rules for the rules-based
international order. That list exists; it is called the
Charter of the United Nations, and here is what it says
in Article 2, paragraph 4:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any State, or in any other matter inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations.”
The United Nations Charter was signed on 26 June
1945, in the wake of the most destructive war the world
has ever seen — a war of those who sought to enslave
the world by conquest and brutality against those who
stood up against aggression, who fought shoulder to
shoulder for their freedom and dignity.
In July 1937, after several years of gradual
encroachment through the creation of various puppet
State, imperial Japan invaded the Republic of China.
The Japanese armies brutally fought their way
across China. The Chinese Government appealed for
international help and received it. None other than
10/25

29/06/2023

Moscow provided China with hundreds of aircraft and
even pilots who played a crucial role in the Chinese
resistance effort, in particular in the Battle of Wuhan,
in the spring of 1938. Were it not for Soviet and, later,
American help, the aggressor would have triumphed,
and China would have fallen.
After the Second World War broke out in Europe
and German armies laid waste to neighbouring
countries, the United States stepped up to the task,
both by committing its troops and also, crucially, by
providing Lend-Lease aid to those countries fighting
against Hitler’s aggression, including the Soviet Union.
Between 1941 and 1945, the United States provided the
Soviet Union with $11 billion worth of aid, which is
over $200 billion in today’s dollars — an amount second
only to that provided to the United Kingdom. That
aid included over 14,000 airplanes; 12,000 armoured
vehicles, including 7,000 tanks; over 8,000 artillery
pieces, including anti-aircraft weapons; over 400,000
jeeps and trucks and 197 torpedo boats.
Policymakers in Berlin may well have been
concerned at the time that such an ambitious effort by
the United States prolonged the war because it made
it more difficult for Germany to defeat and enslave
the Soviet Union. But it is worth reiterating that those
supplies were the Soviet Union’s lifeline. Without
them, the Soviet Union would have most certainly
been overrun by the Third Reich, the United Nations
would never have won and Mr. Max Blumenthal and
Mr. Chay Bowes would never have joined us today to
tell us about the very heavy, completely unacceptable
burden of supporting freedom. Why are we doing this,
Mr. Blumenthal asks rhetorically. The answer is so that
Mr. Bowes can come here and tell us how terrible it
is to support a victim of unprovoked aggression, how
terrible it is to help people under attack, how terrible it
is to resist imperialist conquest.
I am a historian, and historians bring the past to the
present in order to gain a better understanding of what
the future may hold.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is not a historically
unprecedented development. Wars of aggression have
happened before. Unprovoked invasions have happened
before. They tend to have consequences, one of which
is the tendency of the invaded party to resist the invader
and ask for outside assistance. This idea was enshrined
in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, which
is a provision that sadly no one has shown to Sergei
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Lavrov, and speaks of “the inherent right of individual
or collective self-defence”. It is by that inherent right
that Ukraine has turned to the world with a plea for
help. It is by that inherent right that so many nations
have contributed to Ukraine’s defence by sending much
needed military aid. If anything, those nations have
not gone far enough, for Russia continues to occupy
internationally recognized Ukrainian territory posing a
great threat to international peace and security.
The great Carl von Clausewitz, who incidentally
served in the Russian army during the Napoleonic
invasion of Russia, once noted that the aggressor “is
always peace-loving”. That is, the aggressor would
gladly invade its neighbours peacefully unless it will
meet with organized resistance.
(spoke in Russian)
Clausewitz was right.
Russian complaints regarding external support for
Ukraine do not detract from the following facts.
First, the Russian Federation invaded Ukraine on
trumped-up reasons, not the opposite. Secondly, the
Russian Federation continues to violate international law
by waging a war of aggression against a neighbouring
State. Thirdly, the Russian Federation is continuing
to bomb Ukrainian cities, including Kramatorsk just
yesterday, where the Russian Federation, by way of
a missile strike, destroyed civilian infrastructure,
specifically a restaurant, resulting in the death of
innocent civilians, including three children. Fourthly,
the Russian Federation has been so bold as to demand
that the West not supply Ukraine with weapons to defend
itself against a treacherous attack. Fortunately, the
Security Council is capable of differentiating between
truth and lies, between those defending themselves from
aggression and those who wage wars of aggression, and
between those who are truly peace-loving and those
who are hiding behind lofty statements about striving
for peace but actually think only of war.
The President: I thank Mr. Radchenko for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu, Mr. Blumenthal and Mr. Bowes for
their comprehensive briefings.

S/PV.9364

To Mr. Radchenko, I would say the following: let
us not be hypocritical with regard to the rules-based
international order. The rules-based international order
is not the United Nations Charter; it is a set of rules
thought up by a small number of countries — primarily
Western countries — which are being then portrayed
by them as universal. We fail to understand what is
happening; whereas Mr. Blumenthal and Mr. Bowes
spoke to the topic at hand, gave us useful details with
regard to weapons supplied to Ukraine and the way
they are being financed, Mr. Radchenko gave us a
historical lecture, and we do not understand the reason
for choosing him as a briefer.
As we just heard from our briefers — not all of them,
of course — threats stemming from Western weapons
being supplied to Ukraine are continuing to grow and
multiply. It is happening as our former partners from
the West continue to make incessant attempts to once
again shift all blame for what is going on in Ukraine
onto Russia, inconsistencies in the narrative they are
promoting are obvious. Western countries are doggedly
trying to make the international community forget that
the crisis in Ukraine, just like Western arms supplies to
Kyiv, began long before the special military operation.
Thanks to revelations from a whole host of high-ranking
politicians at the time, we know today that pumping
Ukraine full of weapons and working to prepare it for
war with Russia was planned and carried out for all
these years, under cover of the Minsk accords, which
were backed up by concomitant Security Council
resolutions, although neither the Western countries nor
Kyiv ever intended to implement such accords.
All the while, civilians in Donbas were subjected
to mass shelling. Of course, Russia could not remain
indifferent. Today, though, Kyiv’s Western patrons are
trying to put a new spin on the state of affairs, saying
that they only began to arm Ukraine when the special
military operation began in order to repel the so-called
Russian aggression. This scheme over the last 18
months has become something akin to a supporting a
private military company called Ukraine, with weapons
supplied by NATO, using mainly old stockpiles, its
supplying countries financing their domestic military
enterprises on the sly, with these companies making
exorbitant profits, whereas the ones fighting and
dying by the tens of thousands on the battlefield are
Ukrainians. One of our briefers mentioned today that
United States Senator Lindsey Graham told the head
of the Kyiv regime during their meeting that this

23-1863211/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

scheme — and the resulting deaths of Russians — was
the best money the United States ever spent in its efforts
to help Ukraine.
Today the cumulative amount of military assistance
the United States and its allies have provided to
Ukraine is over $55 billion. The fact that these weapons
are being used to shell civilian infrastructure and are
resulting in civilian deaths — and there is a great deal
of evidence that that is the case — in no way ruffles
the West, the so-called peace-loving West. Western
countries are not only pumping the Kyiv regime full
of weapons in an unbridled fashion, but they are also
training Ukrainian forces and nationalist battalions
on their own territories, providing intelligence to the
Ukrainian army for target setting, and even approving
strikes conducted with Western weapons.
Yet the Western countries are assiduously asserting
that they are not involved in this conflict. They are
supposedly neutral. Nevertheless, international law,
including the provisions of the Hague Convention of
1907 and the norms of customary international law,
which prohibit such actions by neutral States, are
unequivocal. Commission of such acts means that these
States must lose their neutral status and will become
parties to an armed conflict.
As justification, our former partners are putting
forward the following argument. They say that the
Hague Convention of 1907 is supposedly terribly
outdated. It is very strange to hear that from States
whose military agencies are regularly updating and
rewriting heavy tomes dedicated to the law and customs
of war. These tomes include lengthy sections about the
rights and duties of neutral States and invoke, inter
alia, the norms set forth in these supposedly outdated
conventions. Let me underscore that those publications
do not contain doctrine. These documents are practical
guidelines for army and navy commanders and call for
the harshest measures to be taken in response to the
violation of neutrality, including the use of force. The
1907 Hague Convention is an international agreement
that remains in force; it has not been abrogated. Its main
objective is to prevent the spread of armed conflicts, to
prevent a growing number of States from being pulled
into such conflicts.
Today that convention is more relevant than ever.
After all, the collective West has proclaimed that its
objective is to inflict a strategic defeat on Russia on the
battlefield. Their madcap statements are accompanied
12/25

29/06/2023

by equally irresponsible actions. We are tempted
to call this playing with fire, but it is actually worse
than that: in their militaristic frenzy, having become
completely untethered from reality, the West is
deliberately provoking a direct confrontation between
nuclear Powers.
Another argument is based on branding our country
the aggressor, as the General Assembly did in adopting
the resolution at its eleventh emergency special session
(General Assembly resolution ES‑11/1). The United
States has started a record number of aggressive wars
in modern history, and yet it pompously proclaims that
it is possible to help a so-called victim of aggression
without losing its neutral status. Any self-respecting
international lawyer would find such arguments
laughable, and that has nothing to do with the fact that
the West’s support for these consensual conventions
imposed by the collective West, faded as the real
reasons for the Ukrainian crisis became obvious.
Neither is it that the United States and its satellites
are the architects and main beneficiaries of the situation.
The main issue is that, in principle, the General
Assembly is not empowered under the United Nations
Charter to determine that an aggression has occurred.
Such qualifications are in violation of the provisions
of the Charter and are nugatory ab initio. That means
that the label of “aggressor” is not a legal qualification.
It is in fact a political value judgment.Without legal
foundation, everything that has been built on the socalled qualified neutrality argument simply crumbles.
If we are talking about value judgments and
assessments, the aggressor is the one that organized
a bloody pro-fascist coup in a country neighbouring
ours by all means and methods available and moulded
the resulting State into an enemy of Russia and of
everything Russian — our history, culture, language,
and even the Orthodox faith; it is the one that trained
fighters, including vile neo-Nazi battalions, and
supplied them with weapons long before February
2022, knowing all too well that those weapons would
be used to kill civilians in Donbas.
In addition, the way that NATO — which Ukraine
is so eager to join — is trying to portray itself as a
purely defensive alliance sounds like an unfortunate
joke given the extensive record of unprovoked and
unjustified acts of military aggression involving that
militaristic bloc.
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The arguments of the Western legal doctrine
according to which collective self-defence is supposedly
being invoked under Article 51 do not stand up to
scrutiny either. In that regard, there are two main issues.
First, we cannot recall the Council being notified
of such an invocation, even though, according to the
Charter, that should be done immediately.
Moreover, a statement of self-defence against Russia
would be tantamount to a statement acknowledging
being at war with our country.
What is even more interesting are the references
to alleged countermeasures under international law. As
we all know, such measures must meet the criterion of
proportionality. But what kind of damage did Russia
do to the United States or the European Union that
would justify the killing of our citizens with Western
weapons, the sabotage of the Nord Stream 1 and 2
pipelines and the terrorist attacks committed against
prominent Russian public figures? Before it is too late,
we recommend that the authors of such speculative
constructions give some thought to this key question:
what should Russia’s countermeasures be in that case?
Today our former partners in the Council will most
likely talk again about their commitment to settling the
crisis in Ukraine. There is, however, a fact that would
not fit into the narrative that the West is spreading.
As early as in spring of last year, the head of the
negotiating team from Ukraine had initialled a draft
peace agreement in Istanbul. The President of Russia
demonstrated that document publicly during a recent
meeting with African leaders. However, since the Kyiv
regime, under pressure from its Western sponsors,
reneged on the agreement that had been reached and
introduced a legislative ban on peace talks with Russia,
it became clear that Western States are not interested in
achieving a sustainable and lasting peace in our region.
Where does that leave us today? Last March,
Western countries did not allow Ukraine to agree with
Russia on peaceful coexistence and to become a neutral,
non-aligned State posing no threats. Instead, they are
arming the country in every way possible, in an insane
expectation that Ukraine will be able to defeat Russia.
The Western equipment being supplied to Kyiv is being
destroyed on the battlefield, while the Kyiv regime and
its sponsors have almost run out of Ukrainian and other
old Soviet equipment.

S/PV.9364

Incidentally, today, just before our meeting, the
Prime Minister of Latvia said that “Ukraine has already
been integrated into NATO in terms of armaments”. It
is hard to disagree with that, because Ukraine is now
only able to fight using the weapons it gets from the
West and NATO. It has hardly any other weaponry.
Moreover, Mr. Borrell Fontelles, the beacon
of European diplomacy, announced today that the
European Union is considering turning the European
Peace Facility into a defence fund for Ukraine. We
would advise Mr. Borrell Fontelles, as we have done
before, not to limit himself to half-measures and interim
solutions, but to change the name of the European Peace
Facility to the “European War Facility” immediately.
Ukraine has no weapons of its own left. But still
there are Ukrainians being sent into battle like lambs to
the slaughter as part of the so-called counter-offensive by
the Armed Forces of Ukraine, referred to by Ukrainians
as the “Zaporizhzhya meat grinder”. The Kyiv regime’s
mobilization reserve has not yet run out — although it
will soon come to that — but — and this is extremely
sad — Ukraine’s cemeteries are running out of space.
And all that unnecessary bloodshed — which only
Western countries want — is being imposed on Ukraine
for the sole purpose of reporting at least some success
at the coveted NATO summit to be held in mid-July.
Then Western Governments will be able to assert that
the huge sums of money being spent on Ukraine are not
being wasted, and then new weapons will be sent there
to eventually be destroyed on the battlefield just like
the ones that Armed Forces of Ukraine have now. There
is no measure of weapons supplies that will alter the
balance of power. Most independent military experts
already admit openly that the defeat of the Kyiv regime
is only a matter of time — and a matter of the number
of casualties that the Armed Forces of Ukraine will
sacrifice completely in vain during that time. And only
Western propagandists promote meaningless and empty
slogans saying that Ukraine can win. In reality, they do
not care in the least about the interests of Ukrainians.
They only want to weaken Russia as much as possible.
Of course, our opponents still have in their arsenal
high-profile staged terrorist attacks, which they try
to pin on Russia, such as the events in Bucha or the
destruction of the Kakhovka dam. God forbid they
should dare to provoke an accident at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, which the Ukrainians continue to
shell. That would kill and affect a lot of people across
Europe. Today we circulated a letter as an official

23-1863213/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

document of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, reiterating — amid the insane insinuations
by representatives of the Kyiv regime — that we have
no intention of blowing up the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant that we control, and that we urge the
Secretary-General and the international community to
influence Kyiv to refrain from provocations against the
nuclear power plant.
That is roughly what the current situation
looks like. And now, after the chance for peace was
squandered last March at the fault of the United States
and the European Union, the conditions for achieving
peace in Ukraine will of course be different. I want
to conclude with a quote from a highly respected and
experienced European leader. Last week he literally
said the following”
“Ukraine is no longer a sovereign State. It has
neither money nor weapons. It can keep on fighting
only thanks to the assistance being provided [by
the West]”.
In that politician’s view, the only way to save Ukraine is
“for the Americans to start negotiations with the
Russians, establish a security architecture and find a
place for Ukraine in that new security architecture”.
There is not much to comment on in that regard. The
good thing is that the bitter truth is finally beginning to
reach Western leaders. Continuing to supply Western
weapons to Ukraine will not lead to the outcome
the West desires — which is to defeat Russia on the
battlefield and inflict a strategic defeat on Russia. We
would like our Western colleagues to realize that as
soon as possible.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing. We have also
taken note of the other briefings. I will focus on three
main points today.
First, Switzerland firmly condemns Russia’s
military aggression against Ukraine. We reject all
attempts to justify and distort responsibility for that
act and its consequences. Through that act, Russia is
seriously violating international law, in particular the
prohibition of the use of force enshrined in Article 2
of the Charter of the United Nations. Ukraine has the
right to ensure its security and defend its sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
14/25

29/06/2023

Secondly, several Security Council resolutions
prohibit weapons transfers originating from certain
countries. Such transfers and the use of those weapons
for targeted attacks on civilian infrastructure constitute
multiple violations of international law. We call on all
States to respect their obligations, including the relevant
resolutions of the Council. We regret the heavy toll this
war has taken on the civilian population. Switzerland
calls for strict compliance with international
humanitarian law. In the conduct of hostilities, the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution
must be respected. We condemn any attack carried out
in violation of those principles and reaffirm that those
responsible for such acts must be brought to justice, and
that victims must receive the necessary support for their
physical, mental, social and economic rehabilitation.
Thirdly, General Assembly resolution ES-11/6
gives us a broadly supported basis for a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter. We welcome the
diplomatic efforts that are being pursued in line with
those principles.
This war is causing immense suffering for the
civilian population in Ukraine and increasing instability
throughout the world, with unforeseeable consequences,
including in Russia. We reiterate our concern about the
intention to deploy nuclear weapons in Belarus. We
once again call on Russia to de-escalate the situation,
cease all its combat operations and withdraw its troops
from the Ukrainian territory without delay so that a
diplomatic solution to be pursued.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her informative
briefing. We have also taken note of the other briefings.
It has now been 491 days since the Russian Federation
launched its brutal and unrelenting war against Ukraine,
bringing about untold suffering to innocent civilians,
who now live under constant threat of harm to their lives.
Apart from the immediate humanitarian crisis, the war
has become an axis of renewed geopolitical tensions,
with far-reaching implications for international peace
and security in the region of Europe. Away from the
battle zone, the war continues to negatively affect the
global economy, with a persisting rise in food and energy
prices and the tightening of international financial and
monetary conditions.
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

As confirmed in the briefing to the Council last
week (see S/PV.9357), the war now accounts for the
displacement of some 10 million people and more than
24,000 civilian casualties. As the Council is often
reminded, those numbers are likely to be higher, as they
represent only those reported through official United
Nations sources. There is no scarcity of evidence of
the massive destruction that has been caused in many
parts of the country. Homes, schools, medical facilities
and transport, energy and other critical infrastructure
are being destroyed at an alarming rate and in clear
violation of the prohibitions against such actions under
international humanitarian law. Presently, rescue
efforts are continuing at the site of a missile strike on
a restaurant in the city of Kramatorsk, where several
people, including children, are reported to have been
injured or killed.
As we know, violent conflicts, such as the one in
Ukraine, create the conditions for the accumulation of
weapons and their diversion from Government control
to unintended recipients and conflict situations in other
parts of the world. It is in that regard that, in previous
discussions on the subject, my delegation has urged
strict compliance with the Arms Trade Treaty and
other international obligations designed to prevent the
diversion or illicit transfer of conventional weapons.
It is important that, in maintaining international
peace and security, Member States providing defence
assistance to Ukraine should implement arms control
measures at all stages of weapons transfer, including
risk assessments, maintaining records, monitoring
and tracking, as well as post-conflict arrangements
for disarmament. Those measures are necessary to
ensure that military support provided in the course of
the war serve the singular purpose of strengthening
Ukraine’s capacity to assert its right to self-defence, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
From the very onset of the war, Ghana has struggled
to appreciate the various assertions provided by the
Russian Federation as justification for its conduct in
Ukraine. We also cannot reconcile any suggestions that
efforts in support of Ukraine’s legitimate use of force in
the defence of its sovereignty and territorial integrity
constitute an obstruction to peace efforts. The rules of
international law and the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations require States to interact on the basis of
mutual respect, peaceful coexistence and cooperation.
All Member States, and more particularly the members
of the Security Council, have an obligation to respect

S/PV.9364

and uphold the fundamental principles of sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity, which
govern inter-State relations and provide the foundation
for a stable international order. It is on that basis that
Ghana continues to call for the cessation of hostilities
and urges the Russian Federation to end the war through
the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of its troops
from the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine.
We also reiterate the absolute necessity for all parties to
refrain from targeting civilians and causing further harm
to Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure.
A large number of States Members of the United
Nations, including the members of the Council, have
taken a stand for peace in Ukraine and repeatedly called
for a peaceful settlement, in line with international
law and the core values on which our Organization is
founded. Much responsibility now lies with the parties
to extend themselves beyond their differences and return
to the negotiating table in search of a comprehensive and
lasting solution.
In a post-modern and globalized world where
challenges that confront nations transcend physical and
political boundaries, a purely inward-looking approach
to security, which appears to be the case, may offer
some temporary resolution but is unsustainable for the
wider maintenance of our collective global security. We
therefore encourage the intensification of diplomatic
efforts in support of a constructive dialogue that could
lead to a durable settlement between the two sides and in
the interest of all others.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and
Mr. Radchenko for their briefings. I would like to make
three points.
First, the Government of the United Kingdom has
been clear about the military support that it has provided
for the defence of Ukraine. The bravery and endless
determination of Ukrainians are their own, but we are
proud to support them in their fight to be free. We are not
just providing weapons. Approximately 17,000 Ukrainian
soldiers have received training in the United Kingdom
since the start of Russia’s invasion. We will also support
Ukraine when peace has been won to rebuild their
country, as we did at the Ukraine Recovery Conference
last week, where the international community made
more than $60 billion worth of commitments. Ukraine
continues to need our support. For Ukraine, this is a war
of survival; for Russia, this is a war of choice.

23-1863215/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

29/06/2023

Secondly, let us remind ourselves how Russia has
decided to fight its war of choice — the shelling of
civilian homes; human wave attacks, ordered forward
at gunpoint; atrocities left in the wake of its retreating
forces; hundreds of civilians arbitrarily detained,
more than 90 per cent of them reporting torture or illtreatment by Russian captors. On Tuesday, Russian
missiles struck a pizza restaurant in Kramatorsk,
taking 10 more innocent lives. Among those killed
in the attack were two twin sisters, Yuliya and Anna
Aksenchenko. They were just 14 years old.

Brazil shares the concern about the disruptive
potential of arms transfers to conflict zones. Our
principled position on the subject remains the same.

This week, the Secretary-General published his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363).
Russia is part of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, and it knows that the reporting system
in that regard is among the most rigorous used by the
United Nations. The report is shocking. A permanent
member of the Council is listed alongside terrorist
groups, such as Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State,
for committing grave violations affecting children
in situations of armed conflict. Russian forces have
been responsible for the killing, abduction and rape
of children as young as 4 years old. Ninety times,
Russian forces used children as human shields. Every
Russian should feel shame about what their army has
done in Ukraine. But the Russian army does not fight
alone. Putin has poured tanks, rockets, anti-aircraft
missiles and every kind of weaponry into the hands of
unaccountable mercenary forces, recruited from the
ranks of gangsters and convicts. A year ago, Russia
denied the Wagner Group’s existence. Now Yevgeny
Prigozhin’s rebellion has publicly destroyed Putin’s
case for the war in Ukraine. The Wagner Group’s march
to Moscow showed us just how quickly Russians can
leave Ukraine when they choose to.

Moreover, we have consistently asserted that the
availability of arms and ammunition may become a
long-term destabilizing factor and multiply threats
to the security of civilian populations. In that regard,
we must recognize the concrete risks of the diversion
of military equipment to non-State actors, including
criminal and terrorist groups.

Thirdly, without a doubt, diplomatic efforts will be
essential for peace, and we note the various ongoing
efforts towards peace, including African leaders’
recent visit to Kyiv and Moscow this month. The United
Kingdom fully supports President Zelenskyy’s 10-point
peace plan. The only path to sustainable peace is for
Putin to withdraw his troops and end the bloodshed
now. We will continue to stand with the people of
Ukraine as they win a just and sustained peace that
respects Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also
thank the other briefers for their interventions.
16/25

First, we recognize the inherent right of Ukraine
and all Member States to self-defence. That principle
does not exempt us from the obligation enshrined
in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations to
seek a peaceful solution to disputes through direct
negotiations, conciliation, mediation and any other
means that do not involve the recourse to arms.

Furthermore, we believe that the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) provides the means to curtail illegal
transfers and to prevent diversion. It is essential to
preserve accurate records and ensure the transparency
of transactions. We encourage other Member States to
take into consideration the provisions of the ATT when
proceeding with their arms transfers.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing
Russia bears sole responsibility for this situation.
It is Russia that, in violation of every norm of
international law and in its a crude attempt to rewrite
history, decided to attack a sovereign neighbouring
country. No one other than Russia seeks to sustain the
war against Ukraine. Russia could end it at any time
by withdrawing its troops, which the International
Court of Justice demanded over a year ago. Contrary
to Russia’s assertions, Ukraine has never represented a
threat to either Russia’s territorial integrity or Ukraine’s
Russian-speaking populations. Our position has been
consistent: Russia’s aggression must not, and will not,
be rewarded, as it flouts the principles of the United
Nations, trivializes the use of force and heralds a world
in which States’ sovereignty would depend solely on
power dynamics.
Ukraine did not want war, and did nothing to
provoke it. The war threatens the security of the entire
European continent. That is why France, together with
its partners, chose to resolutely support the Ukrainian
people in exercising their legitimate right to defend their
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

sovereignty and territorial integrity, two core principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We will
continue to do so bilaterally and through the European
Union as long as Russian soldiers are illegally on
Ukrainian soil.
By concentrating our efforts on anti-aircraft
capabilities, we are helping the Ukrainian people to
defend themselves against Russian strikes against
civilian infrastructure. Only two days ago, Russia
targeted and struck a restaurant in Kramatorsk with a
missile that left at least 11 people dead and 61 injured.
Such systematic strikes against civilian infrastructure
constitute war crimes. In recent weeks, we have stepped
up our deliveries of weapons and ammunition, armoured
vehicles, logistical support and training activities.
By supporting the Ukrainian counter-offensive, we
hope to put Ukraine in a strong position to create the
conditions for credible negotiations leading to a just
and lasting peace.
In order to hide its responsibility, Russia is seeking
to divert attention by deferring to the analyses of the socalled experts whom we heard today. At the same time,
in order to support its aggression, it is buying Iranian
combat drones and launching them against civilian
infrastructure; it is also secretly buying missiles and
munitions from North Korea, all of which it is doing in
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Some of those weapons are being used in the field
by militias financed by the Russian State. Russia is
beginning to assess today what its choice has cost itself.
It is reeling from the instability that it has caused.
The aggression has had catastrophic repercussions
for Ukraine and for the whole world. But it is also a
dead end for Russia, which must realize that our
support for Ukraine will not waver and that there is
only one possible outcome: achieving a peace in line
with the Charter that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.
We listened attentively to Mr. Blumenthal, Mr. Bowes
and Mr. Radchenko.
After 16 months of war, Ukraine remains immersed
in an unprecedented spiral of violence. The war has
led to terrible human suffering and a humanitarian
situation with devastating consequences. Against that
backdrop, the food and energy crises are the making the
prospect of achieving lasting peace even more remote.

S/PV.9364

According to the most recent report of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, 24,862 civilians have been killed and 1,000
health facilities have been attacked; and, according to
UNESCO, 260 sites have been damaged. Both sides’
announcements of offensives and counter-offensives
give reason to fear a more serious toll in terms of loss
of life and mass-scale population displacement.
The recurrent attacks carried out by the warring
parties against the Zaporizhzhya power plant raise the
risk of a nuclear catastrophe, while, at the same time,
the consequences of the destruction of the Kakhovka
dam, as a source of ecological, human and economic
insecurity, continue to loom. My country condemns the
use of all forms of weapons with indiscriminate effects
targeting civilian populations and infrastructure,
including remote-controlled weapons that unnecessarily
inflict suffering on populations and serve to further
terrorize them.
My country reiterates its support for the DirectorGeneral of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and calls on the parties to respect the five principles
guaranteeing nuclear safety and security. We are
opposed to any politicization or trivialization of
the nuclear issue. Nuclear power plants are civilian
infrastructure protected by international humanitarian
law. Diplomacy must prevail over the mindset of force
and the proliferation of weapons, which will fuel
escalation of the conflict.
My country calls on the warring parties to facilitate
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian aid to all
areas in need.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for de-escalation
and good-faith negotiations to end the war in Ukraine.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing, and the other briefers for
their contributions.
Today’s meeting was requested by the Russian
Federation to condemn the increasing supply of weapons
to Ukraine. This is the sixth time that the Council is
convened on this issue in an attempt to deviate the focus
from the appalling acts and violations of international
humanitarian law that Russian forces are perpetrating
in Ukraine. As observed by other Council members,
these meetings serve one purpose only: for Russia
to cynically try to justify its unprovoked aggression
against Ukraine.

23-1863217/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

Despite those distractions, we must not lose sight of
the reality on the ground. The reality is that, on 24 February
2022, the Russian Federation — a permanent member
of the Council, which is entrusted with safeguarding
international peace and security — decided to invade
its neighbour. It was Russia’s decision to illegally exert
the use of force and the devastation that has come with
it. The end of the war depends upon Russia and what
it decides to do next. The same goes for the prospects
for peace. In the meantime, Ukraine has a legitimate
right to defend itself from the aggressor, as enshrined
in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Malta’s position remains unchanged. Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders must be
fully safeguarded.
The grave humanitarian crisis generated by the
full-scale invasion of Ukraine should remain in focus.
Nearly one third of Ukraine’s entire population has
been displaced, with 5.9 million people internally
displaced and more than 8 million people — mostly
women — forced to flee. That has increased their risk
of sexual and gender-based violence, while facing
perilous health conditions.
Equally, we are alarmed by the high number of grave
human rights violations, which include killings and
maiming, abductions, rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children, as well as attacks on schools
and hospitals, perpetrated by Russian armed forces.
We are also alarmed by the systematic mistreatment
of Ukrainian prisoners of war and civilian hostages
by Russia in the temporarily and illegally occupied
territories of Ukraine and in Russia. We demand
the immediate release of all individuals unlawfully
deprived of their liberty.
We call on all parties to abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law.
The result of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is not
only impacting nearly 18 million people in Ukraine, but
it is also having ripple effects all over the world.
In conclusion, Malta stresses once again the
overwhelming necessity for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in Ukraine as a matter of utmost priority.
The Security Council has the duty to distinguish
between the victim and the aggressor and recognize
Ukraine’s right to self-defence. Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity must be fully upheld.
18/25

29/06/2023

We urge the Russian Federation to halt hostilities,
withdraw its military forces and proxies from the
entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders and embrace constructive dialogue
and diplomacy as the means to establish lasting peace,
security and stability.
Mr. Kumanga (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, and all the other briefers for
their insightful briefings today.
The war in Ukraine, with its deteriorating
humanitarian consequences, has been increasing in
intensity. That is happening despite the efforts of the
international community at large to bring an end to the
conflict, which has claimed thousands of human lives
and destroyed economic and social infrastructure. The
conflict is of our common concern. It poses a serious
threat to international peace and security.
It is our considered view that the continuation of the
armed conflict and violent confrontation in Ukraine is not
the answer — it is not in the interests of the parties, or those
of the world community. In that connection, we call on the
parties to the conflict to take responsibility for protecting
civilians and to ensure compliance with applicable
international law and international humanitarian law.
Mozambique wishes to reiterate its call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and a return to direct
negotiations between the parties as a matter of urgency
and with full respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant Security Council decisions.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu and the other briefers for their briefings.
Russia requested this meeting to discuss the issue
of increasing supplies of weapons to Ukraine and their
implications on diplomatic efforts to resolve the Ukraine
crisis. It seems to focus on supporters of Ukraine in the
current tragic situation, but we must not lose sight of the
root cause.
Japan has to repeat its basic position: it is Russia
that initiated the unprovoked war of aggression against
Ukraine. We therefore underscore Ukraine’s right to
self-defence against aggression. Arms are provided to
Ukraine so that it may defend itself. The international
community is lending its support to Ukraine in order to
stop Russia’s aggression and to maintain international
peace and security. By contrast, no nation should support
Russia’s aggression.
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Japan has expressed its position on the transfer of
unmanned aerial vehicles from Iran to Russia. Moreover,
we are concerned by reports of arms transactions
between Russia and North Korea. Any transaction of
arms with North Korea is a violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and should be condemned.
Japan is closely monitoring related developments.
Any efforts aimed at a diplomatic solution to end
the war should be based on justice. We all know the
indisputable fact, as stated by the overwhelming majority
of the General Assembly, that Russia’s aggression is
a clear violation of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations. Japan is not convinced
by the argument that the efforts to support self-defence
deter diplomatic efforts to end the aggression.
Let me pose a question to all members: if a
neighbouring country launched a war of aggression
against their homeland and occupied their territory, then
argued against diplomatic efforts to end the aggression,
what would be the response? For most sovereign States,
such an argument is unacceptable.
Instead of linking support to Ukraine and various
diplomatic efforts, Russia must withdraw all of its
troops and military equipment from Ukraine and respect
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing, and Mr. Radchenko
for his insights.
We express our disappointment at the time wasted
by having two persons with exactly identical positions,
pretendedly to lead the Security Council, mislead it
with militant views. Sugar-coating an act of aggression
with native English speakers will never make it more
digestible. It will not succeed in enforcing a narrative
that was false from the very start, remains insincere and
has now been totally discredited, even by those who are
partners in crime. Last Friday, Yevgeny Viktorovich
Prigozhin — who needs no introduction — described
the invasion of Ukraine as “a racket carried out by a
corrupt elite”.
It has been said many times and we cannot
but reiterate it — when a sovereignty country, an
independent nation, is attacked without a shred of
justification; when people are killed in their homes,
hospitals, schools and kindergartens, including at a
restaurant in town, only to satisfy an insatiable imperial

S/PV.9364

appetite; and when a United Nations member is being
destroyed, causing mayhem to the country, the region,
the continent and the world, condemnation is not good
enough. Recalling the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations is good, but not good enough. Calling
for the war to stop while droves of missiles and illegally
acquired drones destroy civilian infrastructure is good,
but not good enough. There is need for more. There
was — and still is — an urgent need to help Ukrainians
work courageously, defending their freedom and their
right to be themselves; to defend their land, homes and
families; to make sure that the United Nations Charter
is not reduced to mere paper, but has a meaning and
a purpose.
That is exactly what many countries have been doing
and will continue to do. I challenge our colleagues of
the Russian Federation to point to a single article in the
United Nations Charter, to a single line in any United
Nations resolution or any piece of international law that
would justify their aggression. They will not do so, for
the simple reason that it does not exist. Instead, I can
direct them to Article 51 of the United Nations Charter,
which provides a very clear legal basis for individual
State to offer whatever assistance necessary to a country
exercising its inherent right to self-defence in securing
its sovereignty and territorial integrity. And that is a
big difference because there is one aggressor and one
victim, which makes “both-side-ism” for ending the
war meaningless and absurd. It is crucial to recognize
that one side initiated the conflict and therefore it bears
the responsibility of putting an end to it. That side can
be easily identified. It has consistently been condemned
by 143 members of the General Assembly.
There is yet another big difference. The arms transfers to Ukraine have been conducted in accordance with
the national legislation of the countries concerned, the
Arms Trade Treaty, the obligations arising from those
acts and an assessment of the risk of diversion. UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu just confirmed that these
transfers are open data. An ad hoc commission established by the Ukrainian Parliament is responsible for
monitoring the entire process so that weapons are used
for defence purposes and do not fall into the wrong hands.
Meanwhile, Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, is using weapons illegally acquired
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
Iran, openly and blatantly violating what it has been
entrusted to uphold — the Security Council resolutions
that they themselves have adopted.

23-1863219/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

A knife is a knife; it all depends on what it used
for. There are weapons to defend life, and there are
weapons to kill innocent civilians, including children
having dinner at the pizzeria in Kramatorsk. Russia
will therefore not succeed in shifting the responsibility
of the war to others — to Ukraine, as it pretends or to
other countries, as it propagates. Let us not forget that
everything we are talking about, including the supply
of arms to Ukraine, is not the cause. It is just the
consequence of the Russian aggression.
We have continuously raised concerns about the
consequences of this war for Ukraine, Europe and
Russia itself. Last week I said that the war is changing
many things (see S/PV.9357), including Russia — and
unfortunately not for the better. The dramatic events of
last weekend only reinforced our concerns. Among other
things, they revealed that the war of choice of Russia is
not a one-way path. Actions always have consequences.
And whatever the reasons, the dynamics and their
finality, internal developments in Russia sent tremors
beyond its borders — because what was intended to be
the Swiss knife of the Russian military was morphed into
a Frankenstein-like monster that turned against its very
creator. Those hours of total chaos in Russia revealed
many things. The world press and media are full of
various analyses, but there is something worth pointing
out, something that we knew and was denied — the
Wagner Group, the stamp of cruelty in Ukraine and in
many parts of Africa, is simply a Russian tool, 100 per
cent financed by the Government, per the words of the
President Putin himself. The emperor has no clothes.
Therefore, the games of who could be deadlier and
bloodier in Ukraine was a false competition. It was an
inner struggle for money and power at the expense of
poor soldiers and innocent civilians.
Let me conclude with a final remark. The recent
developments in Russia offer another insight worth
mentioning. Faced with the prospect of bloodshed in
power rivalry, everybody rushed to make a deal, including
by pivoting 180 degrees and renouncing their own words.
The main reason for such deals was to not spill Russian
blood. It is very puzzling that this reasoning does not
apply to those they call their brothers, the Ukrainians.
That is why the political, humanitarian and military
support for Ukraine must and will continue — because
despite what we hear from Russia and their supporting
briefers, Ukraine is right and Russia is wrong. The first
shoe has been dropped. Freedom will win because it
always does, and aggression will lose.
20/25

29/06/2023

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing today.
Her continued leadership to counter weapons diversion
has been indispensable.
As we have repeatedly stated in the Council,
it is categorically false for Russia to allege that the
international support for Ukraine’s legitimate selfdefence support provided by over 50 countries somehow
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
That is a transparent and clumsy attempt by Russia to
rewrite the very plain facts of this conflict. Let us be
clear — it is Russia’s full-scale war of aggression and
its invasion of a sovereign neighbour, in violation of
the Charter of the United Nations, that poses the threat
to international peace and security, and it is from
Russia’s full-scale war of aggression that Ukraine is
defending itself.
Russia’s familiar effort to try to divert our
attention through false, ever-changing allegations and
disinformation is painfully obvious. Just consider one
example — the issue of Russia’s support for the Wagner
Group. For years now the Council has heard the Russian
representative repeatedly deny any connection between
the Russian State and the Wagner Group. On Tuesday,
the Russian representative insisted to the press outside
of the Chamber that the Wagner Group is just a private
military company and “detached from the Government”.
But this week, President Putin finally nakedly admitted
that the Russian Government fully finances the Wagner
Group, providing almost $2 billion from State coffers
in the past year alone. Putin said:
“I want to point out and I want everyone to know
about it — the maintenance of the entire Wagner
Group was fully provided for by the State. From
the Ministry of Defence, from the State budget, we
fully financed this group.”
Russia has demonstrated time and time again
its willingness to abuse its position on the Security
Council to purposefully promote falsehoods and
disinformation. We regret that Russia continues to
deliberately misguide the international community,
including through this meeting today. Just remember
that in the lead up to its further invasion of Ukraine
on 24 February 2022, Russia’s leadership denied it had
any plans to send troops into Ukraine, even while it
amassed forces on Ukraine’s borders. It is Russia’s
ongoing brutality against Ukraine’s people and its
campaign to destroy Ukraine’s infrastructure that has
rallied the international community to Ukraine’s aid, both
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

in support of its sovereignty and territorial integrity and
in respect for international law. It is Russia’s irresponsible
nuclear rhetoric and its planned stationing of tactical
nuclear weapons on the territory of Belarus, which is
complicit in Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, that risk
further aggravating an already dangerous situation. The
overwhelming majority of States Members of the United
Nations have repeatedly made those positions clear. The
United States and more than 50 Member States have
answered Ukraine’s call to support its self-defence against
Russia’s aggression and we will continue to do so for as
long as it takes.
These weapons are not prolonging the conflict. The
Kremlin bears that responsibility alone. These arms are
preventing further brutalization of Ukraine’s citizens amid
the Kremlin’s onslaught. This point must not be forgotten.
Russia’s unrelenting and ruthless attacks on Ukraine
and its people, and the all too familiar stream of false
allegations to which Russia subjects us, are just further
demonstrations that President Putin has no interest in
meaningful diplomacy. Only two weeks ago, leaders from
several African nations, members of a peace mission
bound for Kyiv and Moscow, were forced to shelter in
bunkers during their visit to Kyiv as Putin reigned missiles
on that city. What clearer indication could we be given of
the Kremlin’s utter disrespect or disinterest in peace or a
diplomatic resolution to Putin’s war of choice?
No one wants this war to end more than Ukraine and
its people. But as overwhelmingly articulated by members
of the General Assembly, the conditions for a just and
lasting peace must be rooted in international law. This
includes Russia demonstrating a meaningful interest in
ending this war and upholding the principles of the United
Nations Charter through action, and not just empty words.
It is Russia, in violation of resolution 2231 (2015),
that has procured hundreds of drones from Iran and then
deployed them in attacks, killing civilians in Ukraine. If
Russia had any genuine desire for de-escalation, it would
simply withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory and
end its invasion. Instead, we see increased hostilities
and brutality, waves of missiles wreaking havoc across
Ukraine, and dangerous nuclear rhetoric.
We are committed to ensuring Ukraine has the ability
to exercise its right to self-defence against Russia’s illegal
and brutal war, while working with Ukraine to maintain
the highest safeguards that ensure the weapons its partners
provide are not diverted into unintended hands. We will

S/PV.9364

continue to stress accountability, as we have from the
beginning of this conflict, and continue to ensure robust
processes to counter attempts at illicit diversion.
Throughout this conflict, Ukraine has been a
transparent and willing partner in those efforts. By
helping Ukraine and neighbouring States account
for and safeguard arms and ammunition during
transfer, in storage and when deployed, strengthening
border management and security in Ukraine and in
neighbouring States, and building the capacity of
relevant Government agencies to deter, detect and
interdict illicit trafficking of certain weapons, we are
taking concrete steps to address threats posed by the
potential diversion of weapons.
As we have said on many occasions since the
beginning of this crisis, if Russia is serious about
bringing an end to this conflict, it can simply withdraw
its troops from Ukraine and end its war illegal war of
aggression. We once again call on Russia to do so, and
to do so now.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing. I also
listened carefully to the briefings of the other briefers.
I acknowledge the presence in the Security Council
Chamber of the Permanent Representative of Ukraine.
This is not the first occasion on which the Council
has addressed the issue of the challenges posed by
the supply of arms in the context of Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine. I will therefore reiterate
what I have already consistently said in the Council in
the course of this first half of 2023.
First, I must insist on Ecuador’s position of rejecting
armed violence, militarization and weaponization. This
position goes together with our recognition of the right
of peoples to legitimate self-defence, in accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, including Article 51.
Secondly, the provision of defence equipment and
systems, including anti-aircraft systems, contributes
to reducing the destruction of infrastructure and the
number of civilian casualties, when used appropriately.
Any supply of arms or ammunition must be subject
to guarantees of respect for the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution at the time of their use
and must not be made without observing and increasing
the standards of marking, registration and traceability,
with priority being given to the protection of civilians

23-1863221/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

and the objective of global stability over any other
logic, be it industrial, or in terms of production or
distribution. Likewise, the supply of weapons must
uphold the purposes of security and protection and
not be carried out for the mere purpose of testing new
offensive equipment in the theatre of confrontation.
We urge States that have denounced the invasion
and participate in the supply of arms for the defence of
Ukraine’s territorial integrity to further strengthen their
controls to prevent spare parts, parts and components,
including electronics, from their own industries ending
up fuelling the war efforts of the occupying army,
particularly in the production of artillery, missiles
and other weaponry. We further reject any transfer of
materials that contravenes Security Council provisions,
such as resolution 2231 (2015). All these measures can
help prevent the diversion, spread and escalation of the
conflict and are key to post-conflict recovery.
In this very Chamber, I have time and again
reiterated our ongoing concern at the challenges to
peace, security and stability posed by the large-scale
inflow of arms and ammunition in any situation of
armed conflict. I have also stressed the seriousness of
placing arms in the hands of mercenaries and groups
operating outside international law. A few days ago, we
observed how the so-called private army, the Wagner
Group, was putting even Russia’s own stability at risk.
We once again call on Russia to definitively stop the
already prolonged invasion of Ukraine, which continues
to cause too much destruction and claim too many lives,
and to comply with the ruling of the International Court
of Justice.
Finally, we advocate the peaceful settlement of
disputes and reiterate the duty of States Members of the
United Nations to settle their international disputes by
peaceful means, pursuant to the United Nations Charter,
which is the first thing transgressed by a country that
attacks, invades or attempts to annex territories of
another country by force. We must move from the
logic of domination of one State over another, past the
diplomatic logic of the nineteenth-century colonial
Powers or of the European dictatorships of the twentieth
century, to the diplomatic logic of international law, as
framed in General Assembly resolution ES-11/6, on the
principles of the United Nations Charter, underlying a
just and lasting peace in Ukraine.
We recognize and encourage the intensification of
diplomatic efforts that seek to re-establish dialogue so
22/25

29/06/2023

as to move towards that much desired peace and avoid
drawing the world into a wider war.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I
thank
Under-Secretary-General
and
High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu and the other briefers
for their briefings.
Since the outbreak of the Ukraine crisis, there have
been incessant massive flows of weapons and equipment
onto the battlefield, with steadily increased variety and
quantity and greater lethality and destructive power. As
a result, the spillover effects and proliferation risks are
on the rise. At the same time, since the very beginning,
this crisis has led to mounting civilian casualties and
devastation of civilian facilities in conflict areas.
Black swan and grey rhino incidents have occurred
thick and fast. The situation on the ground has become
increasingly brutal, dire, dangerous and unpredictable.
We find that deeply concerning. In the current situation,
what the world needs is a ceasefire — and not pumping
weapons onto the battlefield. The world needs dialogue
and negotiations, not escalated fighting. The world
needs peace talks, not camp-to-camp confrontation.
In recent months and weeks, we have seen a growing
number of countries putting forward peace proposals.
The voice for peace talks has been growing stronger.
We hope that the parties concerned will respond
positively to the international community’s rational
call for them to remain calm, exercise restraint, refrain
from escalating tensions and engage more closely to
forge consensus with a view to securing and creating
the conditions for a final settlement of the crisis.
On the issue of Ukraine, China’s consistent position
has been that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries should be safeguarded, the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations should
be complied with and the legitimate security concerns
of all the parties should be respected. All efforts, as
long as they are conducive to the peaceful settlement of
the crisis, deserve our support. China has consistently
maintained its engagement with all the parties
concerned in the Ukraine crisis, actively encouraging
and facilitating peace talks. We stand ready to work
with peace-loving and justice-upholding countries
around the world in order to maintain our positive and
constructive role in promoting a political settlement of
the Ukraine issue.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

I thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu
for her briefing, and I welcome Ukraine’s participation
in today’s meeting.
As we have stated repeatedly in the Chamber, it is
vital to safeguard weapons during their transfer, storage
and deployment. And, in particular, we wish to echo
the High Representative’s call for vigilance against
the risks of their diversion. We continue to urge all the
parties to take concerted steps, with responsibility and
transparency, to mitigate the risks associated with arms
transfers in that context. And we call on the Security
Council to ensure uniform compliance with all its
relevant resolutions.
For 16 months, this war has devastated Ukraine. It
has killed thousands, displaced millions and inflicted
billions of dollars of damage to critical infrastructure.
A generation of families is forever changed. Children
are growing up with the trauma of living under constant
bombardment. Fathers are on the front lines instead of at
home. Mothers are seeing the responsibility to provide
both sustenance and security fall disproportionately on
their shoulders.
Ukraine’s fertile fields, which only recently
fed hundreds of millions around the world, have
transformed into battlefields, criss-crossed by hundreds
of kilometres of front lines, marked by trenches
reminiscent of the First World War and a terrifying
display of the capabilities of the most advanced
military technologies of this century. While this may
be a European war in terms of geography, it is most
certainly a global concern.
Outside the theatre of war, Europe is again
threatened by the dynamics that once divided it into
two rival camps. Political, economic, social and
cultural links — optimistic bonds of community
that once brought the continent together at a time of
great promise — are being progressively and almost
irreparably unwound. Such a decoupling will have
profound implications for the future of Europe, and
around the world.
The war’s impact on the global economy and
on trade in commodities, energy and food has been
discussed extensively in the Council and other forums.
Today we contend with the once unthinkable, but
now tangible, prospect of a nuclear disaster.
Countries around the world are affected every day
by this war and its consequences, with no diplomatic
reprieve on the horizon. At the same time, the world

S/PV.9364

must contend with an impaired post-pandemic economic
recovery and debt crisis. The multilateral system
is weighed down with divisions and polarization at
precisely the moment when it needs to rise up and meet
the existential challenge of climate change and create a
blueprint for the sustainable development agenda and
economic growth. A constant call echoes from every
corner of the globe in support of a peaceful resolution
to this conflict.
Member States have kept the faith with the Charter
of the United Nations, and therein lies our hope and
a blueprint for what happens next. In large majorities,
countries have repeatedly voted for an end to this war
that preserves Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. It is time for a serious effort to
that end. We cannot afford repeat cycles of approaching
the precipice of disaster only to walk back at the very
last moment. Too much is at stake.
To that end, the United Arab Emirates strongly
urges a cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine and
the vigorous pursuit of a just and lasting peace. Only
by abiding with the Charter will the end of this conflict
enshrine an inclusive and stable security architecture
for Europe. Only by abiding with the Charter will
the end of this conflict preserve sovereignty as the
foundational building block of our open and cooperative
international order, for the benefit of all of us.
We are under no illusions of the difficulty of the
diplomacy required to end this war. But the countries
with the most ability to influence the future course of
events are seated around this table. We are in no need of
further reminders of the consequences of the alternative.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to make a few comments in
response to some of the talking points made today on
the alleged shelling of a pizzeria in Kramatorsk.
The following is a statement from Russia’s Ministry
of Defence.
“On 27 June in the city of Kramatorsk, in the
Donetsk People’s Republic, a high-precision strike
was carried out on the temporary deployment point
of the 56th Motorized Infantry Brigade of the
Armed Forces of Ukraine [a point that, I might add,

23-1863223/25

S/PV.9364

Threats to international peace and security

included the hotel located there as well]. The attack
neutralized two generals participating in a staff
meeting and up to 50 officers of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine, as well as up to 20 foreign mercenaries
and military advisers.”
There is no need to comment on that.
Let me turn now to the comments made about
the Wagner Group. Today a number of delegations
attempted to refer to last week’s events in Russia. Of
course, those are our internal affairs. Nevertheless, I
will say that the leadership of the Russian Federation
took exhaustive measures to address the situation as
swiftly as possible, while avoiding any large-scale
destabilization in the country, as well as a lot of
bloodshed and threats to the civilian population. The
illegal actions of the mutineers were strongly rejected
by Russian society, demonstrating its responsibility
for the fate of the country and its solidarity in support
of the country’s President, as well as its immunity to
external and internal challenges and the futility of the
attempts by Russia’s enemies to take advantage of the
situation to weaken our country. We would like to note
that many friendly States responded to the events and
expressed their support and concern for us. Some of
the assessments made by Council members today were
brimming with regret about the fact that those events
did not turn out the way they wanted them to — that
they did not result in a mutiny in Russia. And that could
not have been the result, as we can now see, although
they and their underlings in Kyiv were hoping for that
very much and monitoring the events with bated breath.
And of course, they were severely disappointed.
As for the poisonous insinuations made by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, they
were brimming with lies and classic British clichés,
especially regarding the methods of warfare, as well as
the so-called kidnapping of children and the alleged use
of those children as human shields and the inclusion
of those allegations in the Secretary-General’s annual
report on children in armed conflict (S/2023/363), in
addition to other allegations. We will respond to those
in due course, and that will conveniently happen to
be during the United Kingdom’s presidency of the
Security Council in the month of July.
The representative of the United States has once
again been lying unabashedly about a number of things,
including the air strikes allegedly targeting Kyiv during
the visit of delegations from Africa. That was refuted
24/25

29/06/2023

not only by us, but also by the African delegations
themselves who visited Kyiv, who described what
happened as a staged provocation.
I would like to add that, in order to put an end to
the war, Kyiv’s United States masters must give such an
order to their vassals in Kyiv. If no orders are given, that
can mean only one thing. The United States has no need
or desire to put an end to the conflict. It is interested
only in prolonging the conflict as it waits to inflict
defeat on the Russian Federation, and preferably, as the
representative of the United States said, a strategic one.
Let me say that that day will never come.
Last but not least, I would again like to thank
Mr. Blumenthal and Mr. Bowes for their very sobering
and informative assessments. The truth they share is
not welcomed by some in the Chamber. We would like
to apologize for the actions of those colleagues who
attempted to turn their briefings into profanation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
Today he has again described to us what the “way
out” should look like, according to Russia. In a nutshell,
it is a situation in which Russia has enough weapons to
attack Ukraine any time it so decides, while Ukraine has
no weapons to defend itself. In reality, it would mean
that bloody attacks such as Tuesday’s missile strike
on Kramatorsk, in the Donetsk region, could happen
on a permanent basis, without any hindrance. Twelve
killed, including 3 children, and 60 wounded — that
was the outcome of a Russian missile hitting a local
restaurant in the city centre. By the way, what source
of information is more authoritative and reliable on that
strike than the Russian Ministry of War?
The Russian armed forces do not tire of proving
the validity of the Secretary-General’s decision to list
them and affiliated armed groups in his annual report on
children and armed conflict (S/2023/363). That is exactly
the list on which the Russian army belongs after all the
horrible crimes it has committed and continues to commit
daily against children in Ukraine. And it is not because
Ukraine receives weapons that three young girls were
killed by Russia in Kramatorsk, but because Russia still
has weapons and remains willing to kill. I urge those who
seem to be concerned about weapons transfers to conflict
zones not to forget the difference between the aggressor
23-18632

29/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

and the defender who fights to survive. At the same time,
I cannot but note that the issue of illicit arms trafficking
in and out of Russia appears to be more than pertinent
and timely following this weekend’s events in Russia.
On numerous occasions, including in the Chamber,
Ukraine has drawn the attention of the United Nations
community to the security threats stemming from the
Russian practice of recruiting people with criminal
backgrounds for proxy armed formations and equipping
those formations with a whole range of conventional
weapons, thereby helping them to evolve into de facto
parallel armies. That was the case with the infamous
Wagner Group, known for its crimes in the Middle East,
Africa and Ukraine. While operating there, the Wagner
Group used weapons that were not subject to any control
mechanisms, including internal Russian ones.
For decades, Russia has multiplied crises throughout
the world, while trying to hide its responsibility behind
such proxy structures. Finally, Russian aggression has
incrementally started returning to its home harbour. It
turned out that Russia, which so generously labelled other
nations as failed States, showed the failure and incapability of its own governance, starting from the highest level.
The whole world witnessed the paralysis of the authorities when armed mercenary units easily crossed the
State border of the Russian Federation; when they took
the city of Rostov-on-Don, of more than 1 million people, without a fight; when they advanced with little resistance towards the Russian capital, shooting down Russian
aircraft and helicopters from modern anti-aircraft missile
systems along the way. Saturday’s events also highlighted
that the safety and security of weapons arsenals on Russian territory are easily compromised by Wagner-like
armed formations. There are several lessons that the international community should draw from those events.
While proving its inadequacy by continuing the war
against Ukraine with no chance of success, Putin’s regime
also demonstrated that it is no longer capable of controlling
its own country. Saturday’s advance on Moscow was
stopped only by the decision of the Wagner chief, following
the engagement of Belarussian dictator Lukashenko.
Putin’s regime has been built on lies and hypocrisy.
For years, Putin lied that the Wagner Group had no
affiliation with the Russian Government. At his press
conference with the then German Chancellor Angela
Merkel in January 2020 about the presence of the Wagner
Group in Libya, Putin said,

S/PV.9364

“If there are Russian citizens there, they do not
represent the interests of the Russian State and do
not receive money from the Russian Government”.
At a press conference with French President Macron in
February 2022 about the activities of the Wagner Group
in Mali, Putin said,
“Regarding Wagner, as I have already said, the
Russian Government has nothing to do with it”.
And this week, Putin confessed that the Wagner
Group was fully funded by the State and had received
Rub86.3 billion, which is equivalent to $1 billion, from
the State budget between May 2022 and May 2023.
One third of Russian regions have annual budgets
that are smaller than that amount. In addition, the
Russian Government allocated Rub110 billion — that is
approximately $1.29 billion — for insurance payments
for Wagner Group fighters. Those expenditures do
not include the equipment and weapons that were
generously given to the Wagner Group all these years.
Putin’s confession revealed not only the habit of
lying to everyone everywhere. The case of the Wagner
Group, which has been a product of the Kremlin from
the very beginning, also showed that Putin and his
cronies are not reliable or predictable, even one step
ahead. The regime continues to pose an existential
threat not only to its neighbours and other regions of
the world, but also to Russia itself.
Putin’s regime will only keep degenerating, while
generating new crises and threats, until it finally
collapses. The international community should therefore
address the Russia crisis as one of its priority tasks. I
reiterate that the military defeat of Russia in Ukraine,
accountability for the crimes committed and international
control over the Russian military arsenal should be the
necessary elements of the resolution of the Russia crisis.
Ukraine continues to do its best in order to survive
and stop the evil. We are grateful to all responsible
nations that support us, including by supplying the
necessary weapons. Their use has been an element of
Ukraine exercising its inherent right to self-defence
under Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations for
a noble goal — to restore respect to the United Nations
Charter. In the meantime, we call on the Security
Council to keep an eye on the Russian crisis and to take
the necessary steps to address many imminent threats
and challenges that that failing State poses to the world.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

23-1863225/25
