A/64/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

69

th plenary meeting
Friday, 22 January 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Aitimova
(Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/64/631)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping
with established practice, to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/64/631, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the
Assembly that 19 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I would like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter, a Member of the United
Nations that is in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no vote in
the General Assembly if the amount of its arrears
equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due
from it for the preceding two full years.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the information contained in document A/64/631?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 70 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolutions (A/64/L.42 and A/64/L.43)
The Acting President: We meet today to
consider the humanitarian situation in Haiti. More than
a week after the earthquake struck Haiti, we are only
beginning to realize the full extent of the loss of life
and the horrendous destruction. On behalf of the
President of the General Assembly, His Excellency
Mr. Ali Treki, and all Member States, I would like to
express my heartfelt condolences to all Haitians, as
well as to the families of all United Nations staff and
peacekeepers who lost their lives, who have been
injured or who have seen their colleagues and friends
suffer as a result of this disaster.
We recognize the sacrifice of each United Nations
staff member. We pay special tribute to Special
Representative Hédi Annabi, Deputy Special
Representative Luiz Carlos da Costa and Acting Police
Commissioner Doug Coates. Our thoughts, sympathies
and support are with their families and friends at this
difficult time.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-21663 (E)

*1021663*

A/64/PV.69

The immediate response of the international
community to the earthquake was a remarkable
example of solidarity with the people and the
Government of Haiti. The humanitarian assistance that
is being delivered is providing relief and beginning to
meet some of the urgent needs of the people of Haiti,
but much more needs to be done.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his leadership in ensuring a speedy response by the
United Nations system. In particular, I acknowledge
the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in leading the coordination of the
international response to this tragic event and in
launching the humanitarian appeal. I would also like to
acknowledge the tireless efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and other United Nations
agencies. We also appreciate the role of President Bill
Clinton, Special Envoy of the United Nations to Haiti,
in mobilizing international support for relief operations.
We offer our thanks to the rescue and relief teams
that have come from all over the world since the first
hours after the earthquake. With so much outpouring of
support, public and private, we are still struggling with
coordination. Obviously, more needs to be done
urgently to reach those most desperately in need of
water, food, medical supplies and shelter. The speedy
delivery of those essential items is crucial in order to
save lives and relieve suffering. I believe that, in order
to be more effective, relief efforts also need to involve
and mobilize Haitians themselves.
I pay tribute to the Government of Haiti, which,
despite having suffered immense losses of personnel,
infrastructure and resources, has been able to assist its
population and to maintain order under these
challenging circumstances. I would like to pay tribute
to the people of Haiti, who have shown great courage,
perseverance and dignity in the face of this national
and personal tragedy. I am pleased that the whole
membership is coming together to express its support
to the Government and the people of Haiti. This is an
occasion to reiterate our full commitment to the
provision of immediate relief and emergency assistance
to the people of Haiti.
Beyond that, it is crucial to ensure support for the
even more difficult task of the long-term reconstruction
and development of Haiti. It will require the sustained
focus and attention of the international community in
the months and years ahead. The entire United Nations

2

system, as well as the international financial
institutions and development agencies, will have a key
role to play in that regard.
I believe that the example set by the United
Nations and its Member States — speaking with a
single voice and acting in unison in full support of
Haiti, its Government and its people — reaffirms the
common humanity that is the moral basis of the
Organization and of the international community.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of those
who lost their lives in this disaster.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Ten days after the
earthquake in Haiti, the scale of the disaster has
become clear. According to Government estimates, at
least 75,000 people have been killed, 200,000 have
been injured and 1 million have been displaced. But of
course, we do not yet have a complete tally. Search and
rescue teams — more than 50 from around the world —
have spent the past week looking for survivors. At last
count, they had rescued 123 people alive from the
rubble. The search continues.
As many as half the buildings in parts of Port-auPrince may have been destroyed or damaged. Towns to
the south-west of the city have seen even greater
destruction. Food, water, medicine and shelter are all in
short supply. Three million people need help. Two
million people require food assistance. One million
people are homeless. The Haitian authorities have been
very hard hit. Most ministries have been destroyed, as
has key infrastructure, including electricity and water
supplies. Schools were destroyed, as were prisons.
More than 4,000 prisoners escaped from the national
penitentiary in Port-au-Prince.
The United Nations itself, as we are all acutely
aware, suffered its single greatest loss of life in the
history of the Organization. As of yesterday, 70 United
Nations staff members had perished, with 146 as yet
unaccounted for. Those include many national staff
members whose whereabouts we are still trying to
determine, but we must expect that the death toll will
continue to rise.

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

In responding to Haiti’s immense needs, the
United Nations has three priorities. The first is the
humanitarian relief operation. Coordination and
logistics are crucial. We must work even more closely
with our partners — Governments, non-governmental
organizations, relief organizations and, of course, the
Haitian authorities.
The second priority is security. Without it, there
can be no effective humanitarian relief effort, or basis
for reconstruction. That is why I am grateful that
Member States have responded so quickly to our
appeal for additional police and soldiers.
The third priority is the future. In the coming
weeks and months, we will need to shift from
emergency response to longer-term relief and recovery.
We must help the Haitian Government to reconstitute
itself. We must help to restore basic services and revive
the economy. And we need to turn disaster into
opportunity.
Our response has been swift and we have made
progress on all three objectives. Despite suffering
devastating losses, United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) troops and police have
cleared main roads, removed bodies and conducted
patrols with the Haitian National Police, which is
gradually recovering from its own losses.
As of today, the security situation in Haiti remains
stable. The United Nations is playing the principal
coordinating role, working with the Government of
Haiti in ensuring security. Incidents of looting and
unrest remain the exception, despite some news reports
to the contrary. MINUSTAH’s military component is
closely cooperating with United States and Canadian
forces. I am also grateful to troop-contributing
countries from Latin America — including Argentina,
Brazil, Chile and Uruguay — and from other regions
for their spontaneous response to the request for
additional troops and police for MINUSTAH.
I have instructed my Special Representative to
ensure that all available assets are put to work in
support of the humanitarian effort. Member States from
all regions have also generously contributed relief
supplies, sent in personnel and deployed troops.
The United States, in cooperation with the United
Nations, is managing the airport. United Nations staff
members from our relief agencies are helping to
prioritize landing slots for humanitarian flights. The

10-21663

seaport of Port-au-Prince is being repaired and is
operating again, at limited capacity.
A humanitarian corridor connecting the affected
areas to the Dominican Republic is becoming a major
staging area for assistance. We are grateful to the
Dominican Republic for its great assistance. As a
result, food distribution has now reached half a million
people, and is being scaled up to reach 2 million people
over the coming weeks.
Drinking water is reaching at least 200,000
people per day. Eighteen permanent health facilities
and temporary field hospitals are now operating, as is a
medical ship sent by the United States. Last Friday, a
flash appeal for $575 million was launched to cover
3 million people for six months. So far, $334 million
have been contributed and pledged. That includes
$25 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF), which would not have been possible without
the 60-plus Member States that have already
contributed to CERF this year.
I am proud of the United Nations response.
Seldom in the face of such disaster has the
international community acted in such solidarity and so
quickly in the face of so many difficulties. That said,
despite all our best efforts, too many people have not
received the assistance they urgently need. The
immediate priorities continue to be medical assistance,
water, sanitation, food and shelter, as well as fuel and
transportation equipment to support the relief
operation. I urge Member States to make additional
contributions to the flash appeal.
At the same time, we need to set our sights
beyond the immediate emergency. Before the earthquake,
Haiti was making progress. Thanks in large part to
MINUSTAH, it was enjoying a new measure of
political stability. The economy was growing and
investors were coming into the country. From afar, it
might look as though all that progress has been lost.
But that is not so. Handled properly, this disaster may
offer us an opportunity to build back better, as United
Nations Special Envoy Bill Clinton has put it.
We not only need to restore Government — we
need to improve governance. We not only need to
rebuild the police and the justice system — we want to
help them become a better police and more capable
justice system. We not only need to rebuild factories —
we need to create the right environment for investors to
build more factories and create an export system that

3

A/64/PV.69

takes full advantage of the opportunities for new
growth. Among those is the tariff-free market opening
to the United States under its existing Hemispheric
Opportunity through Partnership Encouragement
legislation.
We also need to provide jobs, not only to those
who lost their jobs last week, but also to the millions of
Haitians who did not have a job in the first place. The
people of Haiti are not looking for handouts. During
my recent visit, I met many ordinary people on the
streets. Yes, they needed water, food and medicine. But
beyond that they told me that they need one thing
above all else: jobs. They want to work to rebuild their
lives. They want to work to rebuild Haiti. They want a
future that offers stability, dignity and hope. We have a
concrete plan to help.
Right now, we are seeking $41 million through a
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
flash appeal to support a programme we call cash-forwork. We want to scale that up. Imagine what could be
done with a cash-for-work programme two or three
times larger. This is a programme to help Haitians help
themselves by paying them to remove debris from the
streets, to do demolition and reconstruction, and to
help to deliver aid and construct camps for the
homeless. The cost is $5 per person per day. With
$5 per day, a worker can take care of his or her family.
That money will begin to circulate through the
economy, supporting small businesses and banks. That
money will stimulate the economy and give Haitians
hope. It will create more jobs.
Jobs like that are the social concrete and mortar
that will hold Haiti together in this time of extreme
stress. Yesterday, President Clinton and I agreed that he
would do his utmost, first to mobilize support and
funding for this effort and for others aimed at meeting
Haiti’s urgent needs and, secondly, to help lay a firm
foundation for Haiti’s longer-term future. As he said at
our meeting, if this task is handled properly, we will
have an opportunity to help Haitians reinvent their
country. I urge the Assembly to do its part. Haiti’s
recovery must begin with its people, who are strong
and resilient and impatient to get to work rebuilding
their lives and their country.
To succeed on all those fronts, we need a clear
and concrete sense of gaps and needs. That is why I
have directed United Nations agencies to work with the
World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank

4

and others to begin an immediate post-disaster needs
assessment. A number of Member States have called
for a reconstruction conference. A preparatory meeting
will be held in Montreal, Canada, on Monday. I have
asked Under-Secretary-General John Holmes of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and UNDP Administrator Helen Clark to attend that
important gathering.
Haiti has never been more in need. I thank the
Assembly for its efforts on behalf of the people of
Haiti, and for adopting today’s two draft resolutions.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.42.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to reiterate our
deepest sympathy and solidarity to the people and
Government of Haiti and to pay tribute to the United
Nations staff and international peacekeepers who have
lost their lives in the tragic events in Haiti. Brazil is
honoured to present the draft resolution on the
earthquake in Haiti, contained in document A/64/L.42
and entitled “Humanitarian assistance, emergency
relief and rehabilitation for Haiti in response to the
devastating effects of the earthquake in that country”.
Since the draft resolution was submitted, the
following countries have become sponsors: Albania,
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, the Central African Republic, the
Comoros, the Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, the Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the United States of America,
Viet Nam, Yemen and Zambia.
The draft sends a strong and clear message of
support from the General Assembly and Member States
to the people and Government of Haiti in this hour of
dire need. While expressing the condolences and
reiterating the solidarity of the international community,
it outlines actions and measures needed to assist Haiti
not only in the present humanitarian relief phase, but
also in the efforts for early recovery, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development in the medium and
long terms.
The international community has responded with
prompt and generous support to the rescue efforts and
emergency assistance for the affected populations, but
additional resources are needed in order to overcome
the emergency and ensure the transition from relief to
reconstruction and development. In this regard, the
draft further appeals to all Member States and relevant
organs and bodies of the United Nations system, as
well as the international financial institutions and
development agencies, to provide speedy, sustainable
and adequate support for Haiti, including with regard
to rehabilitation, reconstruction and development. It
also calls on the international community to provide
additional assistance, at the earliest, in response to the
United Nations flash appeal for Haiti launched
15 January 2010.
The draft welcomes the leadership of the
Secretary-General, as well as the coordinating role of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in support of the Government of Haiti. They have been
instrumental in ensuring a speedy and coherent
response to the emergency.
In this regard, the draft duly recognizes that, in
the weeks and months to come, it will be especially
important to explore ways for enhanced coordination
for the reconstruction and development efforts in Haiti
in the long haul. The people and Government of Haiti
should be able to count on the support of the
international community long after the attention of the
international media is diverted to other issues.
Before concluding, I would like to submit the
following technical revisions to the draft resolution.

10-21663

In the fifth preambular paragraph, the term
“Member States” should be added to the fourth line so
that the clause reads “relief assistance and rescue
operations provided on the ground by Member States,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
the United Nations system”.
Also, in the third line of the seventh preambular
paragraph, the titles of the posts mentioned in the text
should be rectified to read “Emergency Relief
Coordinator
and
Resident/Humanitarian
Relief
Coordinator for Haiti”.
Finally, the words “humanitarian and” should be
added to the fourth line of the eleventh preambular
paragraph so that it reads “coherent and coordinated
among all humanitarian and development actors”.
On behalf of the sponsors, I would like to submit
the present draft, as orally revised, for adoption by
consensus by the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.43.
Mr. Ali (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I have the
honour to address the General Assembly on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/64/L.43. I wish to
announce that Japan and the Republic of Korea have
joined the sponsors of the resolution.
The developing countries face tremendous
challenges caused by long-term natural disasters and
resulting massive losses of life, property and
infrastructure, as well as negative social, economic and
environmental consequences.
One natural disaster may, in one night, reverse
decades’ worth of socio-economic development efforts.
The negative impacts of climate change, the global
financial and economic crisis, and increased food
prices can be additional challenges to Member States,
and especially developing countries, in their
humanitarian response to natural disasters.
Draft resolution A/64/L.43 is one manifestation
of the international community’s determination to
confront these challenges. The draft resolution stresses
the importance of promoting international cooperation
to support the efforts of countries affected by natural
disasters, especially in the areas of preparedness, early

5

A/64/PV.69

recovery and development in order to limit the
negative impacts of natural disasters.
It also emphasizes the need to promote national
risk-reduction capacities at all stages of the
management of natural disasters and to integrate those
goals into development plans, especially in regions
vulnerable to natural disasters, such as urban areas.
The draft resolution also stresses international
cooperation in supporting the capacity-building of
developing countries so they may benefit from the use
of space-based technologies such as the United Nations
Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster
Management and Emergency Response. The draft
resolution also encourages the increased use of spacebased and ground-based remote-sensing technologies
and the exchange of geographical data for early warning
of natural disasters and risk-reduction preparedness.
The draft resolution also refers to the need to
increase funding and the provision of human resources
and necessary expertise, especially with regard to postdisaster recovery. It also calls on the United Nations
and its humanitarian and development agencies to
support national capacities to mitigate the impacts of
natural disasters, including by providing immediate
humanitarian and other assistance following such
disasters.
Draft resolution A/64/L.43 also encourages all
Member States to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian and development assistance provided in
the context of international efforts. It also calls on the
Secretary-General to continue to improve the
international response to natural disasters and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session, and to include in his report recommendations
on how to address the gaps from relief to development,
and the capacity of the United Nations to accelerate
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to express the
gratitude of the Group of 77 and China to Mr. Carlos
Suárez, who successfully assumed responsibility for
coordinating the negotiations on draft resolution
A/64/L.43. I should also like to thank the delegations
that took part in the negotiations in a spirit of
responsibility and flexibility. As in past years, we look
forward to the adoption of the draft resolution by
consensus.

6

The Acting President: The Assembly will first
take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.42, as orally
revised.
Draft resolution A/64/L.42, as orally revised, is
entitled “Humanitarian assistance, emergency relief
and rehabilitation for Haiti in response to the
devastating effects of the earthquake in that country”. I
should like to inform the Assembly that Grenada, Haiti,
San Marino and Tunisia have joined the draft
resolution as sponsors.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.42, as orally
revised?
Draft resolution A/64/L.42, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 64/250).
The Acting President: Before we continue, I
should like to consult the Assembly with a view to
proceeding immediately to consider the draft resolution
contained in document A/64/L.43. In that connection,
as the draft resolution has only been circulated this
morning, it would be necessary to waive the relevant
provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure, which
reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with that proposal.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: We shall now take action
on draft resolution A/64/L.43, which is entitled
“International cooperation on humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters, from relief to
development”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.43?
Draft resolution A/64/L.43 was adopted (resolution
64/251).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Haiti.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti) (spoke in French): The
Haitian Government welcomes the initiative of Brazil
and our many friends to introduce resolution 64/250,
entitled “Humanitarian assistance, emergency relief

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

and rehabilitation for Haiti in response to the
devastating effects of the earthquake in that country”.
My Government also welcomes the Assembly’s timely
adoption of resolution 64/251, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”.
Resolution 64/250 reflects the great and generous
outpouring of compassion and solidarity from the
international community to the Haitian people at a time
of enormous pain. The Government of Haiti would also
like to thank all the Member States that sponsored the
resolution, as well as the other members of the General
Assembly that have just adopted it.
The dreadful catastrophe that recently struck my
country gives me yet another opportunity to express to
the international community the deep gratitude of the
Haitian people and Government for its formidable
display of solidarity and compassion towards our
people, who have been mercilessly punished by the
fury of the seismic event of 12 January.
It was with horror and great sadness that we
learned of the deaths of our friends and colleagues
members of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti, who lost their lives in the line of duty in the
cause of peace. At this very trying time of great pain
and national anguish, I would like, on behalf of the
Government of Haiti, to express our sincere
condolences to their friends and families, as well as to
the larger United Nations family.
This is also an opportunity for me to thank the
Organization and all the staff of the United Nations
system, who are not just working tirelessly during the
rescue phase but are also already planning for the
country’s reconstruction. I should like to express the
great gratitude of the Haitian people and Government
to all the rescue teams on the ground, including
non-governmental organizations, who, in a spirit of
enormous generosity and despite their own losses, have
done outstanding work for more than a week to save
lives and alleviate the suffering of my fellow Haitians.
As the Secretary-General mentioned a few
moments ago, the toll in human lives, injured and
missing persons and property damage has been
overwhelming. To date, more than 80,000 dead have
been buried. It is estimated that there are over 200,000
total dead and thousands of missing people, with one
third of the overall population believed to be affected.

10-21663

Likewise, thousands of foreign residents and transients
have also perished.
Public buildings, schools, hospitals and banks
have been almost entirely levelled. All the buildings
representing the authority of the State lie in ruins. The
Government has virtually no physical premises. As
Members will have seen in various images broadcast
on television, the presidential palace, the parliament
building, the house of justice, the chancellery and the
hall of ministries have all have been destroyed. The
result is that the Haitian Administration is currently
working at a slow pace. The Port-au-Prince port, our
telecommunications equipment, the general tax
directorate and the general post office have all virtually
disappeared. The vast majority of residential houses
have been destroyed and the population is virtually in
the streets, without shelter. Suffering, hunger, thirst and
shortages of all sorts can be seen. Of course the needs
are huge and require immediate responses.
Faced with this tragedy, the international
community has come forward with great compassion,
and it is with heartfelt gratitude that we welcome the
exceptional efforts of all the friendly, brotherly
countries that have rushed to our side.
Despite these horrifying circumstances, I want to
convey our hope and belief that Haiti will rise again
and embark on the path of genuine reconstruction,
thanks to the courage and resolve of our people and
with the help of the international community.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union.
At the outset, we wish to express once again our
sincere and deepest condolences to and solidarity with
the Government and people of Haiti, as well as to other
nations and to the United Nations itself, for the
massive loss of life and devastation caused by the
earthquake that struck the capital of Haiti, Port-auPrince, and surrounding areas on 12 January,
aggravating the country’s already fragile situation. We
share the grief of the families of the deceased and
express our sympathy and support to the injured and to
all who were seriously affected by the catastrophe.
The European Union welcomes the immediate
global response of the international community to this
humanitarian crisis and fully supports the central and

7

A/64/PV.69

general coordinating role of the United Nations in the
international relief effort.
The European Union and its member States
responded rapidly by providing humanitarian
emergency assistance and deploying humanitarian and
civil protection experts. The first priority has been to
dispatch search-and-rescue teams, including military
and civil engineering teams. Current efforts are
focused on providing emergency health services, water,
food, sanitation, medical facilities, shelter, logistics
and telecommunications, among many other urgent
needs, to the people of Haiti.
There is also a need for adequate security on the
ground to ensure access to and the distribution of aid
without hindrance, which will rely on the crucial
cooperation of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and of countries that
are in a position to lend their assistance at this critical
phase. The European Union and its member States
stand ready to provide additional assistance on the
basis of the ongoing needs assessment, including
military and civil resources, at the request of the
Government of Haiti and the United Nations.
Since the earthquake of 12 January, several strong
aftershocks have struck southern Haiti. This highlights
the position of extreme vulnerability in which the
Haitian people find themselves and the fact that the
humanitarian and recovery effort will take time.
Nevertheless, the greatest possible synergies
between all components of the response to this challenge
must be ensured, both in the short term and in the
medium to long terms. In this respect, we support the
efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy for Haiti, former President Clinton,
as just announced by the Secretary-General.
The task before us will require a strong and
sustained mobilization of the entire international
community. The European Union has started work to
that end by holding an special meeting of ministers for
foreign affairs and cooperation devoted to the
humanitarian crisis in Haiti. This meeting was held in
Brussels on 18 January and chaired by the European
Union High Representative, Mrs. Ashton. She will be
here in New York today to meet with the SecretaryGeneral. At that meeting, the European Union called
for the convening of an international conference on
reconstruction in Haiti once the needs for the postemergency phase have been assessed. We welcome the

8

preparatory meeting that Canada will host in Montreal
on 25 January, and the European Union will, of course,
attend that meeting and play an active role in its
deliberations.
Yesterday, at the meeting convened by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, I
announced the initial contribution to be made by the
European Union and its member States within the
framework of the humanitarian flash appeal launched
by the United Nations.
Today, we reiterate our commitment in resolution
64/250, which was just adopted by consensus and
which sends a strong message of solidarity and support
to Haiti. We welcome in particular the work done by
the delegation of Brazil in this regard and the support
of all delegations to this important resolution, as
evidenced by the many sponsors and the speed with
which the Assembly was able to respond to this crisis.
Mr. St. Aimee (Saint Lucia): I speak on behalf of
the 14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM). We thank all those who sponsored
resolution 64/250 for exhibiting the commitment of the
international community to come to the aid and
assistance of one of its members in this sad and trying
time.
For us in the Caribbean region, Haiti — the
symbol of freedom from time immemorial, the
promoter of regional collaboration and assistance to its
neighbours from its birth and the symbol of struggle
against oppression and injustice from the time of its
independence — holds a special place in our hearts.
Unfortunately, all those symbols weighed heavily on
Haiti, and the Haitian people have not been able to play
their role as they should have, both in the region and in
the wider sphere.
Yet we must not forget what Haiti stood for in its
glory days and the very principles that enabled some, if
not all, of us here in this Hall to take our rightful place
among the community of nations. That is why Haiti
and the resilient Haitian people need our help.
Over the past week, the international community
has witnessed one of the worst natural disasters in
history, as the massive earthquake in our sister
CARICOM country of Haiti and its tragic aftermath
caused untold suffering, death and destruction in a
Member State least able to handle such a catastrophe.

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

Today, Haiti finds itself in dire need of our
assistance, and I am glad to see that our memories have
not been blunted by our successes and better fortunes.
On all accounts, the response of the international
community has been overwhelming, and we commend
all involved.
In times like this, it is so refreshing to be part of
the membership of this great body that is called the
United Nations. Whatever our shortcomings in other
areas, we remain truly a united body, helping and
aiding when necessary. That is the message of
resolution 64/250, and that is why we in CARICOM
fully associate ourselves with its message. I must say
that it is unfortunate that we need to wait for such
catastrophes to bring out the best in our institution.
Maybe we will change.
We in the Caribbean, though facing our own
challenges and with our limited resources, understand
our obligation to a sister island and a people that shares
the same aspirations and is situated in the same path of
hurricanes and hotspots of earthquakes. We are aware
that it is Haiti today and maybe another one of us
tomorrow. In fact, as we speak, aftershocks are still
occurring in the region. One occurred just this
morning, with a magnitude of 6.1.
We are also aware that, when the dust has settled
on immediate needs and the losses are counted, the
larger task of rebuilding will equally require our
efforts, assistance and generosity. The best guarantee
against future catastrophes, whether in Haiti or
elsewhere, is assistance for self-reliance and
sustainability. We must plan now for the next phase
and commit now to the sustainable programmes that
will help the victims and others in Haiti to overcome
the stresses, the traumas and the memories of what
took place there on January 12.
Even now, coordination of both the regional
response efforts in Haiti and other response efforts will
require significant attention. Although several
CARICOM countries have readily available bilateral
assistance, CARICOM will very soon define a niche,
geographic or thematic, to target its intervention in
Haiti. Based on reports, the operational scenario will
require the total self-sufficiency of the assets deployed.
For example, the sustainability of personnel being
deployed in the field for an extended period is an issue
for consideration.

10-21663

Given the language that many of us share with
Haiti, Creole, assets with that language capability are
encouraged, especially for the long-term development
challenges, where technical and technology transfer will
be required in such fields as agriculture, reforestation
and small enterprise development — all necessary for
the long-term reconstruction and sustainability of Haiti.
I may sound as though the entire Caribbean
region suffered the catastrophe, and truly we did since,
in a small subregion such as ours, what affects one
affects all. We also mourn with those of other
nationalities who perished in the disaster. We extend
our sympathies to the families and friends of United
Nations staffers who gave their lives to the cause of
helping Haiti re-establish its democracy. We extend our
encouragement to the staffers who are there now,
helping in the aftermath. We extend our thanks to all
those brave men and women from all over and in
diverse fields who themselves are living under stressed
conditions to bring support to Haiti. History will not
forget their deeds and will remember all those who
gave so willingly and unselfishly.
A successful operation in Haiti will greatly
enhance the standing of the United Nations, especially
coming after what is perceived as a less than successful
climate change negotiation. The resolution adopted
today presents just such an opportunity, and that is why
the Caribbean Community associates itself with it and
thanks again its initiator, Brazil, the other sponsors and
this body for the consensus reached on this resolution.
Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French): On
behalf of Canada, I would like at the outset to convey
our most heartfelt condolences to the people of Haiti
following the violent earthquake that struck the
country. I would also like to extend our sympathies to
the family and colleagues of the United Nations for the
loss of their loved ones. We grieve with them.
Canada has always had very close relations with
Haiti and is determined to support the people of that
country, working in close cooperation with the
Government of Haiti and the United Nations in these
difficult times. It is entirely appropriate that we should
gather here today in this Hall to show our solidarity
with Haiti by adopting resolution 64/250. We thank
Brazil for this initiative. In adopting that resolution, the
General Assembly is sending a clear message to the
people of Haiti: We are at your side.

9

A/64/PV.69

(spoke in English)
In response to the devastation caused by the
earthquake, Canada has so far committed $135 million
to humanitarian assistance in Haiti. This includes a
$60-million contribution to the United Nations flash
appeal for Haiti to fund essential necessities and basic
services provided on the ground by United Nations
agencies and for interventions in the areas of health,
nutrition, protection, water and sanitation. In addition
to this contribution, other Canadian assistance in support
of the relief efforts has included search and rescue
response, the provision of supplies and equipment, and
Canadian Forces military assets.
Canada is pleased to note the speed and intensity
with which the international community has responded
to this disaster. Canada would like to commend the
Secretary-General, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
and the entire United Nations team for the swiftness of
the United Nations response. At times like these, the
United Nations has a key coordination role to play, and
this is why Canada has been working closely with the
United Nations and other donors in Haiti to make sure
that our assistance is coordinated through the United
Nations system, supporting the priorities set by the
Government of Haiti, and channelled to where it is
needed most.
All of our efforts are, of course, currently focused
on the immediate needs of the Haitian people, but we
also have to start thinking about the future, the
transition to recovery and reconstruction. Canada will
host a conference in Montreal on 25 January that will
constitute a first step in this direction. Amongst other
things, it will pave the way for a much larger
conference on reconstruction, to be held at a place and
time yet to be determined.
Once again, today’s resolution sends a strong
signal to the Government and the people of Haiti: We
stand with you during these difficult times.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank you,
Madam, and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the
briefings on the latest developments after the
earthquake and the international relief efforts in Haiti.
We thank the delegation of Brazil for submitting
resolution 64/250 on the earthquake in Haiti to the
General Assembly. We are pleased to note that the
resolution has the support of all Member States. That

10

will send a positive signal of unity to the international
community.
On behalf of the Chinese Government and
people, I wish to express our deep sympathy and
condolences over the heavy casualties and loss of
property caused by the earthquake, and our sadness and
condolences over the unprecedented casualties suffered
by the United Nations．
Since the earthquake, China has done what it can
to provide support and assistance to Haiti. Since its
arrival in Haiti on 13 January, the Chinese emergency
rescue team has worked strenuously at the forefront of
disaster relief in the country. The Red Cross Society of
China provided $1 million in emergency aid to Haiti.
The Chinese Government also provided 30 million
yuan — approximately $4.4 million — worth of
supplies to the country. The first batch of supplies
arrived in Haiti on 17 January and the second, which
was delayed due to the limited capacity of Haiti’s
airport, will be delivered on 26 January.
Yesterday, the Chinese Government announced
its decision to contribute $2.6 million to the United
Nations flash appeal for Haiti. To date, China has
provided over $8 million in assistance to Haiti in cash
or in kind. In addition, in light of the urgent needs of
the earthquake areas, yesterday the Chinese Government
decided to send a 40-member medical and epidemic
prevention team to Haiti and to provide medicine and
medical equipment to the country.
We note that the disaster relief efforts in Haiti are
now in full swing. The Chinese Government appreciates
the timely and effective response of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the relevant United Nations disaster
relief agencies. The United Nations is universally
recognized for its work in international humanitarian
relief and development. In the areas of humanitarian
relief, early recovery, reconstruction and long-term
development, the United Nations has not only the
authorization of Member States, but also expertise and
technological advantages. In recent years, the United
Nations has accumulated in-depth experience and
established an effective coordination mechanism in
response to emergencies such as the Indian Ocean
tsunami and the Myanmar cyclone.
Enhancing the coordination of humanitarian
assistance and strengthening planning for reconstruction
efforts are two priority areas for disaster relief in Haiti
at this time. On the one hand, the United Nations needs

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

to maintain close cooperation with the Haitian
Government, integrate the disaster relief efforts of all
parties, and improve the efficiency of relief efforts. On
the other hand, if international aid is to be utilized
effectively, it is imperative that the issue of
reconstruction be taken fully into account in the current
rescue and relief phase and integrated into the disaster
relief efforts. We hope that the United Nations will
strengthen coordination in that regard. We support the
early establishment, through effective planning and
speedy action, of a United Nations reconstruction
coordination mechanism that will help to coordinate
international relief efforts in Haiti, make the best use
of relief funds and facilitate reconstruction efforts.
As the rotating President of the Security Council
for this month, China has maintained close contact and
cooperation on the issue of Haiti with the parties
concerned. After the earthquake, the Security Council
reacted immediately. It convened several meetings and
issued two press statements by the President on the
situation in Haiti (SC/9842 and SC/9846). On
19 January, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1908 (2010), by which it decided to send an
additional 3,500 peacekeepers to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The resolution will
greatly facilitate the security, disaster relief and
reconstruction efforts in Haiti.
Before concluding, I wish to thank the
representative of the Sudan for submitting to the General
Assembly, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
resolution 64/251, entitled “International cooperation
on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural
disasters, from relief to development”. We welcome its
adoption by the General Assembly by consensus.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to convey the condolences of the Cuban people
and Government to the Haitian people and
Government, the countries that have suffered the loss
of their nationals in the earthquake in Haiti, and the
United Nations family.
The United Nations is facing a new challenge.
Assistance to the brotherly people of Haiti is a very
urgent and manifest need. At the time of the disaster,
over 400 Cuban workers were working selflessly and
without pay in Haiti. The Cuban doctors began to offer
their services from the first moment after the
earthquake. It was the most significant medical

10-21663

assistance that the Haitian people received in the first
72 hours.
Immediately after the earthquake, more than
60 additional workers from the Cuban health service,
with experience in similar emergency and disaster
situations, joined the assistance work for our Haitian
brothers. Moreover, there are 240 Haitian residents and
students in their fifth year of medical training in Cuba.
Many other young Haitians, trained as doctors in my
country, also immediately joined the task of saving
lives. As of 8 p.m. on 20 January, they had treated
14,551 patients and had carried out 1,252 surgical
interventions. Cuban doctors are working at
21 assistance centres in the capital, the surrounding
area and other departments of the interior. Cuba has set
up 14 operating theatres, with 16 surgical teams.
Cuba reiterates its readiness to cooperate on the
ground with all nations in order to help the Haitian
people and to save more lives, given that it already has
the staff and infrastructure in that country necessary for
such a task. Over 100 specialists from various countries,
including Venezuela, Nicaragua, Chile, Spain, Mexico,
Colombia and Canada, as well as 17 nuns, are also
working with their Cuban co-workers on the ground.
The Haitian people need the international community’s
support. That support should not be limited to
addressing the damage caused by the earthquake that
shook Haiti.
Cooperation and assistance for Haiti should
continue in the future, in close coordination with the
Haitian Government and in full respect for the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-intervention, including in domestic matters. The
United Nations has an important role to play in this
process that should be neither ignored nor supplanted.
Cuba has provided free and disinterested medical
assistance to the Haitian people since December 1998.
To date, 6,094 Cuban participants have worked in
Haiti’s Haitian medical sector. They have carried out
more than 14 million medical consultations and
250,000 operations. They have also assisted in more
than 100,000 deliveries and saved over than
230,000 lives. Since 2004, thanks to Operation Miracle,
47,273 people in Haiti have received eye operations.
Cuba has hosted the training of 917 Haitian
professionals, including 570 doctors. At the moment,
660 young Haitians are studying in my country,
including 541 who are being trained in medicine. The

11

A/64/PV.69

cooperation between Cuba and Haiti also extends to
several other fields, including education, agriculture,
energy, fisheries and communications. As a result of
that cooperation, 160,030 people in Haiti have learned
to read.
These statistics are but a modest illustration of
what the international community could achieve with
will and determination. The Haitian people need the
most resolute support from the international community
in their efforts to emerge from the poverty and
underdevelopment to which they have been subject
during too many years of colonialism, neo-colonialism,
military intervention and the imposition of dictatorial
regimes. The United Nations is called upon to play a
crucial role in achieving that goal.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to convey to the Permanent
Mission of Haiti, and through it to the Haitian
Government and people, our heartfelt condolences in
connection with the thousands of lives lost as a result
of the earthquake. We also wish to extend the same
condolences to all the countries that, like ours, have
lost fellow citizens to that natural disaster, as well as to
the entire United Nations family, which has suffered so
much from that event, which took the lives of Hédi
Annabi and Luiz Carlos da Costa, its highest officials
in Haiti.
The international community has reacted with
outstanding solidarity and generosity in the face of this
tragic situation. The States Members of the Organization
have provided extraordinary support to help alleviate
the current situation in Haiti. We appreciate the work
of all the people and agencies on the ground. In that
connection, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which reflect
the ongoing commitment of the United Nations to Haiti.
The adoption of resolution 64/250, which was
introduced by Brazil and of which we were a sponsor
from the outset, has sent the clear and timely message
that countries are united at this time to help a brotherly
country. That is why we decidedly support the
resolution.
Efforts to help Haiti will, of course, continue
beyond this initial humanitarian assistance. For that
reason, we should view this event as an opportunity to
ensure that, in the near future, Haiti will be able to
strengthen its capacities to achieve sustainable
development. There is no doubt that this undertaking,

12

in which the affected country must be the principal
stakeholder, will require major coordination efforts
with the Haitian Government and among international
actors. That will be one of the greatest challenges we
will face in the future as States Members of the
Organization.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, we reiterate our condolences
to the brotherly Government and people of Haiti, the
United Nations family and all the countries that have
lost citizens in this catastrophe.
Nicaragua, a country that has been beset by
countless natural disasters, including a devastating
earthquake in the 1970s, feels the pain of its Haitian
brothers. Our solidarity has been evident since the
initial aftermath of the earthquake. We have saved
lives. We have acted with affection, humanity and the
generous heart for which the Nicaraguan people are
known. We have already deployed various humanitarian
missions, including special rescue and medical brigades,
medicine and tons of food. In line with our capacities,
we are now working to provide as much medical care
as possible.
Developing countries share what they have and
not what they have left over, for we have nothing left
over. Many other brotherly peoples in the international
community have also responded in solidarity to this
suffering and sought to alleviate the impact of the
tragedy by providing meaningful humanitarian
assistance. Nevertheless, it is regrettable to see how
some are exploiting this painful situation to take
control of a brotherly country mired in blood by
occupying it with excessive military troops, who are in
many instances creating hurdles and impeding the
delivery of assistance to our Haitian brothers. That is
the reality of what is taking place on the ground, and
we must not ignore it.
We take this opportunity to ask the United Nations
system to strengthen its leadership of the coordination
of humanitarian assistance and, eventually, of
reconstruction, in accordance with the principles set
out in the Charter of the United Nations. No one should
assume for himself the right to shape the destiny of a
people suffering and dying helplessly as a result of
catastrophe. The people and Government of Haiti
should guide their own destiny.
Nicaragua stresses the need for timely periodic
reports on the implementation of the resolution 64/250

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

so that we can improve on the progress made and face
and overcome obstacles. We should send the Haitian
people the clear message that our solidarity does not
have a hidden agenda and seeks only to continue to
save lives and to provide medium- and long-term
support during the various stages of the recovery and
reconstruction process.
Nicaragua joined the consensus on resolution
64/250 as a manifestation of its deep solidarity with the
brotherly Haitian people, but we warn that the
omission of any reference in the resolution to the
presence of foreign troops should not be interpreted as
an open door for military occupation. What Haiti needs
are doctors, engineers, teachers, construction materials
and the strengthening of its agriculture production, not
soldiers. A situation as serious as that of Haiti should
not be politicized or exploited to justify special
interests; rather, it should be an opportunity for the
countries of the world to unite in solidarity under the
joint slogan “Haiti is not alone. The international
community is with you. With your efforts and our
support, you will come through.”
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): The
Government and the people of India are shocked and
deeply grieved by the loss of human life and the
damage that have resulted from the catastrophic
earthquake in Haiti. India is familiar with the
consequences of natural disasters and therefore fully
understands the trauma and the suffering that the
Haitians are living through. I reiterate the solemn
pledges of the President and the Prime Minister of
India to stand shoulder to shoulder with our Haitian
brothers and sisters in their moment of sorrow. We will
do whatever is in our power to partner with the people
of Haiti in their journey to rebuild their lives and their
nation.
We would also like to commend the United
Nations and the international community for the swift
and rapid response that has been mounted to assist the
people of Haiti in their hour of need.
Immediately on hearing the news of the
earthquake, the Government of India initiated measures
to assist Haiti. On 15 January, we announced a cash
contribution of $5 million towards relief measures as a
token of India’s solidarity with the people of Haiti.
That assistance is being sent to the Government of
Haiti through its Permanent Mission here in New York.

10-21663

The Government and the people of India also pay
homage to the men and women of the United Nations
family, including one of our own, who were struck
down at their posts. The loss to their near and dear
ones is irreplaceable. It might, however, be some
consolation that they fell in the service of humanity
and while working for a greater good. The greatest
tribute to them will be the continuation of their work in
Haiti — a cause for which they gave their lives.
My delegation would again like to convey our
condolences to the injured and the family members of
those who have died on account of the earthquake. We
have no doubt that the people of Haiti have the strength
and resilience to overcome this immense natural
disaster.
In conclusion, our delegation was happy to
co-sponsor resolution 64/250, which was adopted
earlier today. At this forum, we want to express our
appreciation to the delegation of Brazil for having
piloted the resolution.
Mr. Solón-Romero (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, I wish to express our
solidarity, condolences and respect to the Haitian
people and the relatives of the victims. The terrible
earthquake that shook the city of Port-au-Prince on
Tuesday, 12 January, was one of the most violent and
deadly in the history of the Caribbean. The damage that
it caused in barely 60 seconds was devastating.
That human tragedy should prompt us to express
humankind’s deepest feelings of solidarity in the most
selfless way and without the least political calculation.
Humanitarian assistance and the reconstruction of Haiti
must be undertaken in the fullest respect for Haiti’s
sovereignty. This human tragedy must not be used for
any geopolitical strategy or to promote the business of
private firms. Humanitarian assistance must take place
in the fullest respect for the principles of international
law, putting food, water, health and housing assistance
and support for the relatives of the victims ahead of
promoting a disproportionate military presence.
In that regard, we note and are concerned by the
presence of approximately 11,274 additional United
States troops, as stated in a report issued by the White
House on 18 January. We are concerned that the issue
of Haiti is being treated as a security issue before one
of humanitarian assistance. We need to know under what
mandate those 11,274 troops — a force greater than the

13

A/64/PV.69

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti — are
operating.
The best way to support Haiti at this time is by
immediately forgiving its entire external debt, as some
countries and institutions are already doing. Likewise,
financial aid must be in the form of donations without
any kind of credit conditions. One way to help Haiti is
to give the overseas brothers of Haiti the right to work
in order to increase remittances to the country that will
contribute to its reconstruction.
The reconstruction of Haiti is a task to which we
all must contribute, learning from the lessons of the past
by
overcoming
the
neo-colonialism
and
interventionism that are to a great extent the causes of
the poverty in Haiti. We want to promote and are
resolutely committed to Haiti’s reconstruction by
Haitians and for Haitians, with the help of the entire
international community.
What we have just seen in Haiti is just a tragic
example of what can happen to any of our countries
and to the entire planet if we are not able to unite in the
most important battle of this century — the fight
against climate change and the defence of our mother
Earth.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to reaffirm the solidarity of the
people and the Government of Colombia with the
Haitian people and Government in the difficult
humanitarian situation being experienced by the
brotherly country of Haiti owing to the earthquake of
12 January.
We thank the delegation of Brazil for having led
the consultations to ensure that the General Assembly
could today adopt resolution 64/250, on Haiti. The
resolution sends a message about the political
commitment of all Member States and of the
international community to provide Haiti with the
cooperation and support it needs in the face of this
humanitarian emergency, as well as to carry out the
processes of early recovery, reconstruction and
transition towards sustainable development.
The immediate response of the international
community in the face of this humanitarian situation
has been crucial and will continue to be essential in the
coming months. Colombia acknowledges the valuable
work done by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which expeditiously

14

put together the flash appeal to mobilize the necessary
cooperation for Haiti during the humanitarian and early
recovery phase.
Colombia has supported humanitarian assistance
efforts while taking into account the priority areas that
have been identified by the United Nations. To that
end, with a view to contributing to response efforts, at
the very outset the Government of Colombia put in
place a coordinated effort involving the entities that
comprise our national system for disaster prevention
and action.
To date, Colombia has deployed five cargo planes
and a naval ship to provide humanitarian assistance to
Haiti. Two hundred and fifty persons have travelled to
Haiti to provide assistance in various areas, including
medical personnel and search and rescue experts. More
than 400 tons of in-kind assistance have been sent to
Haiti, including donations from the Colombian people.
In addition, the Government of Colombia has
provided cash support to the World Food Programme to
carry out its activities in Haiti. I should also like to
report that, in its capacity as Chair of the Management
Board of the Agency for Cooperation and Development
of the Organization of American States, Colombia has
proposed establishing a special account to support
Haiti’s reconstruction process. Similarly, the issue of
Haiti has had a central place on the agenda of the
fifteenth ministerial meeting of the Association of
Caribbean States, which is currently being held in
Colombia. The people and the Government of
Colombia will continue to extend their cooperation and
support in line with existing capacities and experience
in the various areas of response.
Coordination is a crucial element in the work
being carried out. Coordination is basic to ensuring
that emergency assistance for affected populations is
provided in an effective, organized and timely manner.
In that connection, we would like to underscore the
work that OCHA has done to build the proper
coordination between agencies and aid workers, as well
as in each of the various areas of humanitarian work.
Colombia also stresses the importance of ensuring a
coordinated and effective response to rehabilitation,
reconstruction and the transition towards development
during the early recovery stages. In that connection, we
support the efforts announced today by the SecretaryGeneral.

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

Colombia has had its own experiences in
responding to serious natural disasters. In 1999, we
undertook the recovery and reconstruction of cities
affected by a devastating earthquake in our country’s
main coffee-producing region. The mobilization of
resources at the national and international levels made
it possible to rebuild urban areas. Resources were
administered by a reconstruction fund. That arrangement
made it possible to create jobs at the local level. It also
allowed for efficient and transparent management that
included assistance from UNDP and broad support from
civil society institutions, including non-governmental
organizations and the private sector. Today that region
is one of our country’s most dynamic.
Based on lessons learned and positive practices,
we have recommended that we begin now to identify
appropriate planning and financing mechanisms for
Haiti’s recovery and reconstruction that ensure the
proper coordination between the Haitian Government
and cooperation entities and humanitarian actors. Such
mechanisms should ensure the coherence, efficiency
and sustainability of efforts while avoiding duplication
and loss of focus. They should also serve to contribute
to organized financing and project management and
implementation with clear responsibility for participation
and implementation among the various international
bodies, Governments and other governmental and
non-governmental assistance entities.
My Government has suggested that such
coordination be supported through a multilateral
organization or international bodies. We have also called
for each participating country and actor to commit
itself to specific projects and the reconstruction of
specific areas and sectors. All of that should be done in
line with the specific technical and human capacities of
participants to play an active part both in the face of
the urgency of the moment as well as vis-à-vis Haiti’s
development and future.
We trust that the efforts of Governments and
international organizations will make it possible to
address both early recovery and reconstruction efforts
and the enormous emergency assistance needs that have
been identified. Colombia will continue to support
United Nations efforts and initiatives to provide an
suitable response to this humanitarian emergency and
to produce new capacities and the conditions for the
economic revival and sustainable development of the
Republic of Haiti.

10-21663

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Once
more, we reiterate our deep condolences to the
Government and the people of Haiti and to the United
Nations family on the loss of life, the injuries and the
damage they have suffered. We convey our condolences
to all the Governments that, like ours, suffered loss of
human life.
As we have indicated on numerous occasions,
Mexico’s Government and society have mobilized on a
sustained basis. We are also considering new support
measures to be adopted in the near future. We are also
part of a number of regional initiatives, to which some
colleagues have referred.
We should address the urgent needs of today, but
we must also look towards the future and at the fact
that, among the countries of the international
community, Haiti has in recent decades been one of the
most sorely punished in terms of its development.
Paradoxically, this unprecedented tragedy provides the
United Nations with a historic opportunity to review its
overall strategy for Haiti, with a view to fully taking on
not just the challenge of contributing to its
reconstruction but also that of helping it to overcome
the enormous structural deficiencies in the way of its
economic and social development, as well as its
political and institutional weakness, fully coordinating
with Haiti’s Government and with key stakeholders.
Let us be clear: this is not about returning the
country to its pre-earthquake state. Rather, this is about
giving decisive momentum to Haiti’s development. We
therefore believe that the organs and mechanisms of
the system associated with Haiti — from the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the various
agencies, programmes and funds — should, in a
coordinated manner, review the scope of their
mandates and activities within their respective areas of
responsibility with an eye on Haiti’s future. Only in
that way will the United Nations be able to fully bring
about the coordination that is its role.
Both in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly, the delegation of Mexico will continue to
promote initiatives to that end. In that context, we
welcome today’s adoption of resolution 64/250 as a
first step.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government and
the people of Venezuela are in mourning owing to the
terrible catastrophe that Haiti is experiencing. We would

15

A/64/PV.69

like to reiterate our condolences over the loss of the
lives of thousands of Haitians and also the deaths of
citizens of other nations and United Nations personnel.
Natural disasters occur suddenly without warning,
ending human lives in seconds. They raze everything in
their path, turning splendour and hope into destruction
and devastation, showing no mercy towards the poorest
and most vulnerable in particular. This time, it was
Haiti’s turn to once again feel nature’s devastating
blow, which was aggravated by the disruptive
consequences of climate change and the terrible
imbalance brought about by a desperately inhumane
model of consumerism. Before this devastating tragedy
occurred not only was Haiti already impoverished, but
it had suffered the plundering and servitude of
colonialism, slavery, imperialism and internal tyranny.
Those realities plunged Haiti into hardship and terror.
The earthquake in Haiti ended up destroying what its
worthy people, with so much sweat and effort, had
built up in recent years amid many limitations.
Venezuela is a Caribbean country, a brother of
Haiti by blood and by tears. Historic ties in the fight
for freedom and independence link us to its people. We
Venezuelans feel particularly committed to its fate. The
selfless solidarity and cooperation of the Bolivarian
Government with the Haitian people is a matter of
principle. It is a resolute, ongoing and permanent shortand long-term commitment.
To curb the devastating effects of the earthquake
in Haiti and to address the humanitarian emergency
that is currently paralysing its people, to date the
Bolivarian Government has sent more than 7,000 tons
of humanitarian aid and a team of over 200 specialists,
which grows daily, among whom are doctors, fire
fighters, search-and-rescue experts of the Simón
Bolívar Humanitarian Task Force, as well as members
of the Simón Bolívar International Brigade, who attend
every time that natural disasters occur in brother
countries. In the coming hours, another 6,000 tons of
food and supplies will arrive in Haiti in four ships of
the Venezuelan navy. A humanitarian corridor has been
permanently established so that, by air and by sea, we
Venezuelans can provide the support that the Haitian
community needs in these terrible circumstances.
We are implementing a special humanitarian
assistance plan for Haiti, seeking to ensure that basic
institutions, including health care institutions, can
function. Before the earthquake, Venezuela consistently

16

provided ongoing support in that regard. In addition to
the 225,000 barrels of diesel and petrol that we have
already decided to send to Haiti through the Petróleos
de Venezuela, S.A., yesterday our Government
announced a donation of another 300,000 barrels of oil
to that Caribbean brother country. The delivery of
humanitarian aid is being coordinated with the other
countries of the Bolivarian Alternative for the
Americas and with friendly countries, such as the
Russian Federation, whose aircraft have landed on
Venezuelan territory in order to provide humanitarian
aid to that Caribbean brother country.
In this unfortunate hour of its history, Haiti needs
the immediate and selfless cooperation and help of all
peoples and Governments of the world. This terrible
situation must be a chance for every one of the
countries that make up the United Nations to give Haiti
its solidarity and generous support, putting aside evil
hegemonic claims to political and military control.
President Hugo Chávez stated recently that “the
United States Government is taking advantage of the
tragedy that the brotherly people of Haiti is experiencing
to occupy it militarily”. That concern and warning call
have also been voiced by other heads of Government,
people’s organizations around the world and
humanitarian organizations on the ground that have
said that what Haiti needs are medicines and joint
support, not military intervention.
No country should take advantage of the current
situation of despair and vulnerability in Haiti by
deploying, as is the case, a huge occupying military
force that is bigger, as has already been said here, than
the military presence of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti: a military occupation
that is being carried out over the corpses and the tears
of the Haitian people. The independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Haiti must be preserved and
respected, irrespective of the current weakness of
Haitian institutions as a result of the dreadful
devastating earthquake.
We hope that resolution 64/250, which we adopted
by consensus today and which Venezuela endorses, will
be an appeal to the world conscience. We must respond
to the immediate phase of humanitarian relief, without
forgetting that the people of Haiti will continue to need
us in the subsequent rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development stages, a commitment that Venezuela
most naturally and resolutely accepts.

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

As a Latin American and Caribbean country,
brother of Haiti, we sincerely thank the States Members
of the United Nations that have generously and promptly
responded to the humanitarian emergency that is
overwhelming our Caribbean brethren, with whom we
have been united since the time of independence and in
the fight for freedom and independence.
The work of Brazil in presenting the draft
resolution that we adopted by consensus today has
been commendable and should be acknowledged.
Ms. Davies (Australia): Five years ago this week,
we gathered in this Hall to express condolences for all
those affected by the earthquake and tsunamis that
struck the Indian Ocean region on 26 December 2004.
Today, the General Assembly gathers again, following
Haiti’s terrible natural disaster, to offer our
condolences to the victims and their families and to
demonstrate that Haiti has the support of the
international community in this dark hour.
Resolution 64/250 signals that we, the States
Members of the United Nations, are committed to
providing the assistance that Haiti needs in a
coordinated and effective way, from the immediate
relief phase, through early recovery, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development. Australia is pleased to
have been a sponsor of the resolution. The resolution
that we have adopted today stresses the importance of
strengthening Haiti’s disaster preparedness capacity
and reducing its vulnerability to natural disasters. It is
crucial that in rebuilding Haiti, we build back better
and integrate disaster risk reduction into all
development strategies, helping to avoid another
disaster of this magnitude.
So far, Australia has pledged 15 million Australian
dollars in humanitarian assistance, which will be
channelled via the World Food Programme, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency
and non-governmental organizations. We will consider
further contributions towards Haiti’s longer-term
reconstruction. Our support demonstrates the strong
concern of the Australian community for the desperate
situation of Haiti’s people.
We all continue to grieve for the valiant United
Nations staff who lost their lives in the course of duty.
In spite of their own losses, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United Nations
country team immediately set to work to help the

10-21663

Haitian people. The importance of the United Nations
role in the coordination of humanitarian assistance has
been particularly clear in this emergency, and the United
Nations team has done a remarkable job in extremely
difficult conditions. We commend their efforts.
We recognize in particular the role of United
Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator John Holmes
and all the staff of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs involved in the coordination of
assistance to Haiti, both on the ground and in New
York and Geneva.
Mr. Nwosa (Nigeria): We in Nigeria were
shocked at the monumental level of misery, pain and
agony arising from the recent earthquake in Haiti. We
are therefore grateful to the President of the General
Assembly for convening this meeting to discuss the
way forward in mitigating the human misery in Haiti.
Nigeria laments the damage to lives and property
caused by the earthquake and expresses its deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
Haiti. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims of
the tragedy. We also commiserate with the SecretaryGeneral over the huge personnel losses suffered by the
United Nations.
The magnitude of the horror and the significant
proportion of the Haitian population who have been
subjected to such a high level of penury and
destruction are of great pain to the Government and the
people of Nigeria. Haitians may have died in their
thousands, and so many Haitians may have been
consigned to the grave, yet the indomitable spirit of the
living remains undaunted and undeterred as to what the
future holds. We salute the courage and the resilience
of the Haitian people, and we pay deserved tribute to the
individuals, organizations, agencies and Governments
that have acted swiftly to deal with the consequences
of this disaster.
As responsible members of the international
community, a community in which the fall of one
means the systemic stumbling of the others, this is a
time for concerted and coordinated efforts so that we
can confront the current challenges and to keep Haiti
on the international agenda. That is where the critical
role of the United Nations comes in.
Nigeria’s 121-strong police contingent on
peacekeeping duty in Haiti and volunteer members of
the Technical Aid Corps have begun to render their

17

A/64/PV.69

service to the victims of the disaster. Nigeria
recognizes that the current situation in Haiti calls for
immediate action, and the urgency that underlines its
positive response to the current challenge defines its
reaction to this regrettable catastrophe. In that vein, the
Federal Government of Nigeria is making an additional
financial contribution in the sum of $1.5 million
through the Secretary-General. That also informed
Nigeria’s decision to join in sponsoring resolution
64/250, which was adopted earlier this morning.
Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): At this time of sadness that the world is
experiencing owing to the indescribable suffering that
befell the Republic of Haiti on 12 January, the
Dominican Republic would like to express its sincerest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Haiti, to the United Nations and to the other countries
and organizations that were affected. That is why we
are infinitely grateful to the delegations of Brazil and
the Sudan for introducing resolutions 64/250 and
64/251, which we have just adopted today.
A few minutes after the disaster occurred in Haiti,
President Leonel Fernández arranged for the dispatch
of a plane equipped with skilled rescue personnel,
trained dogs, first-aid teams, water, telecommunications
teams and medicines. From the very beginning, doctors,
volunteers and Dominican construction companies have
been working together to remove rubble. An operations
centre was set up in Jimaní fortress on the border with
Haiti, from which were coordinated support for
humanitarian assistance activities, the organization of
transfers of the wounded and affected persons, access
for humanitarian aid and all the coordination needed in
such a tragic event.
The ministers of the armed forces, public health
and social assistance and public works and
communications immediately headed for Haiti in the
plane in which President Leonel Fernández dispatched
the first humanitarian aid contingent. Both from the air
and from our embassy facilities, the destruction caused
by the earthquake could be seen in order to assess what
assistance to provide in the following days.
By order of President Leonel Fernández of the
Dominican Republic, Dominican hospitals to which the
injured would be taken were identified. All these
hospitals in the Dominican Republic, both close to and
far from the border, in cities such as Santiago, Santo
Domingo and other towns in the interior of the country,

18

are treating the Haitian wounded who have crossed the
Dominican border. Ten mobile kitchens were set up,
each able to feed 10,000 people daily. Six ambulances
were also mobilized, as well as rescue teams of relief
agencies, the Dominican Red Cross, civil defence and
the Emergency Operations Commission.
The President of the Dominican Republic, Leonel
Fernández, visited Haiti on 14 January, less than
36 hours after the tragic event, and was the first and so
far only head of State to visit the country in person. He
flew over the disaster area and met with President René
Préval at the Haiti airport. They agreed on the
implementation of an immediate programme of action
to re-establish water, electricity and telecommunications
services and to hold an international meeting to plan
for the medium- and long-term reconstruction of Haiti.
On 18 January, with the approval and assistance
of President Préval and at the initiative of President
Fernández, the international meeting was held in Santo
Domingo. Participants included representatives of the
member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), Canada, Spain, the United States and
Brazil. The United Nations was represented by our
colleague Edmond Mulet from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The
Vice-President of Spain represented the European
Union, and the Organization of American States (OAS)
was represented by its Secretary General. The World
Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank were
also represented. They gathered to examine the best
way to address this tragic situation.
The countries and organizations present at that
meeting agreed to promote the holding of an
international conference to prepare a strategic plan for
the reconstruction of Haiti that will, above and beyond
emergency aid, help to strengthen in the medium and
long term Haiti’s viability and its political, social and
economic stability. That conference will take place in
the Dominican Republic.
A coordination committee was created comprised
of Haiti, the Dominican Republic, CARICOM, the
United Nations, the European Union, the OAS, the Rio
Group, the United States, Mexico, Canada, Brazil, the
Inter-American Development Bank and the World
Bank. This coordination committee will oversee the
organization of activities, including the first preparatory
meeting, to be held on 25 January in Canada, as

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

mentioned by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in his
statement this morning.
A working group appointed by the committee will
prepare a draft strategic plan to be submitted for debate
at the first plenary meeting. It will be based on three
points: the Millennium Development Goals, the Haitian
2010 National Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy,
and the World Bank document entitled “Options and
opportunities for Haiti”.
The expressions of solidarity by the people of the
Dominican Republic with the people and Government
of Haiti have been wide-ranging. We have held
neighbourhood charity drives and telethons. We have
postponed repatriations. We have made it easier for the
wounded to cross the border and have offered free
medical treatment in Dominican hospitals throughout
the country for the injured. The Dominican Republic
has also become the primary hub for international
humanitarian aid to Haiti. Our three airports in Santo
Domingo, three airports in the north — in Santiago,
Puerto Plata and Samaná — and the Barahona airport,
which is 45 minutes from the border at Jimaní, are
working at full capacity, managing the hundreds of
daily national and international flights bringing
emergency aid for Haiti.
Just as a Dominican woman, Sonia Marmolejos,
came to the Dario Contreras public hospital in Santo
Domingo to breastfeed some of the dozens of Haitian
babies affected by this tragedy, so the international
community must once and for all make economic
development in Haiti a reality. That country’s problems
have required peacekeeping support for some time, and
now, after the earthquake, the reconstruction efforts
will be the opportunity for us to take up the challenge
of development in Haiti as a part of peacebuilding. Let
us take up once and for all, and in an irreversible
manner, the task of laying the foundations for
sustainable development in Haiti in conditions of social
justice and minimizing our vulnerability to the disasters
that have historically devastated the Caribbean Basin.
Mr. Keegel (Sri Lanka): My delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to Brazil for initiating
resolution 64/250, on humanitarian assistance for Haiti,
which we adopted today. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Permanent Representative of Haiti for
updating us on the relief efforts.
Sri Lanka wishes to join others in this Assembly
in conveying once again our deepest condolences to the

10-21663

Government and people of Haiti on the tragic loss of
life and property following the devastating earthquake.
As a country that faced a similar natural disaster five
years ago, we are able to fully empathize with their
suffering, and we once again convey assurances of our
support and solidarity at this time of great sorrow. We
have no doubt that, with the support of the
international community and with their own efforts, the
Government and people of Haiti will be able to rebuild
their country.
Sri Lanka was fortunate not to have lost any of
our 1,079 United Nations peacekeepers in Haiti. We are
extremely heartened also to hear that our peacekeepers
have been playing an important role since the day of
the tragedy in search and rescue operations and in the
distribution of food and water in the areas worst
affected by the disaster.
As a token of our support and solidarity, the
Government of Sri Lanka has granted a cash donation
of $25,000 to the Government of Haiti and has today
decided to send a consignment of essential supplies to
the people of Haiti. We will continue to extend our
support to the Government and people of Haiti by
contributing to the United Nations flash appeal.
We also convey our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his leadership in ensuring that emergency
relief assistance reaches the victims of the disaster in a
timely manner. We convey through the SecretaryGeneral our condolences to the families of the United
Nations staff who lost their lives on 12 January. We
recognize the role of the Special Envoy, Mr. Bill
Clinton, and the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Mr. John Holmes.
Finally, my delegation conveys its thanks to you,
Madam President, for giving us this opportunity to
once again renew our commitment to support the
people of Haiti at this time.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to reiterate the heartfelt
condolences of the Peruvian Government and people to
the authorities and people of Haiti, who have been
struck by the terrible disaster that has caused
irreparable human loss and devastation in the country.
In addition, I would like to express my Government’s
deep sorrow for the many who have gone missing from
our United Nations family. I would like to mention in
particular our distinguished colleagues Hédi Annabi

19

A/64/PV.69

and Luiz Carlos da Costa, who spared no effort in their
untiring work for Haiti.
From the very beginning, Peru joined the efforts
of the international community to support the urgent
search and rescue efforts in Haiti. We sent three planes
with humanitarian aid, a medical team and a rescue
team. My country, as a contributor of troops to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and a member of the Friends of Haiti,
also supported and co-sponsored the MINUSTAH troop
increases that were necessary so that it could contribute
to the efforts for recovery, reconstruction and stability
in that fraternal Caribbean nation. We also
co-sponsored resolution 64/250, on humanitarian
assistance, which was presented by Brazil and which
the Assembly has just adopted.
It is comforting to witness the immediate
response of the international community and the way
that, throughout the world, every possible effort is
being deployed to commit resources and aid in order to
respond effectively to the challenges that must be
overcome in dealing with this human tragedy. We have
all witnessed the enormous problems that Haiti has been
facing with courage and with international support.
In this grave situation, Peru believes it
indispensable for the United Nations, more than ever
before, to play a leading role in the difficult endeavour
of reconstructing Haiti. In the short term, this task
means the collective development of multiple
humanitarian assistance efforts, taking into account the
number of victims. In this respect, we support the work
of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy and the
efforts being deployed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
My delegation believes that is it extremely
important to define the steps and procedures that above
all will enable us to assess exactly what the needs of
the Haitian people currently are. We also need to
ensure that all of the assistance that is being distributed
is delivered in a coordinated and effective fashion. We
should ensure that we have all the tools and means
necessary to ensure that aid flows remain constant.
United Nations joint coordination is essential to
manage all the international cooperation, whether
multilateral, bilateral or from the private sector, and to
avoid any scattering or overlapping of efforts.

20

The Government and people of Haiti face a great
test, but it should also lead to long-term commitments
being made to Haiti by the international community in
order to consolidate a process of recovery,
reconstruction and economic development in the
country. In that spirit, Peru will participate actively at
the high-level meeting next Monday in Montreal,
Canada. We are confident that it will be a first step in a
new and even more committed phase of international
cooperation for the reconstruction of Haiti. Peru
reiterates its readiness to continue to contribute to this
effort.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes today’s resolution 64/250, on
humanitarian assistance, emergency relief and
rehabilitation for Haiti. We are working urgently with
our international partners, nations around the world,
non-governmental organizations and the entire United
Nations system to help the people of Haiti recover
from the current crisis and rebuild over the long term.
We are also pleased to join the consensus on this
year’s resolution on international cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development (resolution 64/251), to help
provide timely and effective assistance to communities
shaken by natural disasters. The United States remains
deeply committed to working in close partnership with
our fellow Member States and the United Nations
system to respond to natural disasters around the
world. We note for the record that this resolution
contains a paragraph with a reference to international
humanitarian law, which should not be confused with
the humanitarian activities or assistance that are the
subject of today’s resolution. International humanitarian
law, to which we are fully committed, is a term that
governs situations of armed conflict, not humanitarian
assistance.
Regrettably, I must respond to the undignified
allegations of three isolated delegations — those of
Nicaragua, Bolivia and Venezuela — who have used
this sombre occasion in support of Haiti to politicize
the matter with ill-informed, tendentious statements. In
calling for us all to avoid politicizing the situation in
Haiti, they have done just that by alleging ulterior
motives
and
claiming
occupation.
Another
representative, from a large Caribbean island nation,
rightly noted the Haitian people’s need for help from
the international community and the assistance over
time in close cooperation with Haiti, which should be

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

with the full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Haiti. We share that approach.
We are in Haiti at the request of the Haitian
Government, with only humanitarian interests in mind.
President Préval and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
issued a joint communiqué reflecting that. Today, the
Permanent Representative of Haiti expressed the
gratitude and appreciation of his Government for all
the international assistance his country has received. It
would be appropriate for those three countries that
have ridiculously alleged conspiracy and occupation,
without any foundation, to actually respect the position
of the sovereign country of Haiti, about which they
claim to be so concerned.
The Acting President: I now call on the observer
of the Holy See.
Mr. Bharanikulangara (Holy See): At the
outset, the Holy See joins those delegations who have
expressed their solidarity with and prayers for those in
Haiti suffering in the aftermath of the recent
earthquake. My delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 64/250 as a sign of the international
community’s solidarity in addressing the needs and
challenges of the entire Haitian population.
As we adopt this resolution today, it is those who
toil around the clock to rescue people trapped, those
who labour to provide medical and humanitarian
assistance to the millions left homeless, and those
whose hearts ache as they mourn the loss of a child,
mother, father or friend who need our continued
financial, physical, emotional and spiritual support in
this trying time. We pray that these people find the
strength, support and assistance they need as the
families and communities across Haiti begin to rebuild
their country.
As the resolution notes, there are persistent
challenges to providing and delivering life-saving
humanitarian support. The international community has
pledged millions of dollars, and volunteers from
around the world have been risking their lives and their
security to provide immediate assistance to the Haitian
people. The challenges and the need for sustained
action will continue long into the future.
For its part, the Catholic Church, with its vast
network of organizations already in the country, has
been working to provide emergency services and
goods. Catholic Relief Services, Caritas Internationalis,

10-21663

Caritas Haiti, the Order of the Servants of the Sick and
parishes around the world have responded with
millions of dollars in aid and thousands of
professionals and volunteers to provide emergency
medical and humanitarian aid. The continued
engagement of those organizations has enabled an
immediate response to the crisis, but it will also be
crucial in assuring long-term growth and renewal
within the country. In the relief and recovery
programmes also, due participation of and cooperation
with faith-based organizations and civil society will
help ensure more efficient delivery of humanitarian
assistance and better implementation of the gradual
reconstruction of Haiti.
While we mourn the loss of untold thousands, it
is the international community’s responsibility to show
that in all corners of the globe we will not forget
them — in particular those dedicated members of the
United Nations family committed to international
peace.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 49/2 of 19 October 1994,
I now call on the observer for the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Jilani (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies): I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak on behalf of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
I would like to express our deepest condolences
and sympathy to all the people of Haiti, as well as to
the families and friends of the United Nations family,
for the tragic loss of so many lives as a result of the
earthquake that struck Haiti. Our deepest sympathy and
condolences also go out to our colleagues in the
Haitian Red Cross.
From the very first days of the disaster, the Red
Cross and Red Crescent family started the mobilization
of its global network and the deployment of its teams
and emergency response units. Today, the Red Cross
and Red Crescent family has more than 20 national
societies deployed in support of the Haitian Red Cross,
with about 20 emergency response units (ERUs)
deployed and working. They include a rapiddeployment hospital from the Norwegian and Canadian
Red Cross; a field hospital from the German and
Finnish Red Cross, which is being established today;
more than 35 basic health clinics, which are supported
by the American, French, Swedish, German, Finnish,

21

A/64/PV.69

Spanish, Swiss and Iranian national societies; water
and sanitation ERUs from the American, Australian,
British, Italian and Danish Red Cross societies; relief
shelter, logistics and base camp ERUs and so on. To
date, 29 Red Cross and Red Crescent flights have
landed in Santo Domingo or Haiti. Yesterday, the
Colombian navy vessel Cartagena de Indias left its
namesake port with 333 tons of relief supplies from the
Colombian Red Cross.

was asking for directions, so we stopped and
directed them to where they were supposed to
deliver the medicine and relief items they were
transporting. The Spanish Red Cross has started
setting up water production plants, as well as
distributing water. They were able to distribute
100,000 litres of water in two areas, and they are
mobilizing volunteers to help them from one
place to another.

The Red Cross and Red Crescent family today
has around 400 delegates assisting the Haitian Red
Cross in its heroic efforts to bring relief to the
suffering and assist the most vulnerable victims of this
devastating disaster. More than half of them are from
national Red Cross societies of the region.

“When I arrived back at our office, I was
informed that search and rescue crews had
located about 40 people in the collapsed
Caribbean supermarket. They had been given
water to drink, and crews were going to try and
get them out as quickly as possible.

In closing, allow me to read from the diary of the
Canadian Red Cross programme manager who has
been living and working in Haiti since September
2009. She was in her apartment in Port-au-Prince when
the earthquake struck and immediately went to the
Haitian Red Cross office, where she worked with staff
and volunteers to provide emergency first aid and
triage for more than 250 injured in the first night. This
is her account, dated 17 January, five days ago.

“In the evening, I went to the International
Red Cross base camp, and the scene was just
amazing. The Canadian delegates had already set
up their tents. The Americans were planning their
relief distributions. The French were coordinating
the arrival of the Norwegian planes and
equipment for the field hospital. The Swiss were
entering the camp with all their equipment,
followed by delegates from the Swedish, Finnish
and German Red Cross. The camp looks like the
whole world is here, and more are coming.”

“My days start very early in the morning. I
have started a cantina service for our local
logistic support staff. I get up early every
morning and prepare breakfast with their help. I
spoke with the President of the Haitian Red Cross
and expressed my concern for the people who
were suffering beyond words, and asked for her
support. She immediately instructed her staff to
assist us in transporting the injured for medical
care. I couldn’t help it: I gave her a tight hug,
tears in my eyes.
“Our action saved 10 lives. On the drive
back to the office, I still couldn’t believe what I
was seeing: piles and piles of buildings, smashed
cars, destruction and pain and suffering
everywhere; an endless sea of people on the
streets and camping out in parks. The Haitian Red
Cross staff and volunteers are everywhere.
Working, moving people, moving equipment,
they are trying to salvage what little can be saved
from their seriously damaged buildings. Everyone
is doing what they can.

The Red Cross and Red Crescent family will
continue to mobilize the power of humankind and its
global network to assist the most vulnerable throughout
the relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction phases in
Haiti.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this morning’s debate.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan on a point of order.
Mr. Ali (Sudan): I take the floor to correct an
editorial mistake in draft resolution A/64/L.43, which
we have just adopted as resolution 64/251. In
paragraph 14, the phrase “in full accordance with the
provisions of resolution 46/182 and the annex thereto”
should read “in full accordance with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 46/182 and the annex
contained therein”.
I kindly ask that this mistake be corrected.

“We noticed a convoy of seven trucks from
the Dominican Red Cross. The head truck driver

22

10-21663

A/64/PV.69

The Acting President: The Secretariat takes note
of that technical correction to the text of draft
resolution A/64/L.43.
Several representatives have requested to exercise
the right of reply. May I remind members that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
5 minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): I would simply like to remind the
representative of the United States of the history of the
multiple interventions and occupations carried out by
his country in the Latin American and Caribbean
region, taking advantage of various circumstances,
whether of a natural or political character. I kindly ask
him not to be so disingenuous. Although his President
says that we should not look towards the past, the
images of his troops in Haiti today cannot but remind
us of the past. We reiterate that what Haiti needs is an
army in white coats — teachers and engineers — and
not United States Marines.
Mr. Solón-Romero (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We find ourselves obliged
to take the floor because a question has been raised as
to what facts motivated our statement some minutes
ago. The fact is that there is a presence of 11,274
United States military troops on the territory or the
coast of Haiti, as acknowledged and publicized in a
White House press release. We have every right to
wonder why there is a military presence of such
magnitude, which exceeds the size of all the
contingents that all countries have provided to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, and what
is the function of that military contingent.

10-21663

A second question that representative of the
United States has not answered is this: To whom does
that United States presence answer? Is it under the
command of the United Nations? To us it is basic: what
we say should be what we do. If we say that the United
Nations is going to coordinate and guide all the
international assistance, then we must ensure that that
is actually the case.
Regrettably, we have here a problem that cannot
be evaded. We want to clearly spell out that that
question has not been answered and that we shall
continue to ask for an explanation and a correction of
the policy that has given preference to military
assistance over the type of assistance that is basically
of a humanitarian nature.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America): I just
wanted to take this opportunity to respond to the
statements that we have just heard from a couple of
delegations.
First, I would like to reiterate that the American
presence in Haiti is intended solely to serve
humanitarian purposes and is covered under the
communiqué between Haiti and the United States. It is
regrettable that those delegations are attempting to
exploit the tragedy that is before us now for their own
political benefit. But my own Government will focus,
along with the rest of the international community, on
helping the Government and the people of Haiti to
confront this catastrophe.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 70.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

23
