S/PRST/2006/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5425th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 April 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Chad and the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s briefing on
18 April 2006 on Chad/Sudan relations and endorses his deep concerns over
the political and security situation and the instability along Chad’s borders
with Sudan, as well as over the possible spillover effects of these crises on
neighbouring countries and the entire region. The Security Council encourages
the Secretary-General to continue his consultations with relevant parties, in
particular the African Union, on the matter and requests him to closely follow
the situation and continue to keep the Security Council informed.
“The Security Council welcomes the fact-finding mission dispatched by
the African Union in Chad and looks forward to its conclusions.
“The Security Council fully endorses the statement by the African Union
Peace and Security Council of 13 April 2006 in which it strongly condemned
the rebel attacks against N’Djamena and the eastern town of Adre and
reiterates that any attempt to seize power by force, pursuant to the 1999
Algiers Declaration of the African Unity Organization, would be regarded as
unacceptable.
“The Security Council calls for political dialogue and a negotiated
solution to the continuing crisis within Chad.
“The Security Council also reaffirms the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Chad and Sudan, as well as of all States in the region,
and calls on all Members to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council calls upon on States in the region to cooperate in
ensuring their common stability.
“The Security Council notes with deep concern the deteriorating relations
between Chad and Sudan and urges the Governments of the two countries to
abide by their obligations under the 8 February 2006 Tripoli Agreement and to

06-32708 (E) 250406

*0632708*

S/PRST/2006/19

urgently start implementing the confidence-building measures which have
been voluntarily agreed upon. Both Sudan and Chad must refrain from any
actions that violate the border.
“The Security Council is concerned about the situation of the refugees
from the Darfur region of Sudan and from the Central African Republic, as
well as the situation of the thousands of internally displaced persons in Chad.
It therefore notes the decision by the Government of Chad not to expel the
Sudanese refugees and urges the Government of Chad to continue supporting
the efforts of humanitarian and relief agencies in the country in accordance
with international principles governing the protection of refugees. The
Security Council further reaffirms the right of all displaced persons who wish
to do so to return to their homes. It reminds all Governments in the region of
their obligation to respect international humanitarian law. In this regard, the
Security Council calls on donor countries to provide additional resources to
respond to the emergency humanitarian situation in both Sudan and Chad.”

2
