Resolution, adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
designated in article XXIX in a manner acceptable to the
Joint Staff Pension Board.
"3. If repayment in accordance with paragraph 2 above is
not made, his prior contributory service credit shall not be
restored, and
"(a) The lump sum which is the actuarial equivalent of any
discontinued benefit at the date upon which payments were
discontinued shall be credited as a voluntary deposit in accordance with the provisions of article XVIII, paragraphs 2 and
3; and
"(b) The total benefits paid or payable to him in respect of
two or more periods of employment shall not exceed the
benefits he would have received had all his employment been
continuous."

Article XVIII
(Voluntary deposits by participants)
Replace the present text by the following:
"1. In addition to the contributions deducted from the remuneration of a participant as provided in article XVI, any
participant may, subject to the approval of the Joint Staff
Pension Board and under such conditions as the Board may
prescribe, deposit in the Pension Fund, in a lump sum or sums
and/or by an increased rate of contribution, an amount computed to be sufficient to purchase an additional retirement
benefit which, together with his prospective regular retirement
benefit as provided herein, will provide for him a total retirement benefit not to exceed 60 per cent of his final average
remuneration at the age of retirement. Interest at such rates
as may be set from time to time by the Board shall be allowed
on such contributions.
"2. Such ad,ditional amounts, together with interest thereon,
shall be credited to the participant's individual account in the
Pension Fund and shall be used to provide him with an additional benefit, commencing at the same time as any regular
benefit to which he may become entitled under the present
Regulations, or upon his death prior to such commencement,
to provide a benefit to a survivor designated therefor by the
participant. The additional benefit shall be payable in one of
the following actuarial equivalent forms to be elected by the
participant or, in the absence of such election, by the survivor
so designated:
"(a) An amount equal to such additional deposits payable in
a single sum or in instalments together with interest thereon
to the date of payment;
"(b) An annuity payable for life with no further payments
after death ;
"(c) A reduced annuity payable for life, with a·provision
that upon the annuitant's death one-half of such annuity shall
be continued to, and during the life of, a survivor designated
therefor by the annuitant at the time of the commencement of
the annuity;
"(d) A reduced annuity payable for life, with a guarantee
that the total benefits paid on account of such additional deposits shall not be less than the amounts credited at the time
of the commencement of the annuity;
in the event that the participant has made no designation of a
survivor to receive such additional benefit, or if such person
does not survive him, the lump sum provided under subparagraph (a) above shall be paid to the participant's estate.
"3. Should a former participant whose annuity has commenced under the provision of the present article be restored to participation, his annuity shall cease and the lump
sum which is the actuarial equivalent of such discontinued
annuity shall be credited to his individual account under the
present article, provided, however, that no value shall be included in such lump sum for the contingent annuity of a survivor designated under paragraph 2 (c) above unless the participant submits evidence of such person's survival in good
health.
"4. A participant who elected, and had been authorized, to
make voluntary deposits under the present article may cease
making such deposits at any time, but in no case shall sums
once deposited ½/refunded to him before he has ceased to be
a participant." · ·

53

Article XXII
(Joint Staff Pension Board)
Replace the present text by the following :
"l. The Joint Staff Pension Board shall consists of twentyone members :
"(a) Six members appointed by the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee, two from the members elected by the
General Assembly, two from the members appointed by the
Secretary-General, and two from the members elected by
the participants; and
"(b) Fifteen members appointed by the staff pension committees of the other member organizations in accordance with
a table fixed by the administrative rules of the Fund which
shall provide for equal representation of the three groups
referred to in article XX.
"Z. The Board may appoint a standing committee, which
will act on its behalf when the Board is not in session."

Supplementary ~rticle B
(Associate participation)
Delete.

Supplementary article C
(The International Atomic Energy Agency)
The present text becomes supplementary article B.

1851 (XVD). Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the pattern of conferences 18 and the recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on that subject, 14
1. Decides to continue for a further period of one
year, until 31 December 1963, the pattern of conferences
established in its resolution 1202 (XII) of 13 December 1957;
2. Amends sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) of paragraph 2 of that resolution to read as follows:
" ( c) The regular sessions of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Economic
Commission for Africa, as well as meetings of their
subsidiary bodies, may be held away from their headqua:ters when the commission concerned so decides,
subject, in the case of regular sessions of the commissions, to the approval of the Economic and Social
Council and of the General Assembly;
" ( d) The annual session of the International Law
Commission would be held in Geneva;"
3. Invites the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the competent organs the importance and urgency
of the measures outlined in paragraph 11 of his report,
as well as the need for moderation on their part in
fixing their programmes of meetings in New York for
1964, in view of the major reconstruction work to be
carried out at Headquarters.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1852 (XVD). Geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 153 (II) of 15 November
1947 and 1559 (XV) of 18 December 1%0, and the
13 Ibid., agenda item 65, document A/5317.
H Ibid., para. 14.
