United Nations

S/PV.6202

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6202nd meeting
Thursday, 15 October 2009, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kyrle
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/497)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-55956 (E)

*0955956*

S/PV.6202

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2009/497)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated from the
representative of Serbia in which he request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremić
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I
should like to acknowledge the presence at the Council
table of the Vice Federal Minister for European and
International Affairs of Austria, His Excellency
Mr. Johannes Kyrle. On behalf of the Council, I extend
a warm welcome to him.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to take a
seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the

2

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members have before them document S/2009/497,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
a briefing my Mr. Lamberto Zannier, to whom I now
give the floor.
Mr. Zannier: The report you have before you
today (S/2009/497) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 1 June to 15 September 2009. The
period following the conclusion of the Mission’s
reconfiguration on 30 June has been one of
consolidation and readjustment for UNMIK, reflecting
the evolving realities on the ground. UNMIK has now
become a more compact and more politically focused
mission within the remit of its mandate under Security
Council 1244 (1999).
As this Council is aware, political realities have
substantially affected the implementation of UNMIK’s
administrative role. Consequently, the Mission has
concentrated its efforts on crucial tasks that we are
well suited to perform: addressing the concerns of
minority communities in order to foster confidence;
promoting dialogue in order to foster reconciliation;
and addressing external relations issues with
non-recognizing States, including facilitating Kosovo’s
participation in regional and international processes, in
order to foster economic development and regional
cooperation. Our guiding principle is to ensure
Kosovo’s lasting security and stability and the security
and stability of the region.
Although conditions remained generally stable
during this period, the situation in northern Kosovo
remains an issue of concern, with the potential to
destabilize other parts of Kosovo if not kept in check.
In this regard, I am pleased to report that UNMIK’s
presence and efforts, together with those of the Kosovo

09-55956

S/PV.6202

Force (KFOR), the European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), have so far
contributed to preserving a fragile stability. Notably, in
August, when the situation threatened to get out of
hand, UNMIK helped the parties in the northern
Mitrovica suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani to reach a
compromise on the issue of reconstruction of Kosovo
Albanian houses damaged in the conflict, and
construction of new Kosovo Serb houses. Over the
summer, I visited Mitrovica twice to meet with local
leaders and emphasized that returns should not be
politicized, but should be the result of a balanced and
properly regulated process that does not create new
tensions and resentments.
In spite of a modest increase in the overall
numbers, returns remain far below the level we would
hope to see. We know that displaced families from all
communities wish to reclaim their lost lives and begin
anew, and I believe the United Nations can play an
even more active role in supporting them. I have
therefore tasked our Office of Community Support and
Facilitation to work closely with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and develop contacts with Belgrade in order
to further returns. Priština authorities insist that they
are committed to a multiethnic Kosovo and I encourage
them to develop incentives for sustainable returns and
address security concerns relating to internally
displaced persons (IDPs). And they can count on
UNMIK’s support and assistance.
In that regard, I have met with local authorities
and the Kosovo Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian (RAE)
leadership in Mitrovica on the long pending issue of
the RAE IDP camps located there. To support the plans
of the Kosovo institutions to address the issue, I have
established a Coordination Group, which I am chairing,
composed of UNMIK experts and the United Nations
Kosovo Team, with the participation of the European
Commission Liaison Office. Our aim is to speed up the
closure of the camps and ensure the sustainable
relocation of their residents.
The Kosovo political landscape is currently
dominated by decentralization and the upcoming
municipal elections scheduled for 15 November.
Kosovo Serb views on these two issues range from
outright rejection to engagement. Since the SecretaryGeneral’s report before you was drafted, the Kosovo
authorities have decided that, as part of their

09-55956

decentralization programme, four new municipalities
with Kosovo Serb majorities are to be established
following these municipal elections. These elections
will be the first organized by the Kosovo institutions
since the declaration of independence in February 2008.
While there has been little, if any, support for
decentralization or the 15 November vote among the
Kosovo Serb leaders in the three northern
municipalities, a number of Kosovo Serb community
leaders south of the Ibar River have openly called for
participation in the upcoming elections. Putting status
considerations aside, I personally believe that greater
participation in Kosovo’s local structures could benefit
all of Kosovo’s communities and foster the
development of multi-ethnic local institutions, leading
to stronger protection of minority rights and
encouraging returns.
In this regard, the return of Kosovo Serbs to their
posts within the Kosovo Police Service has been a
welcome development, reinforcing the multi-ethnicity
of and promoting community confidence in the police.
I am disappointed, however, that efforts to develop
cooperation in other practical areas between Pristina
and Belgrade have been less successful. Kosovo
authorities have distanced themselves from an
agreement on police cooperation between EULEX and
the Serbian Interior Ministry. I therefore urge
pragmatism and compromise so that fully functioning
multi-ethnic courts and customs points in northern
Kosovo can be re-established and life for all of
Kosovo’s communities normalized.
In particular, cooperation in the important area of
cultural heritage has been greatly reduced since
Kosovo’s declaration of independence. UNMIK stands
ready to play a role with Belgrade, Pristina and the
European Union to help protect and preserve the
cultural heritage of Kosovo and the patrimony of the
Serbian Orthodox Church there.
Similarly, both Belgrade and Pristina need to
work harder so that the technical dialogue working
group on missing persons, chaired by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, can meet the expectations
of the families whose loved ones are still missing. Ten
years after the conflict, the bodily remains of more
than 3,000 individuals have been identified and
returned to their families, but the fate of 1,885 missing
persons is still unknown. People with knowledge of the
facts need to heed the repeated calls to come forward

3

S/PV.6202

and divulge this information so that families can
achieve closure and Kosovo’s communities can
continue the process of reconciliation. In this regard, I
also urge the international community to ensure that
there are sufficient resources available to continue this
important work.

Pristina have avoided any official contact with me
during the past few months. I am pleased to report,
therefore, that immediately prior to my departure for
New York, I was invited by President Sejdiu for a long
and cordial meeting. I was encouraged by this contact
and hope that it will continue.

In a broader context, I am pleased that UNMIK’s
facilitation has enabled Kosovo’s participation in
important international and regional forums and
processes, which would not otherwise have been
possible. Resolution 1244 (1999) requires Kosovo’s
representation under the United Nations banner. It is
clear that the Kosovo authorities would prefer to
participate on their own, without UNMIK having to
facilitate their presence. On the other hand, there are
significant benefits accruing to Kosovo by
participation, without prejudice to their stand on status
and in line with our own status-neutral stance.
Accordingly, UNMIK does not attend without the
participation of the representatives of Kosovo’s
institutions, nor does it speak on their behalf.

Kosovo continues to present both challenges and
opportunities for UNMIK. UNMIK aims to help restore
full normality in Kosovo so that all of its people may
have better lives in a stable and peaceful region. While
that goal is ambitious, I am convinced that, together
with Pristina and Belgrade and our international
partners, as well as with the support of this Council,
UNMIK can meet it.

The last time I addressed this Council, I noted
that the Kosovo and Serbian authorities alike were
increasingly concerned as to how their actions might
influence the International Court of Justice’s advisory
opinion on the legality of Kosovo’s declaration of
independence. Actions by Pristina and Belgrade
continue to be aimed at bolstering their respective legal
positions before the Court. As a consequence, our role,
although aimed at promoting pragmatic solutions to
existing problems, has not been an easy one to play.
For instance, most recently, the Kosovo Ministry of
Justice has announced that it is taking over the
processing of international legal assistance requests
involving non-recognizing countries and institutions, a
task being performed by UNMIK as part of our own
facilitation efforts.
In fact, UNMIK is inextricably caught between
the differing perceptions of Belgrade and Pristina.
While Belgrade expects a robust UNMIK role, the
Pristina authorities believe that UNMIK’s job is done,
although I detect some acknowledgement that there are
areas where we can usefully work together, and
UNMIK continues to enjoy cooperation at the working
level with representatives of the Kosovo institutions in
many relevant areas.
Nevertheless, not having been able to obtain the
closure of the Mission, members of the Government in

4

The President: I thank Mr. Zannier for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council.
Once again, we are gathered to discuss the
situation in the Serbian province of Kosovo. I would
like right at the outset to express my country’s deep
gratitude to the substantial majority of United Nations
Member States that respect Serbia’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The expressions of solidarity we
have received from all over the globe encourage us to
persevere in our efforts to resolve the future status of
Kosovo peacefully and in a way that is acceptable to
all responsible stakeholders.
Our principled position on our province’s future
status remains the same. Serbia will never recognize
the unilateral declaration of independence by the ethnic
Albanian authorities in Pristina on 17 February, 2008.
This remains our political, moral and legal obligation.
It is also our democratic duty, for our nation is united
as one on this fundamental point. The Kosovo case is a
significant test for the world community, for there is a
choice to be made here between unilateralism and
consensus. The unilateral declaration of independence
is a challenge that we must work together to overcome,
for the sake of peace and stability and in the name of
international law.
The General Assembly tasked the International
Court of Justice to determine whether the unilateral
declaration of independence conforms to international
law. The crucial stage in the legal process is just about

09-55956

S/PV.6202

to begin. This is the first time in history that the Court
will rule on the legality of an attempt at secession by
an ethnic group from a United Nations Member State
in peacetime. It is also the first time that all five
permanent members of this Council will participate in
a proceeding before the Court. The total number of
actors that will present their views in The Hague is a
record for the Court, exceeding even the figure in the
cases involving the legality of the use of nuclear
weapons. There is therefore little doubt that the Court’s
conclusions will have overarching consequences for
the international legal order.
It is in this context that Serbia appeals to all
United Nations Member States to respect the fact that
the International Court of Justice is actively
considering the issue of the unilateral declaration of
independence. It is our shared duty to ensure that the
Court’s deliberations are not prejudged. The Court’s
proceedings should be allowed to run their course,
unhindered by political pressures, such as further
recognitions of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence.
I would like to welcome the presence of Special
Representative Lamberto Zannier, and wish to
underline the Secretary-General’s assertion in
paragraph 2 of the report before the Council
(S/2009/497) that the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) “has successfully concluded its
reconfiguration … as at 1 July”. It has now reached the
end-state of its draw-down.
The United Nations remains an indispensable
actor in Kosovo. It is therefore critical that this Council
continue to support UNMIK’s presence as a crucial
pillar of peace and stability. The exercise of UNMIK’s
external representation function remains especially
important. Its role is critical if regional groups, such as
the Central European Free Trade Agreement and the
Regional Cooperation Council, are to function in
accordance with established procedures.
Moreover, the United Nations ability to work
effectively with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) must remain
unconstrained. That is why it is important for the
amendments adopted by the General Assembly to the
UNMIK budget for the next fiscal year be fully applied
and for all vacant positions to be filled as soon as
possible.

09-55956

Serbia strongly believes that disagreements on
status must not impede the determination to act
together on improving the lives of all the residents in
the province. We have proactively worked with all
legitimate actors on the ground in Kosovo, while
ensuring our constitutional red lines are not crossed.
I am pleased that the report commends Belgrade’s
policy of constructive engagement by acknowledging
our “pragmatic approach” to the resolution of practical
issues.
Commitments made in this Chamber should be
honoured. What is agreed to and welcomed by the
Security Council must be implemented in full — from
resolution 1244 (1999) to the Secretary-General’s sixpoint plan, to which I will now turn. I begin with the
police, where I wish to highlight two important
developments that took place during the reporting
period in applying this crucial segment of the
Secretary-General’s plan.
First, virtually all Kosovo Serb police officers
returned to their posts as a direct consequence of our
engagement. This has contributed to an improvement
in the security situation throughout the province —
especially in the Serbian enclaves in the south.
The second important development concerns the
signing of the Protocol on Police Cooperation between
the Serbian Ministry of the Interior and EULEX. The
Protocol is based on the best practices of our
longstanding cooperation with UNMIK police forces
on these matters. It is entirely status-neutral and fully
conforms to resolution 1244 (1999). Its implementation
will greatly contribute to the fight against organized
crime and terrorism in Kosovo — an area that
continues to be the hub of a sinister international
network of arms, drugs, and human traffickers.
Regarding
the
judiciary,
despite
some
constructive preliminary discussions with UNMIK and
EULEX, we have regretfully not been able to move
forward on issues such as determining the territorial
jurisdiction of the District Court in Mitrovica, the
appointments of judges and prosecutors designed to
reflect the ethnic communities they would serve, and
the applicability of UNMIK law. It is our hope that our
talks will intensify in the time ahead, for consensual
solutions must be found, in accordance with the
provisions of the November 2008 report.

5

S/PV.6202

On a number of other fronts, cooperation has
deepened. For example, special EULEX prosecutors
and Serbia’s war crimes prosecutors have intensified
collaboration on serious cases. These include organ
harvesting committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army
on ethnic Serb civilians in the well-publicized “yellow
house”, and the infamous KLA-run jails and
liquidation centres in places like Klečka in the Lipljan
municipality.

Yet the critically important issue of facilitating
the entry and transport of Serbian officials into the
province remains unresolved. It is difficult to imagine
how we can positively contribute to developments on
the ground, if our ability to work closely with the
Kosovo Serb community throughout the province is
hindered. We must find a way to overcome this
obstacle in a status-neutral manner, consistent with
resolution 1244 (1999).

With respect to the delicate matter of customs, we
have also achieved some results. Technical cooperation
between Belgrade and EULEX has proceeded
smoothly, as information is exchanged regularly on
topics of mutual concern, such as smuggling. However,
progress on the important issue of revenue collection
and how it will benefit the relevant communities has
been more limited. We hope that, in the months ahead,
we can come to workable arrangements with our
UNMIK and EULEX partners, within the framework
endorsed by this Council in November 2008.

Regarding Serbian patrimony — the last of the
six points — we salute UNMIK’s efforts to “achieve
durable solutions for the protection of Serbian cultural
heritage in Kosovo,” (S/2009/497, para. 9), as well as
its good-faith attempts to work with other legitimate
stakeholders in this sensitive field.

Concerning administrative lines and security, I
would like to acknowledge the useful role played by
the International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR).
Serbia will continue to act as its reliable partner, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Kumanova Military-Technical Agreement.
KFOR’s status-neutral presence in the province is
still required in order to protect Kosovo Serb enclaves
and our holy sites from threats, incursions and attacks.
According to Annex 1 of the report before us this
afternoon, a handover of responsibility from KFOR to
the Kosovo Police is being envisaged at the
Gazimestan Monument in honour of our martyred
heroes. Serbia strongly opposes such plans.
Gazimestan is hallowed ground for the Serbian nation.
KFOR has done an exemplary job in protecting it. It is
critically important that they continue to guard it,
together with other holy sites.
Concerning transportation and infrastructure, the
Serbian Government has worked hard to resolve
pressing electrical energy issues. As a result of our
active engagement with UNMIK and the OSCE, the
disconnection policies that discriminated against the
Kosovo Serb community, as highlighted in the report,
have been rectified. Consequently, a vast majority of
Serbian enclaves and monastic communities in the
south have had their power restored.

6

The Serbian Government and the Serbian
Orthodox Church have fully supported the renewal and
restoration of our holy sites, conducted under the
auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission chaired
by the Council of Europe.
Unfortunately, the precarious state of Serbian
patrimony remains a deeply troubling part of the reality
on the ground in Kosovo. For instance, local officials in
the town of Dečani continue to defy the international
community. They have repeatedly refused to restore the
cadastral record of land belonging to the monastery of
Visoki Dečani — a UNESCO World Heritage Site that
has been placed on its List of World Heritage in Danger.
Judges have been intimidated in connection with
this case, while a public disinformation campaign
orchestrated by KLA War Veterans Association claimed
that the monastery represents centuries-old Albanian
cultural heritage that was taken over by the Serbs in the
19th century. It is deeply regrettable that no one from
Priština has chosen to condemn such dangerous
distortions, and set the record straight once and for all.
In August of this year, the whole-scale pillaging
of the largest medieval hermitage complex in the
mountains above our ancient capital of Prizren took
place. This unique and now abandoned monastic centre
was built by the Serbian ascetic Saint Peter of Korisha,
and dates back to the early decades of the 13th century.
Frescos were damaged and altars were vandalized. In
one of the pictures taken at the scene, we see carved
into a wall the acronym “UCK” — meaning the
Kosovo Liberation Army.

09-55956

S/PV.6202

The extent of the material damage is still being
documented. What is beyond dispute is that the
perpetrators have succeeded in debasing our faith and
destroying yet another part of our patrimony.
Unfortunately, the authorities claim they have no leads,
and no arrests have been made.
Ethnic Albanian authorities are still refusing to
reconsider the outrageous decision to pave over with
concrete the remains of the twice-destroyed Serbian
church in the centre of Đakovica — thus compounding
physical destruction with the attempt to erase every
trace of its existence.
This is the third time I raise the issue in this
Chamber. Is it possible that the international
community is powerless to get this awful deed
reversed? Do we have the will to undo this act of
cultural cleansing? Once again, we ask for your help.
It is our assessment that our UNMIK and EULEX
partners share our determination to constructively
engage in overcoming these challenges. Let me
underline the great importance of our common statusneutral approach for moving forward on a whole host
of concrete matters. We invested great efforts in
building up this solid basis for our cooperation.
Regretfully, Kosovo’s ethnic Albanian authorities
have not demonstrated enthusiasm to embrace the
status-neutral framework for dealing with unresolved
practical issues. We believe this reticence does no one
any good. All parties have their constraints. But these
must not harm those who matter the most, the residents
of the province.
Last time we met, I called on everyone to
concentrate on improving the lives of citizens, instead
of making them the victims of our disagreements. I
proposed that we focus on the central humanitarian
issue of internally displaced persons (IDPs). The report
before us speaks of the upsetting consequences of a
failure to engage on this issue in good faith. A total of
only 31 of the more than 200,000 Kosovo Serb IDPs
were able to return to the province during the reporting
period, out of the thousands that expressed a concrete
interest in doing so in the weeks following our most
recent meeting in this Council. Serb IDPs have been
informed in writing by various local authorities that
they cannot come back home. This must not be allowed
to stand.

09-55956

The denial of the right of return to Kosovo Serb
IDPs took place against the backdrop of tensions in the
northern village of Brdjani. The ethnic Albanian
authorities insisted on going ahead with the
construction of new, unauthorized settlements.
Breaking their agreement with EULEX, they
dispatched a special operations police unit, called the
Regional Operational Support Unit, to support the
illegal construction of Kosovo Albanian dwellings in
Brdjani, only to pull it back at the last minute under
intense pressure from the international community. In
short, while Priština insists that ethnic Albanians settle
in new areas, their local authorities actively prevent
Kosovo Serb IDPs from going back to their homes in
the south.
As the report indicates, Priština called for some
local elections to be held on 15 November.
Unfortunately, the legitimacy of the entire electoral
process has been compromised by the failure to hold
them within the status-neutral framework of resolution
1244 (1999). According to the report before us
(S/2009/497), the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General did not call them, the OSCE will not
monitor them and the United Nations cannot certify
them. Under such circumstances, it is simply
impossible for us to support them.
The situation is deeply regrettable. An
opportunity was missed to de-politicize this vitally
important issue. Had a choice been made to work in
concert instead of at cross-purposes, perhaps we could
have paved the way for a properly incentivized Kosovo
Serb community to actively participate in this process.
It is now imperative that we focus our energies on
finding a way forward. As has always been the case,
we remain in favour of establishing a system of
functional
decentralization
acceptable
to
the
non-Albanian communities directly concerned. We
stand ready to engage through a status-neutral
organization — the OSCE, for example — to create a
legitimate decentralization package designed to
succeed.
In a few days, the Republic of Serbia will
celebrate the sixty-fifth anniversary of the liberation of
our capital from the fascists. That liberation marked the
end of a brutal occupation that had forcefully
partitioned our country among the Axis countries and
their collaborators and brought profound misery to our
people. A great number of valiant men and women lost

7

S/PV.6202

their lives in that triumph over evil. Their heroism will
always be remembered. Thanks to their sacrifice, our
nation stood up proudly again.
They set in motion what has come to pass now,
decades later: the embrace of interdependence and the
conviction that only by working together, in good faith,
can we overcome the traumatic consequences of the
past. My responsibility is to act in the interest of my
people and my country, and in the twenty-first century,
national success cannot come about in isolation. That is
why Serbia will continue to engage in the best possible
faith with the international community in addressing all
outstanding challenges in the Western Balkans.
Furthermore, we remain fundamentally as committed
to defending our territorial integrity in a peaceful
manner, as we are to fulfilling our European destiny.
Serbia’s central strategic priority remains full European
Union membership.
During the recent general debate, a great world
leader said that we are called upon by our times to
unite as one and work together for mutual benefit and
progress of a win-win nature, like passengers in the
same boat.
It is a call that we wholeheartedly support. Serbia
is dedicated to resolving all differences at the
negotiating table, not the battlefield. Enough bullets
have been fired in the Western Balkans. Never again
should we descend into the maelstrom of war.
Today we have an obligation to foster
engagement grounded in mutual respect. This will not
be easy, for the wounds have not yet healed. But if we
take up the challenge of reconciliation and find the
courage to act together, then it will be said of this
generation that when the need was great and when the
odds seemed against us, we did the right thing and
brought lasting peace to our lands, so that our children
could live out their dreams.
I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to address the
Council today.
The President: I thank Minister Jeremić for his
statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Mr. Hyseni: Allow me to first express my deep
appreciation for the opportunity to brief the members
of the Council on the situation in Kosovo, namely on
the continued accomplishments and steady progress

8

that the Republic of Kosovo has been making in all
areas.
Since my most recent statement to the Council, in
June, significant progress has been made in the area of
state institution-building on the basis of our new
democratic Constitution and the provisions contained
in the comprehensive plan of Nobel Peace Prize winner
Marti Ahtisaari. Two more nations have recognized
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State — the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Dominican
Republic. We would like to extend our deepest
appreciation for the recognition of our statehood to the
peoples and Governments of Jordan and the Dominican
Republic.
On 29 June 2009, the Republic of Kosovo
formally signed the articles of agreement of
membership with the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank. Membership in those two very
important financial institutions has further encouraged
the Government of the Republic of Kosovo to intensify
efforts to fight crime and corruption.
This has also conferred additional responsibilities
on the Government of the Republic of Kosovo and
reinforced the need to further strengthen the rule of law
and maintain macroeconomic stability through fiscal
and budgetary discipline. The Government of Kosovo
has continued to address and resolve many issues
relating to the economy, justice and security and safety
throughout Kosovo.
The well-being of minority communities and the
return of Kosovo refugees to their homes and
properties is a standing priority and the process of
returns is ongoing, with Government funds allocated
for the reconstruction of houses for returnees.
Improvement of conditions in the minority community
areas, in particular in the Serb majority areas, is an
issue the Government of the Republic of Kosovo is
paying close attention to, and progress is obvious.
There is, however, obstructive interference by the
Republic of Serbia in our efforts to improve the living
conditions of the Serb citizens of Kosovo. As Belgrade
has continued to support parallel structures in the
north, the Government of the Republic of Serbia has
been working actively to discourage and prevent the
members of the Serb community in Kosovo from
working and integrating with the rest of Kosovo’s
population. Instead, the members of the Serb
community in Kosovo are under permanent pressure

09-55956

S/PV.6202

from Belgrade, with clear instructions to boycott the
institutions of Kosovo and any cooperation with both
the central and local authorities. Unfortunately, it is the
members of the Serb community in Kosovo who suffer
most as a result of that approach and mentality.
While the institutions of Kosovo seek to protect
the rights and improve the lives of the members of the
Serb community, the Government in Belgrade has been
exploiting and confusing them with calls to reject
integration and cooperation with Kosovo’s institutions.
At the same time, Belgrade has failed to offer any
assistance or solution to the problems and concerns of
the Serb community in Kosovo.
The situation in the North remains an issue of
concern. However, there has been clear improvement
in overall conditions with the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), in particular with its becoming fully
functional and operational. As EULEX has already
achieved full operational capability, I wish to underline
that the Government of the Republic of Kosovo
remains deeply committed to cooperating closely with
that Mission to combat crime and corruption, as well as
illicit and criminal cross-border activities.
Nevertheless, I am very happy to report to the
Council today that the overall security situation in the
Republic of Kosovo is very calm and stable. The
electoral campaign for municipal elections was
launched today. As the Council knows, the Government
of the Republic of Kosovo is now fully in charge of
organizing elections. New elections for Kosovo’s
municipalities are due to take place on 15 November.
Those will be the first elections following Kosovo’s
independence. Kosovo’s Central Election Commission
is fully responsible for conducting electoral operations.
Comprehensive preparations have taken place to make
sure that the upcoming municipal elections are
successful and in full compliance with set standards.
With more than 70 political entities having been duly
certified to participate in the elections, we are
confident that this will be another democratic, free and
fair election in the Republic of Kosovo.
The institutions and the Government have been
working hard to create all the conditions for a
successful electoral process in the newly established
Serb majority municipalities as well. We look forward
to sizable and substantial participation by the Serb
community in the November elections, as we believe it

09-55956

to be the most effective way to enable Kosovo Serbs to
duly participate in the conduct of public affairs. In
their outreach activities, both President of the Republic
Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Thaçi have urged and
encouraged Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
elections. Regrettably, as we have heard today, there
are clear indications that the Government of the
Republic of Serbia has been doing quite the opposite,
calling on Kosovo Serbs to boycott the elections.
Cooperation and the further strengthening of
relations with neighbours, as well as regional
cooperation in general, have continued to be a priority
of the Government of Kosovo. I am very pleased to
report to the Council that the maps and the agreement
on the physical demarcation of the border line with the
Republic of Macedonia have now been initialled. The
signing ceremony for the agreement between the
Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Macedonia
will take place very soon.
The participation of the Republic of Kosovo in
regional trade and cooperation is critical to fostering
and further strengthening bilateral and regional
relations and understanding in the Western Balkans.
Again, unfortunately, Belgrade has continued to
impede our cooperation with neighbours and the
international community by blocking our participation
in regional and wider international bodies. Belgrade is
also blocking Kosovo’s exports to Serbia. Once again,
I emphasize that Kosovo’s Government has refrained
from taking reciprocal measures, as we are confident
that they would only hurt both people and businesses
on both sides of the border.
The establishment of an atmosphere of
cooperation and understanding in our region is critical,
as all seven nations of the Western Balkans share the
same European future. The Republic of Kosovo is
firmly committed to pursuing the goal of European
Union (EU) membership steadily, and welcomes the
specific requirements and recommendations of the
European Commission to Kosovo contained in the
2009 progress report. The Government of Kosovo will
be working around the clock to deliver on all EU
requirements.
The Republic of Kosovo appreciates the
European Union’s support for the economic and
political development of Kosovo through a clear
European perspective that is fully in line with the same
perspective of the rest of the Western Balkans region.

9

S/PV.6202

In achieving our short-term, mid-term and long-term
objectives, the Republic of Kosovo, its institutions and
the people of my country will continue to cooperate
closely with the EU, the United States, NATO and our
neighbours and region.
In conclusion, as always I wish to thank the
President and the members of the Council for the
opportunity to present Kosovo’s views. We look
forward to working very closely with all the Members
of the United Nations and of the Council as we
promote shared goals of international peace and
security.
Mr. Kyrle (Austria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and to
thank him for his statement. Let me equally welcome
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
thank him for his statement. Moreover, let me express
our deep appreciation for the work and leadership of
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and for his important contribution
to a gradual improvement of the situation in Kosovo.
I would also like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/497) on recent developments in Kosovo. We
particularly welcome the successful completion of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as the Mission’s ongoing efforts to facilitate practical
cooperation between communities and between
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade, thereby promoting
security and stability in Kosovo.
We are very pleased with the good cooperation
between the European Union (EU) and the United
Nations on Kosovo. The EU remains committed to
playing a leading role, and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) will proceed with
the consolidation of the rule of law Kosovo-wide. We
are encouraged by the achievements of EULEX
throughout the entire country, including the successful
reintegration of Kosovo Serb police officers, police
operations and trials under the executive mandate of
EULEX, as well as the enhanced presence in the North
in the absence of full customs controls.
A lot remains to be done. We will need increased
efforts by all sides to combat organized crime as a
matter of priority. Close cooperation with EULEX by
both Serbia and Kosovo will be crucial in order for the
Mission’s efforts to bear fruit. We are particularly

10

concerned about the recent attacks on EULEX staff and
property and call on everyone to refrain from such
irresponsible actions.
Austria fully supports the work of EULEX and
welcomes the plans to strengthen the EU presence in
the North of Kosovo through the establishment of an
EU house by the end of the year. Austria is currently
providing EULEX with 23 experts in the police and
judiciary fields. Furthermore, we will also continue to
contribute to the Kosovo Force by providing more than
600 soldiers.
We commend the progress achieved by Kosovo in
recent months. To date, 62 States have recognized
Kosovo. The country’s accession to membership of the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund will
be essential to its economic development and will thus
contribute to overall stability in the Western Balkans.
We do note, however, that despite relative stability in
recent months, ethnic tensions and incidents of
violence, especially in the North, continue to have
destabilizing potential.
We are encouraged to learn that at this stage, 23
Kosovo Serb political entities have already applied for
participation in the 15 November elections. However,
we are concerned about the continued existence of
parallel structures in the three Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities in the North of Kosovo and their refusal
to recognize the upcoming municipal elections, as well
as about the holding of separate municipal by-elections
in two Kosovo Serb-majority areas by Belgrade
authorities. Progress in the ongoing decentralization
process will benefit the minority populations, above all
the Kosovo Serb community.
We hope that all ethnic groups in Kosovo will
participate actively in the upcoming municipal
elections, which will be an important test for the future
of Kosovo. In his recent visit to Kosovo, Austrian
Foreign Minister Spindelegger called on the
Government of Kosovo to actively engage with the
Kosovo Serb community. We sincerely hope that the
first elections after Kosovo’s independence will result
in an encouraging signal for the future of all
inhabitants of Kosovo. We would like to encourage
pragmatism and self-restraint from both Kosovo and
Serbia to make these elections a success, avoiding
increased tensions, particularly in the North.
We remain strongly committed to a peaceful,
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo with full respect

09-55956

S/PV.6202

for the rule of law and the protection of non-Albanian
communities and of Kosovo’s cultural and religious
heritage. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo (OMIK) has
an important role to play in the realization of this goal.
We welcome its extensive civilian field presence
throughout all parts of Kosovo and commend its
important work.
We also commend the Mission for working
intensively and in coordination with other international
stakeholders to support the Central Election
Commission (CEC) in the preparations for the
15 November elections and for taking the lead in
coordinating international stakeholders’ assistance to
the CEC, in accordance with OMIK’s previous
experience in organizing elections and within its statusneutral mandate.
Kosovo is a key factor in the long-term
stabilization of the Western Balkans. It is well known
that Austria has consistently supported a future for all
peoples of the Western Balkans within the European
Union. Yesterday, the European Commission published
a progress report on Kosovo highlighting that many
challenges, such as corruption and organized crime,
remain, as well as a feasibility study analysing ways to
further Kosovo’s political and socio-economic
development. The Commission proposes steps in this
regard. Austria will favourably evaluate these
proposals and remains dedicated to the objective of a
peaceful, prosperous and multi-ethnic Kosovo, in
which all people irrespective of their ethnic or
religious background can live in safety and dignity.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Jeremić, and the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni. We are happy
to see both of them with us today. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Kyrle, Vice Federal Minister for
European and International Affairs of Austria.
I would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
informative and comprehensive briefing. We very
much appreciate his efforts. We are confident that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), as reconfigured, will continue to
cagy out the tasks entrusted to it and will, as in the
past, contribute to ensuring peace and stability in
Kosovo, in close cooperation with the European Union

09-55956

Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We are pleased to see that Kosovo is taking the
necessary steps to solidify its democratic institutions
and capabilities as a sovereign State. We fully support
these steps and remain ready to further contribute in
any way we can.
The municipal elections to be held on
15 November 15 will be the first in Kosovo since the
declaration of independence. Free, fair, transparent and
inclusive elections are decisive for Kosovo’s progress
towards becoming a multi-ethnic society. The
participation of the Kosovo Serbs and other
communities in a multi-ethnic Kosovo is critical. We
are encouraged to see that the political entities that
have applied to take part in the elections come from the
whole spectrum of communities in Kosovo. In this
context, the integration of Kosovo Serb communities
into Kosovo’s institutions and their participation in the
elections are particularly important.
We commend the Kosovo authorities for the work
done so far on decentralization. We urge them to
pursue these efforts to the end and devote the necessary
resources thereto. While challenging, success in this
area is critical to ensuring peace and stability and to
demonstrating that Serbs have a future in Kosovo. We
note the efforts of the Kosovo Government on the
reconstruction of cultural property and returns. We
hope to see further steps to advance the current
projects. Progress in these areas is important for the
formation of a diverse, multi-ethnic and multicultural
Kosovo.
Security and stability in the Balkans are one of
the key priorities for Turkey. We are committed to
working with all our partners towards ensuring a safe,
stable and prosperous future for the region. This being
the case, the support given to Kosovo in its efforts to
integrate with the international community and
institutions should be further intensified. We will do
our part in that regard.
At the same time, a democratic and prosperous
Serbia is crucial to regional stability and cooperation.
The international community should continue to
encourage and support Serbia in its efforts to integrate
with European and Euro-Atlantic structures. As for
Turkey, we are determined to carry forward our
friendly and mutually beneficial relations with Serbia.

11

S/PV.6202

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I, too, would
like to join others Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni; and the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, to the Council
Chamber today. I should like also to welcome the Vice
Federal Minister for European and International Affairs
of Austria.
I would also like to express our thanks to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/497) on developments in Kosovo over the
reporting period and to commend the continuing efforts
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to help improve stability in
Kosovo. We would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for
his leadership and hard work.
The Secretary-General’s report illustrates that
Kosovo is continuing to make good progress in a
number of areas: the rule of law, security and
community reconciliation. We acknowledge the
contribution of the United Nations in achieving this
progress. It is also positive that 317 Kosovo Serb
police officers have been reintegrated into the Kosovo
Police Service and that the Kosovo security force has
now reached initial operating capability. We commend
the role that the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force have
played in achieving this.
The United Kingdom welcomes the start of
criminal proceedings against those involved in
deliberate attempts to damage vehicles belonging to the
international missions in Kosovo. As the President of
Kosovo has said, such attacks are unacceptable.
It is important to note that a growing number of
United Nations Member States — now 62 — have
recognized Kosovo. Kosovo has also become a
member of the five World Bank Group institutions with
the active support of over 50 further countries that,
while not yet formally recognizing Kosovo, have
shown by their votes that they accept that the Republic
of Kosovo is now a permanent fact on the international
scene and should be allowed to play its part
independently in relevant international institutions.
Altogether, almost 60 per cent of the membership of
the United Nations has now accepted the fact of
Kosovo’s existence. We hope that those that have not
yet done so will soon follow their example.

12

With UNMIK now having concluded its
reconfiguration, more autonomy being given to Kosovo
institutions and EULEX establishing a presence in all
regions of Kosovo, UNMIK needs to ensure that it
focuses on those areas where it can play a useful and
relevant role. Equally, it is correct that UNMIK’s
resources should be commensurate with the size of its
responsibilities. We welcome UNMIK’s willingness to
engage in a number of areas, such as assisting the
Kosovo Property Agency, supporting Kosovo’s
engagement with external organizations where
necessary, and promoting returns and reconciliation.
We also underline our full support for the valuable
work that EULEX is carrying out throughout Kosovo.
We call on the Government of Kosovo to
continue to engage constructively and pragmatically
with UNMIK for the benefit of all people of Kosovo.
Nothing in that cooperation diminishes Kosovo’s
status.
One of the key challenges facing Kosovo in
coming months is to ensure the success of the local
elections. That will be achieved only by encouraging
the participation of all of Kosovo’s communities.
Kosovo Serbs and their friends in the international
community should recognize the practical benefits of
decentralization and local elections. Whatever
differences we have on status, we can surely agree that
Kosovo Serbs need effective and legitimate locally
elected leadership. Only through wide participation can
there be viable local government that can secure
funding for the benefit of its communities. The
Government of Kosovo must reach out to all
communities and do all it can to ensure Kosovo Serbs
recognize the benefits that local representation will
bring them.
We also call on the Government of Serbia to
continue to engage with the European Union to
improve conditions for Kosovo Serbs. We welcome
recent progress on the ground and look forward to
further, early steps on customs, justice and other issues.
We disagree with the view of the Serbian
Government that conditions for successful local
elections do not exist and regret that the Serbian
Government will not support them. But we welcome
the repeated assurances given by representatives of the
Government of Serbia that Belgrade will not seek to
punish those Kosovo Serbs who do take part. We
believe that Kosovo’s Serb community would benefit

09-55956

S/PV.6202

from the rule of law and the opportunity to play a part
in running their own communities.
The proposed EU house in the north should
enable the citizens of north Kosovo to more easily
recognize the benefits that a European perspective can
bring them — for example, European project funding,
scholarship or business start-up opportunities and
information about the European Union.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting the international community’s efforts to
promote stability, reconciliation and economic progress
in Kosovo so that it can advance towards an EU
perspective in parallel with its neighbours.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier,
for his briefing. We welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Jeremić, and thank him for his
statement. We also thank Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
Let me also welcome Mr. Kyrle, Vice Federal Minister
for European and International Affairs of Austria.
Uganda welcomes the completion of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
commends it for reaching its authorized strength. We
call on UNMIK to focus on promoting security and
stability in Kosovo and in the Balkans by facilitating
practical cooperation between communities, as well as
between the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade. The
creation of the UNMIK Office for Community Support
is significant in facilitating engagement and
cooperation by all sides.
We are encouraged by the level of cooperation
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) regarding the exchange
of information and coordinating on issues of mutual
concern. That cooperation, in all sectors, should
continue to be strengthened. We are also pleased to
note that EULEX has reached full operational capacity
and is continuing to operate under the overall authority
of the United Nations, within the status-neutral
framework of resolution 1244 (1999).
We are encouraged by the progress being made in
decentralization, and we call on the authorities to
ensure that the process is carried out in a consultative,
participatory and inclusive way.
Although it appears that the overall situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period remained relatively

09-55956

calm, we are concerned by the incidences of violence
in the northern Mitrovica suburbs. We therefore call on
both parties to exercise restraint, mutual respect and
tolerance in order to live together harmoniously, in the
interests of peace.
We salute the efforts of UNMIK, in coordination
with EULEX and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), to
encourage both sides to find a sustainable and peaceful
solution. We also commend UNMIK for its efforts to
encourage the return of Kosovo Serb internally
displaced persons to their homes.
Finally, we commend UNMIK for its work and
urge the internationally community to continue to lend
the necessary support to enable it to effectively carry
out its role of maintaining peace and stability.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates the information provided by
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, as well as the
presence and statement of Mr. Vuk Jeremić, the
Foreign Minister of Serbia, and the statement of
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Mexico has followed the full reconfiguration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the transition over recent
months with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX). We welcome the fact that there
has been appropriate coordination between the two
organizations in this transition period and that
cooperation has continued in important areas such as
rule of law and resolving community disputes.
My delegation calls on the parties to meet their
obligations in conformity with resolution 1244 (1999),
under the principle of neutrality, and to cooperate with
UNMIK and EULEX in the implementation of their
mandates, as their presence will continue to be central
for the security, stability and development of the
region.
It is important to recall that, pursuant to
international humanitarian law, human rights and the
rights of refugees, the parties are obliged to create
conditions conducive to the secure, voluntary and
non-discriminatory return of displaced persons and to
adopt measures to facilitate that return, including
economic reconstruction and social development in the
locations of return.

13

S/PV.6202

My delegation views with concern the
humanitarian situation and the lack of conditions
necessary for the return of displaced persons and
refugees to their homes. While the security situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, factors such as
discrimination, harassment and lack of development
opportunities arise as some of the major obstacles to
ensuring enduring return in the region. Much remains
to be done, given the much reduced number of returns
registered in recent months, to attend to the requests of
nearly 1,295 families for return to Kosovo.
We encourage UNMIK to continue to support
local authorities, together with the United Nations
Development Programme and other humanitarian
organizations working on the ground, in the promotion
of community development programmes aimed at the
reconstruction of homes, job creation and access to
services such as health, water and electricity, as well as
in areas such as security and education. Mexico joins
the call to local authorities to promote effective
measures that improve conditions in the camps for
internally displaced persons and offer basic services to
their inhabitants including medical care. Caring for the
population cannot be subordinated to other agendas.
For my delegation, strengthening the rule of law
remains one of the pending matters that require priority
attention. Along those lines we encourage UNMIK and
the EULEX to spare no effort in strengthening the
capacities of local authorities to provide access to
justice, combat impunity and promote and ensure
respect for human rights. Likewise, we call upon the
parties and UNMIK maintain their support for and full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in order to guarantee the
right to due process in the cases under its jurisdiction.
Mexico endorses the recommendation contained
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/497) to
increase strategic and political coordination between
the United Nations and the European Union. We urge
them to continue to work on the basis of a common
strategy to address the ongoing challenges in Kosovo,
with an eye to contributing to stability in the Balkans.
Lastly, we reiterate our position, consistent with
the principles of justice and international law enshrined
in the United Nations Charter and commend the
International Court of Justice as the judicial body
supremely competent to peacefully resolve disputes
arising from the interpretation of international law. In

14

that regard, we await with interest the advisory opinion
of the Court requested by the General Assembly on the
case of Kosovo.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Mr. Zannier for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2009/497). We salute his leadership and that of the
mission in Kosovo. Costa Rica also welcomes the
presence of Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and of Mr. Hyseni, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo. We also welcome the presence of
the Vice Federal Minister for European and
International Affairs of Austria.
Costa
Rica
recognizes
the
successful
reconfiguration of the Mission in Kosovo and the
ongoing coordination and complementarity of its work
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We also welcome the improvement
of the overall security situation in Kosovo, as well as
the reintegration of Kosovo Serb police officers into
the Kosovo Police Service, because we believe that an
inclusive police force will be more successful in
addressing the ongoing ethnic tensions, in particular in
the northern areas of the country. We believe that the
strengthening of the Kosovo Police Service will serve
not only to maintain security, but also to improve the
operations of local security committees so that they
may better address security incidents that arise within
communities,
including
ethnically
motivated
confrontations.
Costa Rica hopes for the peaceful continued
implementation of reconstruction projects and the
creation of economic, social and security conditions
conducive to the return and sustainable reintegration of
internally displaced persons (IDPs), including the
Roma, Ashkalis and Egyptians from the North. We also
recognize the efforts undertaken to facilitate the return
and reintegration of IDPs and call for continued efforts
to promote security conditions that will help the
greatest number of people to return.
Costa Rica underscores the importance we attach
to the legitimacy of the democratic process with a view
to the establishment of a peaceful State. In that context,
we believe that the strengthening of institutions
capable of holding transparent and fair elections is
essential if the results are to be accepted by all parties.
We hope for broad participation in the upcoming

09-55956

S/PV.6202

municipal elections and believe that a successful
electoral exercise will contribute to the strengthening
of local governance and the consolidation of a Kosovar
State that is prosperous, democratic, multi-ethnic and
respectful of human rights.
Costa Rica reiterates its support for the
declaration of Kosovo as a sovereign and independent
Republic. We believe that a definitive and
internationally recognized solution on the status of
Kosovo is today more necessary than ever to the
internal domestic development of the nation and to
greater stability in the Balkan region.
While this recognition is in progress, we hope
that Kosovo’s relations with its neighbours continue to
be based on respectful and peaceful coexistence. We
call on the authorities in Kosovo to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights,
including measures to ensure respect and protection of
minority groups. We also urge the international
community to support the socio-economic development
of Kosovo and its active integration into the regional
economy and the broader context of the international
community.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Kosovo, for their presence. We have
listened to them with great care. I also commend the
work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General who in a very effective and
pragmatic way has implemented the reconfiguration of
the international presence created by the SecretaryGeneral with the support of the Security Council.
More than a year and a half have passed since
Kosovo’s declaration of independence. What lessons
can we draw? Kosovo’s independence has contributed
to strengthening security and stability, by putting an
end to two decades of violence and defiance. The rights
of minorities are respected in conformity with the
commitments undertaken by Kosovo authorities by
accepting the plan elaborated by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari.
This outcome is the result of the work of all the
men and women who have worked within the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for ten years. It is also the result of the work
of the European Union with the European Union Rule

09-55956

of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and its essential
support in helping the authorities in Kosovo to set up a
State of law and solid institutions for the good of the
people of Kosovo. It is also the result of the work of
Kosovars who placed their confidence in the
international community. It is the result of the work of
Serbs who chose the path of reason and of doing their
utmost to ensure that Kosovo would develop in peace
and calm for the good of all its communities.
Of course, difficulties remain. But France
believes that if we take a step back to look at all the
very real imperfections in the field, it can be said that,
generally speaking, the Government of Kosovo has
acted in a responsible way and fulfilled its
commitments. The creation of a Constitution in
conformity with European norms and values and the
adoption of laws promoting the participation of
minorities are all important steps towards a State of
law at the service of all of the inhabitants of Kosovo,
without regard to their community alliances.
The reorganization of the international presence
took place in very good conditions. The European
Union is now providing essential support through
deployment of EULEX which assists in building the
institutions of a State of law in Kosovo in the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999). The European
Mission is pursuing a twofold objective: to help the
authorities in Kosovo to consolidate the institutions put
in place with UNMIK’s assistance, and to ensure the
full implementation of the commitments that they have
undertaken concerning the rule of law. In that context,
the role of Serbia is, of course, essential. We welcome
the Mission’s technical cooperation with the authorities
of Kosovo’s neighbours — including, of course, Serbia —
in the area of law enforcement.
We are aware of what Kosovo’s independence
represents for Serbia. Nevertheless, we call on Serbia
to maintain its responsible attitude and to focus its
efforts on its future integration into the European
Union. France, which does not forget a long shared
history, is counting on Serbia to contribute to stability
in a difficult region. The statement just made by
Mr. Jeremić confirms that intention.
We listened attentively to Mr. Hyseni. The
commitment to the rule of law, the desire to build a
multi-ethnic State that respects minorities, the will to
nurture friendly relations with Kosovo’s neighbours
and the pro-European commitment of the Kosovo

15

S/PV.6202

authorities that the Foreign Minister just reiterated are
strong commitments that should be commended.
Once again, we have just seen evidence of the
persistence of differences between Serbia and Kosovo.
We regret that a legal and political guerrilla war is
under way that is sterile and does not correspond with
public opinion in both countries in favour of
overcoming the crisis and turning to the future. The
people are sometimes ahead of their Government.
However, we must also highlight the concern
shared by the Serbian and Kosovo authorities to
maintain stability in the region and to preserve the
conditions for a shared future within Europe. We
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to resume direct
dialogue as swiftly as possible. The European Union,
for its part, will remain committed to ensuring a stable
and prosperous future for the Western Balkans as a
whole and to offering a shared future to Serbs and
Kosovars within the framework of our European
adventure.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like at the outset to welcome
Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Mr. Hyseni. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing.
It goes without saying that the changes in the
situation on the ground since Kosovo’s declaration of
independence and the deployment of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) have made it
possible to appropriately reconfigure the Mission and
its activities. In that context, I should like to
congratulate the bureau of the Mission on having taken
the concerns of communities into account. We believe
that it is extremely important that those efforts
continue, in particular with regard to the minorities.
That will allow for the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons, the monitoring and protection of
human rights and continued mediation among local
communities.
Despite the prevailing calm and recent positive
developments in Kosovo, such as the return of certain
Serbian police to carry out their duties, we remain
concerned about the tense situation in the northern
municipalities, since they are functioning in isolation,
separately from other areas of Kosovo, and in some
cases are linked to separate conflicts between Kosovo
Serbs and Kosovo Albanians. In that connection, we

16

would like to commend the role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
as mediator and its efforts to reduce tension and begin
reconstruction, with the assistance of EULEX and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). We condemn any attacks on
the United Nations Mission and its property in Kosovo,
and we wish to stress the need to ensure the safety,
security and rights of United Nations personnel,
wherever they might be.
We share the opinion expressed by the SecretaryGeneral with regard to inviting the parties to adopt an
approach based on common interests, to adopt a
constructive policy concerning reconciliation between
various ethnic groups, to exhibit restraint and to avoid
any incendiary statements that could lead to an
escalation of violence in the region. All parties must
refrain from any act that could destabilize the region.
We are aware that there are differing points of view
concerning the status of Kosovo, and we await the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on that issue. However, we are hopeful that dialogue
and constructive cooperation will continue so that all
sects and communities can coexist in an atmosphere of
cooperation far removed from acts of violence.
We have taken note of the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2009/497), and we join others in thanking the
Mission for its efforts to strengthen dialogue and
pragmatic cooperation among communities and
between Pristina and Belgrade in order to establish
stability in Kosovo and in the Balkan region in general.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to join previous
speakers in extending a warm welcome to Foreign
Minister Jeremić of Serbia and Foreign Minister
Hyseni of Kosovo. I would also like to thank Special
Representative
Lamberto
Zannier
for
his
comprehensive briefing. The United Nations
contribution for Kosovo — particularly the SecretaryGeneral’s leadership and Mr. Zannier’s personal
commitment — is very much appreciated.
We also highly value the contributions on the
ground by the sister organizations — the European
Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) — to support a multiethnic, democratic Kosovo and the entire Western
Balkans region.

09-55956

S/PV.6202

The reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) initiated
by the Secretary-General has now been completed. We
welcome the useful role played by UNMIK in interethnic mediation. UNMIK is making efforts to mediate
between northern Kosovo and Pristina and also between
Pristina and Belgrade, in cooperation with the United
Nations Office in Belgrade. We are very pleased that
UNMIK’s involvement has contributed to the relaxation
of tensions surrounding the Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani
reconstruction.
EULEX is also extremely important. We welcome
the operation conducted by EULEX, which has been
carried out very smoothly. Its technical consultation
with Belgrade is also making progress. The attack by a
militant group on EULEX in Pristina was quite
regrettable. Establishing the rule of law in Kosovo is
an urgent task, and we urge all parties to work with
EULEX to achieve effective cooperation.
We are expecting municipal elections on
15 November. If Kosovo is to develop multi-ethnic
communities, it is important to ensure that these
municipal elections are conducted in a free, fair and
transparent manner. People must be allowed to vote
and participate in a free and safe atmosphere. It is our
hope that decentralization will be promoted throughout
Kosovo, including the northern provinces, with broad
local participation.
The tense security situation in northern Kosovo is
a continuing source of concern, and we urge all parties
to extend their cooperation to aid the return of
internally displaced persons and the protection of
ethnic minorities.
The focus of the international community should
be on promoting economic growth and development
and peaceful coexistence in a multi-ethnic Kosovo. We
welcome the fact that Kosovo has become a member of
the World Bank Group and is implementing a new
partnership strategy, including by improving public
subsidies and generating new sources of economic
growth. Japan has extended support to Kosovo through
a human security approach, because integrating a
human-centred approach is particularly relevant in the
northern provinces, with due regard to reducing the
sense of vulnerability among the population. Such an
approach is extremely useful not only in Kosovo but
also in the Western Balkan nations as a whole.

09-55956

We conducted a bilateral consultation in Pristina
yesterday, and Japan will consider, on the basis of the
outcome, additional assistance to Kosovo. Japan is
committed to helping Kosovo develop as a vibrant
multi-ethnic and fully democratic country, and to
stabilizing the Western Balkan region as a whole. We
will do so in close cooperation with our international
partners, Serbia and other countries in the region.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation): We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo, Mr. Zannier, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/497) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, whose assessments we share. We are
compelled to note that the ideas offered by Mr. Hyseni
are often very different from the realities on the
ground.
The position of the Russian Federation on the
issue of Kosovo remains consistent. We are convinced,
as before, that resolution 1244 (1999) is still fully in
force and remains the international legal basis for a
Kosovo settlement binding upon all. The Russian
Federation fully endorses UNMIK’s actions in
fulfilling its mandate and the provisions of the report
of the Secretary-General of November 2008
(S/2008/692). That document enshrines the primacy of
the United Nations Mission vis-à-vis other
international presences in the province. No one,
therefore, has the right to impede UNMIK’s fulfilment
of its mission, including issues related to securing in
Kosovo the democratic standards established by the
international community.
At the same time, we continue to hear calls from
Pristina for the drawdown of UNMIK. We consider
these unacceptable and even dangerous. Any tolerance
of such suggestions will lead to a destabilization of the
situation, which has manifested itself lately in the
burning of vehicles belonging to international
presences.
On the basis of the lead role of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo, we should build its
relations with the European Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). Any attempt to question the
competence and authority of UNMIK or to replace it
with other international structures in the province is
unacceptable, as it would run counter to the Security

17

S/PV.6202

Council’s approach package for the reconfiguration of
UNMIK, adopted in November 2008.
In the context of the completed reconfiguration of
UNMIK, the Mission should fulfil its functions in a
proactive and comprehensive way within the
framework of the mandate entrusted it by the Security
Council. We are concerned about attempts to
marginalize UNMIK’s role, not only in the area of the
rule of law, but also in the context of the negotiation
process on the six technical issues. Representatives of
UNMIK should participate in all Belgrade-EULEX
meetings. Albanian Kosovars should also be more
actively motivated to cooperate on practical aspects of
restoring the daily life of the Serb community in the
province. What is important here is the active
participation not only of UNMIK, but also of States
with influence in Pristina. We note that the authorities
in Pristina, in contrast to Belgrade, have thus far
pursued a policy in this area that is not constructive.
We consider any further downsizing of UNMIK’s
operational personnel to be unacceptable, as it would
limit its ability to discharge its Security Council
mandate, including on the issues of the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons, and the
protection of Serb cultural heritage. The situation in
that sphere is alarming. This outrage cannot be swept
under the carpet.
Regarding the municipal elections scheduled for
15 November in the province, we stress that UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) should carry out a
coordinated and status-neutral policy aimed at averting
tensions that could have unpredictable consequences.
This applies equally to the issue of the return of
Albanian Kosovar property in the North of the
province. The situation in this respect is marked by a
potential for explosive conflict, which has arisen
largely as a result of the illegal activities of Albanian
Kosovars.
We reiterate our readiness to continue political
efforts to elaborate a legally correct, fair and effective
settlement of the Kosovo issue. The next stage in that
context should be the oral hearings beginning
1 December in the International Court of Justice on the
question of the legality of Kosovo’s unilateral
declaration of independence, in which Russia intends
to participate.
I have one further important point. We draw the
Council’s attention to the unacceptability of the

18

arbitrary participation of Kosovo representatives in
international forums, including the United Nations and
its specialized agencies. Unfortunately, we were
recently witness to blatant violations in that regard.
During the high-level week of the sixty-fourth session
of the General Assembly, representatives of Pristina
enjoyed illegal, unfettered access to the Assembly Hall
and other Headquarters premises intended exclusively
for the official delegations of Member States. There,
these individuals engaged in bilateral contacts with
other delegations without the mandatory presence of
UNMIK representatives, as required under resolution
1244 (1999). Such flagrant breaches of the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999) and of United Nations rules
and procedure are unacceptable, and we assume that
they will not happen again.
Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremić and Mr. Skender Hyseni, Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and the Republic of Kosovo,
respectively, and thank them for their statements.
My delegation notes that the overall situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, despite a
number of inter-ethnic problems that unfortunately
persist in the North of the province. We pay tribute to
the actions of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General,
in
cooperation
with
local
authorities, to address these differences, and we
welcome the full cooperation of the Kosovo Police
Service with the European Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force.
Regarding the upcoming municipal elections
scheduled for 15 November, the first since the
declaration of independence of Kosovo, we urge all
actors to step up their efforts to ensure the calm
conduct of the electoral process, which we very much
hope will be free, transparent and democratic.
While we commend the authorities of Pristina for
the steps taken to resolve the issues relating to the
minority communities, we urge them to further engage
in the fight against the crimes of aggression, killings
and desecration of cemeteries.
In the opinion of my delegation, the following
challenges should be especially emphasized. First is
the creation of the necessary social, political and
economic conditions to ensure a successful

09-55956

S/PV.6202

reintegration of the displaced Serbs in Kosovo, which
would help guarantee lasting stability of the region.
Second is reconstruction of the cultural and religious
heritage sites, which would certainly have a positive
impact on the spiritual life of the Serb minorities in the
region. In that regard, the support and cooperation of
the countries of the region and of the international
community are essential in order to promote
rapprochement and reconciliation between the two
communities. Third and last is relaunching the
economy through creating jobs and improving the
living conditions of the population in Kosovo.
My delegation congratulates the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for its cooperation with the authorities in Pristina and
of Belgrade, despite certain reluctance over its
presence. We wish to recall that the Mission, which
was authorized by the Security Council, should have
the support of the international community to enable it
to play its role fully, in particular that of mediator in
the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade so as to
guarantee security and stability in the region.
We welcome the fact that the EULEX Mission is
fully operational, so it can undertake monitoring,
mentoring and advising activities in the area of the rule
of law. The results of its efforts have already been seen
in the areas of law enforcement, justice and customs.
We also welcome its cooperation with UNMIK in
handling war crimes cases, and we urge the parties and
all national and international actors to cooperate fully
with it in order to find solutions to the region’s
remaining problems.
To conclude, Burkina Faso wishes to reaffirm its
recognition of the Republic of Kosovo and would urge
the parties to engage in dialogue so as to find a
mutually acceptable solution to their differences. We
also urge the international community, including the
countries of the subregion, to assist them in that step
towards restoring peace and stability. Finally, we
reiterate our full support for Mr. Zannier and for
UNMIK.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting. We
welcome the presentation of the report of SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/497). We thank
Mr. Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-

09-55956

General for Kosovo, for his briefing and commend him
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their efforts to maintain peace
and stability in Kosovo and in the Balkan region.
We have listened carefully to the statements made
by His Excellency Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and by Mr. Hyseni. We welcome the
participation of the Austrian Vice Federal Minister for
European and International Affairs in today’s meeting.
The report of the Secretary-General and the
briefing by Mr. Zannier have shown that in the last
reporting period the political situation in Kosovo
remains generally stable and that municipal elections
will be held on 15 November. However, the situation in
some areas in the north remains fragile. There has been
some small-scale conflict between Serb and Albanian
residents. China is concerned in that regard.
At the same time, we are encouraged to see that
under UNMIK’s mediation, an initial settlement has
been reached in the disagreement between ethnic
Albanian and ethnic Serb residents. We hope that all
parties will continue to exercise restraint, enhance
dialogue and avoid statements and actions that might
threaten the peace and stability.
At present, the fragile situation in northern
Kosovo reflects some prominent issues facing both the
Serbian Government and the Kosovo authorities.
Serbia and Kosovo have serious differences on the
status and the future of Kosovo. The ethnic Serbs and
ethnic Albanians living in Kosovo urgently need to
enhance their mutual understanding and trust. Efforts
to encourage the displaced persons of those
communities to return to Kosovo should be stepped up,
in particular the reintegration of the Serb community in
Kosovo.
We believe that the continuation of the above
situation is not conducive to peace and stability in the
Balkan region. The settlement of the issue depends on
the joint efforts of the Serbian Government and the
Kosovo authorities. China respects the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Serbia. We hope that, through
dialogue and negotiations, Serbia and Kosovo will
reach a mutually acceptable settlement to the Kosovo
issue. The Kosovo authorities should also create
favourable conditions for the settlement of conflict
between the communities and the question of their
return.

19

S/PV.6202

China has noted that with the change in the
situation on the ground, UNMIK has undergone a
reconfiguration and a drawdown. We believe that the
adjustment of UNMIK is only technical and should not
involve the question of the status of Kosovo or change
the neutral position of the United Nations. UNMIK
should continue to observe the mandate provided by
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant documents. We hope that it will strengthen its
communication with Serbia and with Kosovo, pay
attention to fulfilling the functions of the newly created
Office for Community Support and Facilitation,
continue to play a crucial role in the proper settlement
of the Kosovo issue and promote peace and stability in
the Balkan region. We also hope that the parties
concerned will cooperate closely with the Mission’s
various efforts.
We welcome the readiness of the European Union
to play a role in maintaining stability in the Balkan
region. We hope that EULEX will continue to operate
under the overall authority of the United Nations and
within the status-neutral framework of resolution 1244
(1999), to cooperate with UNMIK’s work and to play
its due role in maintaining the peace and stability in
this region.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I too would like to
welcome to the Chamber His Excellency Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and His Excellency Skender Hyseni, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo, and to
thank them for their statements. We also welcome
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and thank him for his important
contribution and his tireless work. We also welcome
the presence at this meeting of Mr. Johannes Kyrle,
Vice Federal Minister for European and International
Affairs of Austria.
Croatia welcomes the continued and steady
progress that Kosovo is making on its path towards
creating a stable, secure and democratic society. We
also salute the European Union for continuing its
efforts in advancing the European perspective for all
the countries in the region on the basis of their reform
efforts and individual accomplishments.
Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the overall security situation in Kosovo
has remained relatively calm. However, we are
concerned with recent incidents in the north, including

20

the acts of vandalism involving 26 European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) vehicles in
Priština.
Croatia would like to commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for its effective and useful role and for the
services that it is providing to both communities in
Kosovo, as well as for its support to international
organizations operating in the north, including through
its dialogue and cooperation on practical issues that
can benefit both Priština and Belgrade.
We believe that that, in itself, confirms the useful
role that UNMIK plays in Kosovo, particularly on
issues of external relations and international legal
assistance. We call on all parties to continue to
cooperate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team.
Croatia is pleased to see that EULEX has
continued to undertake monitoring, mentoring and
advising activities since its full deployment on 6 April
2009. Croatia, which is a contributing country to
EULEX, would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Mission’s leadership and other partner
countries for their efforts, in particular for ensuring, in
a coordinated manner with UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force, effective response to instances of inter-ethnic
violence or major public disturbances.
We welcome the good cooperation that exists
between EULEX and UNMIK, which, together with
other international partners, should continue to work
together to address new challenges and build a better
future for all people in Kosovo. We also welcome the
high level of interest and support that Kosovo
authorities have shown in helping EULEX to fulfil its
mandate, as well as in planning further action.
Croatia looks forward to the successful conduct
of upcoming municipal elections scheduled for
15 November 2009, as the Central Election
Commission, with the support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), will for
the first time be fully in charge of organizing all phases
of electoral operations and certifying the results. That
will be a further test of the maturity of Kosovo’s
institutions.
We believe that all citizens of Kosovo, including
Kosovo Serbs in the north, should be encouraged to
participate actively in the elections. Moreover, we

09-55956

S/PV.6202

welcome the return of almost all Kosovo Serb officers
to their positions in the Kosovo Police by the 30 June
deadline. Remaining Kosovo Serbs and other
non-Albanians will fully realize their civic and
democratic rights by actively participating in the
political process and institutions in Kosovo, thereby
improving the position of their respective communities.
In that respect, even though the number of returns
remains low, we draw attention to the assessment in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/497) that the
reintegration of minority communities continues to be
a challenge, primarily owing to the lack of employment
opportunities, the fragile economic situation and access
to services.
Finally, we acknowledge the efforts made on the
question of the reconstruction of cultural property and
the issue of returns. As stated by the Secretary-General
in his report, the number of returns remains very low,
while the reintegration of minority communities,
especially the Kosovo Serb community, continues to be
a challenge. Further progress in this field remains
critical, as Kosovo is gradually developing into a
multi-ethnic and peaceful society strengthened by its
commitment to the values of tolerance, protection of
human rights and minority rights, dialogue and
cooperation.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming Foreign Minister Jeremić of
Serbia and Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo to the
Security Council today. I would also like to welcome
Special Representative Zannier to the Council and
thank him for his briefing.
The United States commends the Special
Representative for the work the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
carried out under his leadership, including UNMIK’s
successful reconfiguration.
Today, I would like to underscore three key
points. First, the United States welcomes what the
Secretary-General has called a new phase for UNMIK.
The full deployment of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has enabled UNMIK
to reconfigure itself and reduce its responsibilities. We
fully support this transition, which makes EULEX the
primary international presence for rule of law issues in
Kosovo. We welcome EULEX’s expanding role in
Kosovo, especially in the north of the country. As the
Secretary-General states, UNMIK has now refocused

09-55956

its efforts in facilitating practical cooperation among
all communities in Kosovo, and we note that both
Belgrade and Priština have adopted pragmatic
approaches in resolving some of their outstanding
issues.
Special Representative Zannier noted that
UNMIK continues to facilitate Kosovo’s participation
in some international forums. We thank UNMIK for
this assistance where it is necessary, but also note that
Kosovo plays an independent role in a large number of
international organizations and initiatives and should
be allowed to play its role independently in the
international community.
Secondly, we commend the Government of
Kosovo for continuing to carry out its commitments
under the Ahtisaari plan. The municipal elections
scheduled to be held in 36 municipalities on
15 November 2009 will represent a significant
milestone for Kosovo. These elections are the first to
include new municipalities under the decentralization
process outlined in the Ahtisaari plan. These new
municipalities enable Kosovo Serbs to have a
significantly stronger voice in local issues, and we are
encouraged that 41 of the 76 parties or lists registered
to participate in the elections represent Serb and other
minority communities.
The United States strongly encourages all of
Kosovo’s citizens to participate in the upcoming
elections, and we hope that others in the international
community will voice their support for their
participation as well. We regret that Foreign Minister
Jeremić has said today that the Government of Serbia
will not support the participation of Kosovo Serbs in
these elections.
We also call on Belgrade and Priština to
encourage and facilitate the engagement of all ethnic
groups in Kosovo’s institutions. We urge an end to
support for parallel structures, which diminish
coordination and cooperation between the Government
and those in need and undermine the roles of the
responsible Kosovo authorities.
Kosovo continues to face significant challenges
in addressing the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. To be successful, the Governments
of Kosovo and Serbia must continue to sustain efforts
to facilitate these returns. The agreement reached
earlier this year to reopen offices of the Kosovo
Property Agency in Serbia was a major step forward.

21

S/PV.6202

Thirdly, the Secretary-General notes that the
security situation remains relatively calm in Kosovo.
Because of improved security, NATO decided to
downsize its peacekeepers to a deterrent presence. But
recent security incidents in northern Kosovo highlight
the sensitivities and tensions inherent in building a
multi-ethnic society after a conflict. We welcome the
return to work of most Kosovo Serb police officers and
the appointment of an ethnic Serb police officer to the
position of Deputy General Director of Kosovo Police.
Both are positive developments that will improve
relations among Kosovo’s communities.
The United States condemns the recent vandalism
of UNMIK vehicles, but applauds Kosovo’s handling
of the incident, including the later arrest and
prosecution of the perpetrators. These incidents and
others, such as the confrontations over housing
reconstruction by Kosovo Albanian returnees in
northern Kosovo this summer, underscore the need for
strengthened police cooperation and security for
returning displaced persons.
Kosovo has made tremendous progress in the
decade since the passage of resolution 1244 (1999).
Sixty-two countries have now recognized Kosovo as an
independent State. Kosovo has just joined the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, and the
country has shown that it is serious about its
commitment to be a stable friendly member of the
community of nations. Kosovo and other countries
coming out of conflict in the Western Balkans deserve
our continued support. For our part, the United States
will continue to support the integration of all of the
countries in the Western Balkans, including Kosovo
and Serbia, into European institutions and EuroAtlantic structures.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
I thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing and for his
leadership of UNMIK. I also wish to thank Foreign
Minister Vuk Jeremić of Serbia for participating in the
Council’s meeting today and sharing his perspectives
on the situation on the ground. I acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Skender Hyseni at this meeting of the
Council.

22

Viet Nam continues to support the critical role of
UNMIK in maintaining security and stability in
Kosovo. We applaud UNMIK’s efforts to engaged with
all communities in Kosovo and to facilitate cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina.
We are encouraged to note that the Mission has
successfully completed its reconfiguration and moved
into a new phase, with a strong focus on providing
mediation services to local communities and
international organizations operating in northern
Kosovo. We commend the strengthened cooperation
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) under the overall
authority and within the status-neutral framework of
the United Nations. Such cooperation should be further
enhanced so as to create an enabling atmosphere for
dialogue among all Kosovo’s communities and
between Belgrade and Pristina with a view to finding
durable solutions to the ongoing challenges in the
region.
We take positive note of the progress made in
such areas as the rule of law, justice and customs
during the reporting period, as well as the
demonstrated interest of Belgrade in finding solutions
to some of the pending matters.
We remain concerned about the fragile security
situation in Kosovo, marked by a series of securityrelated incidents and confrontations between Kosovo
Serb and Kosovo Albanian communities in the North.
We are also concerned about ethnic tensions in the
North and the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons, including thousands displaced from
Kosovo. We urge the local authorities in Kosovo to pay
due attention and undertake appropriate actions to ease
tensions related to these sensitive inter-ethnic issues.
We call upon the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to
continue to work closely with all relevant international
stakeholders towards negotiated solutions to their
differences through peaceful means.
As a comprehensive and long-term solution to the
situation in Kosovo has yet to be achieved, Viet Nam
believes that the continued engagement of UNMIK
with all sides remains crucial at this juncture, as it
could facilitate the attainment of concrete progress and
the fruitful implementation of arrangements that can be
acceptable and beneficial to both Belgrade and
Pristina.

09-55956

S/PV.6202

The increasing contribution of EULEX to the
areas of police, courts, customs, transportation and
infrastructure, boundary management and protection of
Serbian patrimony has already shown positive results
and should be encouraged. We urge all sides to
reinforce
their
constructive
engagement
and
cooperation with UNMIK within the framework of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) in working
towards the achievement of solutions to long-standing
impasses and of peace and security in the Balkans as a
whole.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I call on Mr. Skender Hyseni, who has asked for
the floor to make a further statement
Mr. Hyseni: I had so hoped that I would not have
to ask to speak a second time today, but a number of
inaccuracies that we heard today from Mr. Jeremić
require a response.
Unfortunately, the efforts to mislead this Council
have continued with the presentation of various figures
that have nothing in common with reality and with
definitions that are in fact profound distortions of
reality. What one ethnic group calls secession another
calls a declaration of independence. I wish to recall for
the Council that the independence of Kosovo was
declared and has been supported by every single ethnic
group living in Kosovo but the Serb community.
Anyone who wishes to see that for themselves has only
to go through the signatures signed under the
declaration of independence. Turkish, Roma, Egyptian,
Bosnian, Ashkali and many other names —
non-Albanian members of Parliament of the Republic
of Kosovo — will be found there.
Organized crime and terrorism are the only words
used by some to describe Kosovo. The Kosovo
Liberation Army is labelled a terrorist organization.
The freedom-fighters of the Kosovo Liberation Army
are freedom-fighters. Kosovo, on the other hand, is
firmly committed to investigating, pursuing and
punishing any crime committed on the territory of the
Republic of Kosovo, regardless of the perpetrator.
Isolated cases will in no way be allowed to overshadow
the efforts of the suffering people of Kosovo to
safeguard their freedom and their very existence.
I will not respond to each and every inaccuracy
that we have heard tonight because I do not want to

09-55956

waste the Council’s time. But let me just say that it is
regrettably amazing that we never heard Mr. Jeremić
speak of the 12,000 to 15,000 slaughtered Albanians.
We never heard Mr. Jeremić speak of the hundreds of
mosques destroyed. We never heard Mr. Jeremić speak
of atrocities committed throughout the former
Yugoslavia that were sponsored, organized, planned
and carried out by the Government of the Republic of
Serbia.
The Serbian patrimony is the cultural heritage of
Kosovo. It is our cultural heritage, and we intend to
protect it by all means and at any cost. We intend to
investigate and prosecute any crime committed in
Kosovo. I am not going to turn myself either into an
investigator or into a judge tonight. I am not the one.
We have an independent justice system that is fully
functional and will be more and more so with the help
and support of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX).
We invited EULEX to deploy in Kosovo to help
us in the police and justice sectors. We, and not the
Republic of Serbia, will prosecute crimes committed
by our people in the territory of our country. The old
way is over, and will never happen again. We know the
ways that the Republic of Serbia used to punish crimes
in Kosovo — by collectively wiping villages and
thousands of civilians off the face of the Earth.
Mr. Jeremić failed to speak of missing persons,
the many persons still missing from Kosovo, the
remains of whom are, unfortunately, still somewhere in
Serbia in mass graves. I am confident that the
authorities in Belgrade are quite aware of many of
those mass graves. The best thing to do would be to
give the families in Kosovo the information on the
whereabouts of their loved ones instead of trying to
blame Kosovo, Kosovar Albanians and the Kosovar
population for all the atrocities that the Republic of
Serbia has, in a very planned manner, carefully carried
out through its military, paramilitary or police forces.
Finally, I would like to once again thank you, Sir,
for your time and patience. I would like to call on you
to refer to various statistical data on the number of
Serbs ever living in Kosovo. Serb officials continue to
speak of 200,000 or 300,000 displaced persons, while,
in the best possible case, less than 200,000 Serbs ever
lived in Kosovo. We still have 135,000 Serbs living in
Kosovo, some in the north, but most of them in the

23

S/PV.6202

southern part of the country. 70 per cent of the Kosovo
Serbs live south of the Ibar river.
I believe this forum, the Council, should not be
misused to spread inaccuracies that are profoundly
misleading. Once again, I assure members that they can
count on our firm determination to fight organized
crime and corruption. But it is we who will do that, not
the Republic of Serbia. The Republic of Serbia will
never again be able to hold any court sessions in the
Republic of Kosovo.
The President: I thank Mr. Hyseni for his
statement.
His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić has asked for the
floor to make another statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I am going to just briefly
address some of the notions presented here related to
the distortion of reality.
What is true is that Kosovo is a very difficult
place to live right now, and not exactly the kind of
place that Mr. Hyseni and a few other participants in
today’s discussion were attempting to describe. So
when it comes to distortions of reality, I think that the
most difficult element of this is the way people actually
live right now in Kosovo.
I will try to address again the issue of
decentralization and the issue of participation in the
electoral process. Unfortunately, these elections were
not called in the way that all elections until now have
been called. Resolution 1244 (1999) is very clear as to
how they are supposed to be called. Had they been
called in the way that all previous elections have been
called, Serbian leadership would have, as every
previous time, supported the participation of Serbs in
these elections. These new elections were simply called
by the so-called institutions of the Republic of Kosovo.
There was no way for us to be able to support them.
We do, however, want to be very constructive and
engage in the process of coming up with a
decentralization concept that would benefit all the
residents of the province. I hope we are going to be
able to do that, for the sake of ordinary people there.
I have heard Mr. Hyseni repeatedly saying that he
looks forward to cooperating with the European Union,
United States and NATO in the territory. We do so as
well. But I want to remind Mr. Hyseni that he is sitting
in the United Nations building, and I would have hoped

24

for him to say that he looks forward to cooperating
with the United Nations, that is, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the United Nations representation in the province, and
not refuse to meet the representatives of the United
Nations in Priština. This is now changing, and I
commend this change of heart in Priština, but I would
just like to encourage people there to continue to work
with UNMIK and the United Nations, as all of us are
going to do in the future.
I spoke about the need to fight organized crime
and terrorism and that that is the subject of the protocol
on cooperation between the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX).
I did mention the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA), but I did not call the KLA a terrorist
organization in my remarks today. Mr. Hyseni,
however, did. But that is of course true. The KLA was
and is a terrorist organization. But I never said that. I
thank him for reminding us that the KLA is a terrorist
organization.
I am never going to try to diminish the deeds
carried out by the regime of Slobodan Milosević in
Kosovo. That regime was overthrown by the people of
Serbia. The Government of Serbia is now led by the
people who risked their lives in overthrowing the
dictatorship of Slobodan Milosević. I will never try to
deny or diminish the crimes committed in Kosovo and
in other parts of the region under the leadership of the
Milosević Government. But I hope Mr. Hyseni is not
trying to blame the current Government of Serbia for
those deeds, including the burning of the mosques.
However, when it comes to the authorities in
Kosovo, I can very well blame the current leadership,
because of events such as the March 2004 pogrom, in
which 35 churches and monasteries from the medieval
ages were burned or desecrated in only two days by
organized mobs of people. By the way, no one is
currently behind bars in Kosovo for that horrible crime.
I commend Mr. Hyseni’s determination to fight
organized crime and to protect the heritage of Kosovo.
I hope he starts doing that very soon. Maybe he could
start by prosecuting those who burned down those
churches and monasteries in 2004. Nobody is behind
bars for that right now.
The last thing that I am going to say is that, with
regard to the statistical data, 206,000 internally

09-55956

S/PV.6202

displaced persons is the official figure of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Those are
the statistics I was referring to. Sitting here in the
United Nations, we decided to quote the United
Nations figure on this.
Having said all that, I think this is really the time
to try to set aside our differences on status, because our
differences on status are going to be contested in a
court of law. It is yet another United Nations organ, the
International Court of Justice.
But this is the time to work together, despite all
the differences and the difficulties that we have with
each other, in a status-neutral way, which is something
that I hope Kosovo can embrace, as we have decided to
embrace that approach, especially in regional
organizations and international meetings. Serbia is not
going to try to shut Priština out of regional
organizations where they have had membership in the
past. Every single place where Priština is a member, we
are going to support their participation — but
according to the rules. The rules are clearly laid out,
and they are written in the statutes of these
organizations. We are just willing to follow the rules. I
think this is the safest approach.

UNMIK has a very important role to play in those
meetings. Kosovo has spoken before in those bodies
and forums in a certain way, and we welcome their
doing just that again. But if they expect us to support
the change of format because on 17 February they
unilaterally declared independence, I am afraid that we
can be of no help in that regard. We want to hear them
out, and we want to allow other people to hear them
out, but we also want rules to be followed. I just think
that that is the safest way forward.
I do stand behind the claim that the unilateral
declaration of independence was an ethnically
motivated attempt at secession. Yes, in the so-called
parliament of Kosovo, they did have representatives of
various ethnic groups, but I just want to remind
Mr. Hyseni that there were a lot of Albanians who were
part of the Government of Slobodan Milosević, and I
am not trying to make any claim that they were
genuine representatives of the Albanian people.
The President: I thank Mr. Jeremić for his
statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has therefore concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

09-55956

25
