S/PRST/2001/36

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4419th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 November 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Angola”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council remains deeply concerned about the ongoing
conflict in Angola. It holds Mr. Jonas Savimbi and the armed faction of the
União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) primarily
responsible for the failure to implement the Lusaka Protocol. It expresses its
deep concern at the resulting human rights and international humanitarian law
violations, and the humanitarian crisis.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the Lusaka Protocol remains the
only viable basis for a political settlement of the conflict in Angola. The
failure by UNITA to implement the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex), the
“Accordos de Paz” (S/22609, annex), and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council are the basis for the continuation of the Security Council
sanctions against UNITA.
“The Security Council once again reaffirms its intention to keep
sanctions under close and ongoing monitoring with a view to improving their
effectiveness until it is convinced that the conditions in the relevant resolutions
are met. It welcomes, in this regard, the ongoing review by the Sanctions
Committee of the recommendations of the Monitoring Mechanism on sanctions
against UNITA.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on Member States to comply
fully with the implementation of the sanctions regime against UNITA. The
Council notes the positive contribution of the Security Council Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) and, in this regard,
calls upon the Member States to cooperate fully with the Security Council
Committee and the Monitoring Mechanism on sanctions against UNITA.
“The Security Council supports the Government of Angola in its efforts
to implement the Lusaka Protocol including through the Fund for Peace and
National Reconciliation. The Security Council supports the Government’s
intention to hold free and fair elections when appropriate conditions are in
place. It encourages the Angolan authorities to continue, in consultation with
all the political parties and the full participation of the civil society, their

01-64152 (E) 151101

*0164152*

S/PRST/2001/36

efforts for peace, stability and national reconciliation. The Council further
encourages the Government of Angola to work for economic reform and to
ensure transparent and accountable governance to provide a positive climate
for peace.
“The Security Council expresses its concern that the continuing conflict
in Angola is leading to a large number of internally displaced persons and a
dire humanitarian situation. It welcomes the efforts of the Government of
Angola to improve the humanitarian situation and the resettlement of the
displaced population and calls upon it to increase its efforts to this end. It also
calls upon the international community to continue to provide necessary
humanitarian assistance. It stresses that humanitarian assistance should be
provided to the population in need, throughout Angola.
“The Security Council supports the efforts of the civil society and the
churches to alleviate the humanitarian situation and to facilitate national
reconciliation.
“The Security Council welcomes the upcoming visit of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser on Africa to Angola for consultations with the
Government, political parties and civil society representatives on how the
United Nations could help in the advancement of the peace process. It also
reiterates its support for the work of the United Nations Office in Angola in
finding the solution to the Angolan conflict.”

2
