VIII.

42/206.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly,
Having considered the financial reports and audited financial statements for the period ended 31 December
1986 of the United Nations Development Programme4 the
United Nations Children's Fund, 5 the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, 6 the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, 7 the voluntary funds administered by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 8 and the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities, 9 the audit opinions and reports of the Board of Auditors 10 and the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, t t
Having also considered the relevant reports on internal
control procedures relating to the benefits and allowances
received by staff members of the United Nations 12 and on
Headquarters catering and gift-shop operations, 13
Noting with concern that the Board of Auditors, for the
reasons stated in its report, 14 was not able to express an
opinion on the financial statements of the United Nations
Children's Fund and issued qualified opinions on the financial statements of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities,
Taking into consideration the views expressed by delegations, by the Board of Auditors, by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and by
the organizations and programmes concerned during the
debate in the Fifth Committee on this item, and the widely
expressed support for measures to improve the efficiency,
management, financial accountability and budgetary control of the United Nations organizations and programmes
concerned,
1. Accepts the financial reports and audited financial
statements and the audit opinions and reports of the
Board of Auditors regarding the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the
voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Fund
for Population Activities;
2. Accepts the report and conclusions of the Board of
Auditors on the financial statements of the United Nations Children's Fund and requests the Board of Auditors,
as agreed by the Fund and as recommended in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 15 to carry out an expanded audit of the fi4 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-second Session,
Sufplement No. 5A (A/42/5/ Add. I), sects. I and V.
Ibid., Supplement No. 58(A/42/5/Add.2), part one, sects. I and IV.
6 Ibid,, Supplement No. 5C {A/42/5/ Add.3), sects. I and V.
7 Ibid., Supplement No. 5D (A/42/5/Add.4), sects. I and V.
8 Ibid,, Supplement No. 5E (A/42/5/ Add.5), sect. Ill.
9 Ibid., Supplement No. 5G (A/42/5/ Add.7), sects. I and V.
10 Ibid., Supplement No. 5A (A/42/5/ Add. I), sects. II and III; ibid..
Supplement No. 58 (A/42/5/ Add.2), part one, sects. II and Ill; ibid.,
Supplement No. 5C (A/42/5/ Add.3), sects. II and Ill; ibid., Supplement
No. 5D (A/42/5/ Add.4), sects. II and Ill; ibid.. Supplement No. 5E
(A/42/5/ Add.5), sects. I and II; and ibid., Supplement No. 5G
(A/42/5/ Add. 7), sects. II and III.
II A/42/579.
,
12 A/42/437 and A/42/438.
13 A/42/399.
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Se.,sion,
Supplement No. 58 (A/42/5/ Add.2), part one, sect. III.
IS A/42/579, para. 28.

259

nancial statements of the Fund for the period ended
31 December 1986, and to submit its report in a timely
manner through the Advisory Committee at its
spring 1988 session, to the Executive Board of the Fund at
its 1988 session and to the General Assembly at its fortythird session;
3. Requests the governing bodies of the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the United Nations Fund for Population Activities to
require the executive heads concerned to take immediate
steps within their competence to correct the situations or
conditions that gave rise to the qualification of the audit
opinions of the Board of Auditors;
4. Endorses the concurring observations and recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
as contained in their respective reports, and requests the
competent governing bodies to ensure that the executive
heads concerned take the necessary steps on a priority basis to implement them and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session;
5. Further requests the governing bodies of all audited
organizations and programmes to keep under review the
other observations and recommendations of the Board of
Auditors that fall within each body's terms of reference, as
called for by the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of United Nations organizations and programmes
concerned to take without delay remedial action within
their competence in response to the comments and observations of the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and
to report in 1988 respectively to the General Assembly and
to the governing bodies of these organizations and programmes on ways to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of financial procedures and controls, including those
relating to the payment of benefits and allowances to staff
members, and also to improve the accounting system and
related administrative and management controls;
7. Recommends that all future reports of the Board of
Auditors continue to include separate sections that summarize recommendations for corrective action to be taken
by the organizations and programmes concerned, with an
indication of relative urgency, and that report on specific
measures taken by the Secretary-General and executive
heads of these organizations and programmes to implement previous recommendations of the Board and comment on the efficacy of such measures and the extent to
which problems recur, giving particular attention to
recurrent problems related to over-expenditures, incorrect
use of funds, control procedures relating to the payment of
benefits and allowances, and other instances of noncompliance with financial and budgetary regulations and
rules;
8. Further recommends that the Board of Auditors in
future submit to the General Assembly a concise document summarizing its principal findings and conclusions
of common interest, classified by audit area;
9. Requests the Board of Auditors to initiate a study on
standardization of the presentation and format offinancial
statements of all audited organizations and programmes
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortythird session;

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

10. Also requests the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to continue to cover in their reviews the areas relating to the efficiency and effectiveness of the financial
procedures and controls, the accounting system and the
related administrative and management areas, in accordance with regulation 12.5 of the Financial Regulations of
the United Nations, and to recommend measures, asappropriate, to strengthen financial and management controls;
11. Decides that while the Board of Auditors should
continue to submit its reports in accordance with the relevant financial regulations of the audited organizations and
programmes, the Board should retain the capacity to submit specific annual reports to the General Assembly and
to governing bodies, should circumstances so warrant;
12. Requests, in this regard, the governing bodies of
the audited organizations and programmes to keep under
review the question of the periodicity of their financial reporting and its relationship to their budgetary cycles,
bearing in mind the most recent reports of the Board of
Auditors and the discussions in the Fifth Committee, and
to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its
forty-fourth session;
13. Invites Governments that are represented on the
governing bodies of organizations and programmes for
which audited financial statements have been considered
by the General Assembly to ensure that full consideration
is given to the reports of the Board of Auditors and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and to the related comments made in the Fifth
Committee;
14. Requests the Board of Auditors to provide the
General Assembly with more detailed reports on the special accounts that the audited organizations and programmes manage, such as the accounts of the non-core
programmes of the United Nations Development Programme;
15. Underlines the importance of an effective internal
audit function in the organizations and programmes reported on, and requests the Board of Auditors, the Secretary-General and the executive heads to ensure that close
co-operation is maintained between the internal audit department of each organization or programme and the
Board of Auditors, particularly with respect to planning,
executing and reporting procedures.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/207.

Pattern of conferences
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3351 (XXIX) of 18 December
1974, 32/72 of9 December 1977, 36/117 B of 10 December 1981, 38/32 of 25 November 1983, 40/243 of
18 December 1985, 41/ 177 B of 5 December 1986 and
41/213 of 19 December 1986,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on Conferences for its report 16 and its continuing efforts to
achieve optimum use of conference-servicing resources
within the United Nations;

16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session.
Supplement No. 32 (A/42/32).

2. Decides to extend the current mandate and status of
the Committee on Conferences for a further year from I
January to 31 December 1988;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly to
reappoint the current States members of the Committee
for that further year, without this constituting a precedent;
4. Requests the Committee on Conferences to continue
and complete its consideration of the outstanding issues
with respect to its mandate and status and, taking into account the views expressed by Member States during the
forty-second session, to make specific recommendations
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences, 16

1. Approves the draft calendar of conferences and
meetings of the United Nations for the biennium
1988-1989 as submitted by the Committee on Conferences; 17
2. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make
any adjustments in the calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium 1988-1989 that may become necessary as a result of action and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its forty-second session;
3. Requests United Nations organs, in order to make
optimum use of the conference-servicing resources allocated to them, to indicate with greater precision the actual number of meetings with conference services that
they will require in their coming sessions;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to consider inviting the Committee on Conferences to review the
Council's draft calendar of conferences and meetings and
to make comments and recommendations on that draft
where appropriate;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to examine the possibility of having all organizational aspects of conferenceservicing in the United Nations as a whole centrally
planned and co-ordinated, with a view to ensuring optimum efficiency and cost-effectiveness by, inter alia, minimizing duplication and overlapping, taking into account
the outcome of the deliberations of the Special Commission of the Economic and Social Council on the In-depth
Study of the United Nations Intergovernmental Structure
and Functions in the Economic and Social Fields and the
implementation of paragraph 4 of the present resolution,
and to submit his findings and recommendations to the
General Assembly, through the Committee on Conferences.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

17 Ibid., annex Ill.
