United Nations

S/PV.9233

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9233rd meeting
Wednesday, 21 December 2022, 3.55 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Ms. Miley
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Shaheen
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-76689 (E)
*2276689*

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Canada, the Dominican Republic and
Haiti to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Jean Victor
Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of Haiti, and Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti; and Mr. Kim Ives, Editor, Haiti Liberté.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
introductory remarks by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
briefings by Ms. La Lime, Mr. Ives and Ambassador
Michel Xavier Biang, Permanent Representative of
Gabon, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), concerning Haiti.
I warmly welcome the Deputy Secretary-General,
to whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the Security Council for the opportunity to make introductory
remarks on the situation in Haiti, a country that remains
a priority for the United Nations and, more personally,
for the Secretary-General and me.
During my last visit to Haiti, in February, I was
encouraged by the nationally led efforts towards
recovery. I saw strong efforts to rebuild after the
tragic earthquake that struck the southern peninsula
in 2021. Efforts to eliminate cholera were yielding
results. And there were high hopes that political
negotiations would set a new course for stability and
sustainable development.
2/27

21/12/2022

But at the end of 2022, Haiti is in a deepening crisis
of unprecedented scale and complexity that is cause for
serious alarm. Efforts to engage in dialogue continue
to be made on a way forward. Insecurity has reached
unprecedented levels, and human rights abuses are
widespread. Armed gangs have expanded their violent
criminal activities, using killings and gang rapes to
terrorize and subjugate communities.
Gang violence is paralysing the country and
obstructing the freedom of movement of people, goods
and humanitarian aid. It has fuelled the resurgence of
cholera, increased food insecurity to unimaginable
levels, displaced 155,000 people and disrupted the
education of thousands of children. The SecretaryGeneral and the whole United Nations stand in
solidarity with the people of Haiti during these
extremely difficult times.
Special Representative La Lime, His Excellency
Ambassador Xavier Biang and Mr. Kim Ives will brief
the Council on the details of the situation unfolding
before the eyes of the world. Allow me, in these brief
remarks, to draw attention to two aspects of the crisis.
First, Port-au-Prince and the regions beyond are
suffering the worst human rights and humanitarian
emergency in decades. As always, vulnerable
communities are suffering most. For example, 90 per
cent of cholera cases are in areas already suffering
high rates of severe acute malnutrition. I condemn in
the strongest terms the reports of widespread sexual
violence by armed gangs. The harrowing accounts in
the report issued two months ago by the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights are a
call to action and accountability. The United Nations
will continue to provide a voice for women and girls
living in communities controlled by gangs, to work to
reduce their vulnerability to violence of all kinds and to
call for justice and accountability for the perpetrators
of those heinous crimes.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for international
support and solidarity. Now is not the time for the world
to turn away from Haiti. It is time to step up and turn
the current crisis into an opportunity for Haiti to bounce
back stronger. I urge every country with the capacity
to do so to give urgent consideration to the Haitian
Government’s request for an international specialized
armed force to help restore security and alleviate the
humanitarian crisis. I have seen it on the ground: that is
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

absolutely essential if Haiti is to return to institutional
stability and get back on the road towards peace and
sustainable development. I reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for international support to the Haitian
National Police, as set out in his letter of 8 October
(S/2022/747).
Despite the end of the siege at the Varreux oil
terminal, there is a continued need for solidarity and
action from the international community. Haiti’s
people, like people everywhere, have a right to go about
their daily lives without the threat of kidnapping, rape
or murder, to access basic and life-saving services and
to exercise their political and civil rights, including the
right to vote in elections.
There are many other crises around the world,
but very few crises, if any, test our commitment and
values like the one we are witnessing in Haiti. It is
a test of the common humanity that should be at the
heart of international cooperation. It is a test of our
solidarity with people in deep suffering. During my
visit in February, I spoke with members of civil society,
students, women and girls. Those conversations gave
me hope. Now we need to help Haitians keep that hope
alive, for today and tomorrow. There is clearly an urgent
need to respond to the most immediate needs. But Haiti
will also need international support to address the
structural causes of this crisis and break the cycles that
have constrained its development for so long. Inclusive,
sustainable development is essential in its own right;
it is also humankind’s ultimate crisis-prevention tool.
The Secretary-General and I and the entire
United Nations reaffirm our solidarity and commitment
to stand with Haiti and its people and to support the
country’s recovery towards sustainable development,
democracy, stability and peace. For this new year, I call
for unity and solidarity in support of a solution to the
crisis in Haiti, led by Haitians and for all Haitians.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her introductory remarks.
I now give the floor to Ms. Li Lime.
Ms. La Lime: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to update it on the latest developments in
Haiti, which are taking place amid the alarmingly high
levels of gang violence in the country.
The siege of Haiti’s main fuel terminal, which
had coincided with months of protests, orchestrated
disruptions and armed roadblocks across the country,

S/PV.9233

came to an end in early November through a concerted
effort by the Haitian National Police. Fuel began to flow
in a number of neighbourhoods in the Port-au-Prince
area, allowing hospitals and businesses to open and
creating the semblance of a possible return to normalcy.
That hope was quickly dispelled, however, as a new
level of gang activity was immediately felt across the
capital, marked by spikes in kidnappings, killings and
rapes. November witnessed 280 intentional homicides,
the highest on record. Equally distressing is the number
of abductions for ransom. Reported kidnappings in
2022 have so far exceeded 1,200 cases — double the
number recorded in 2021 — making every commute for
the average Haitian an ordeal. The increase in recorded
rapes reflects a horrendous modus operandi of the
gangs, who, as we reported in October (see S/PV.9153),
use sexual violence to intimidate and subjugate
whole communities. The brutality with which that
violence is committed has become a badge of notoriety
for perpetrators.
Further compounding the plight of the millions
living amid the violence is the catastrophic economic
situation, with all main roads in and out of the capital
under gang control, stymieing trade. Close to half the
population is food insecure, with some 20,000 people
facing famine-like conditions. In addition to the large
levels of displacement, 34 per cent of schools remain
closed. And while State authorities do their best, with
United Nations support, to manage cholera, suspected
cases have reached 15,000 throughout the country’s
10 departments.
The adoption of resolution 2653 (2021), on 21 October,
was widely welcomed by Haitians. Subsequent
bilateral sanctions, which followed the publication of
the resolution, appeared to generate a renewed sense
of urgency on ways to restore democratically elected
institutions. Some in civil society called for sanctioned
individuals to step back and make space for necessary
reforms to restore functioning, transparent institutions.
As the debate grew, the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti continued with its efforts to advance
political dialogue. In October and November, civil
society groups launched a new round of inclusive
consultations on a transitional road map with members
of the Montana agreement, private sector associations,
trade unions and religious organizations. Out of that
process a national consensus document was developed.
It includes steps for moving the country to elections

22-766893/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

within an 18-month time frame, with a transitional
council and oversight mechanism. On 6 December, the
civil society groups leading those consultations issued
their first public communiqué as the Independent
Facilitation Committee, calling for a final agreement by
the end of 2022.
Other stakeholders have also been active. The
8 December appeal by private sector actors for changes
in business practices represented another step in the right
direction. It is important that the business community
uphold those commitments and strengthen links with
civil society and political actors for a solution to the crisis.
As I brief the Council, intensive consultations,
coupled with efforts to broaden support for the national
consensus document, are under way. I encourage all
sectors of society, for the sake of the nation, to put aside
their differences and forge a common path for taking the
country forward.
While the Government continues to invest in the
Haitian National Police (HNP), with six new armoured
vehicles received in October and a dozen more expected
in the new year, the force continues to be underresourced
and insufficiently equipped to address the enormity of
the task ahead.
Further compounding the challenges posed by the
gangs is the fact that the HNP continues to shrink. Rising
attrition levels have brought its operational strength to
under 13,000 personnel, with fewer than 9,000 available
as active-duty officers. Yes, some effective operations
against the gangs in Port-au-Prince have been mounted,
but holding those security gains continues to be a
challenge. The HNP needs assistance in the form of a
specialized force, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
letter of 8 October (S/2022/747).
Civil society groups, political organizations,
chambers of commerce and religious groups are
increasingly calling for international operational
support to the police, with clear parameters on terms of
engagement, and an integrated approach, that would work
alongside the HNP, and not substitute for it. I am grateful
to those donors that have committed themselves to the
joint programme in support to the HNP, with $17.8 million
pledged so far to the multi-donor basket fund.
Programmes to counter illicit weapons and
financial flows are now also moving, with clear national
ownership. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime has provided legal support in drafting the new
4/27

21/12/2022

customs code and is currently mapping transnational
criminal networks to understand the reality and extent of
firearms and drug trafficking in Haiti.
A significant number of Haitian interlocutors have
welcomed the recent work of the Security Council.
They support the adoption of sanctions as a crucial tool
in combating corruption and impunity. Nonetheless,
sanctions will be most effective as part of a comprehensive
approach — one that includes both the ongoing political
dialogue and enhanced operational security support to
the HNP, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s letter
of 8 October. Those three approaches in parallel will be
essential to restoring order, public confidence and the
hope that the country’s tomorrow can be better. Haitians
deserve no less.
The President: I thank Ms. La Lime for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Biang.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to brief the Security Council in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti,
as mandated by paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2653
(2022), in which the Committee undertakes to report
to the Security Council on its work within 60 days. I
would like to give the Council a brief overview of the
work carried out by the Committee since the adoption of
resolution 2653 (2022), on 21 October.
In resolution 2653 (2022), the Council demanded an
immediate cessation of the violent criminal activities
and human rights abuses that are undermining the
peace, stability and security of Haiti and the region,
including kidnappings, sexual and gender-based
violence, trafficking in persons and the smuggling of
migrants, killings, extrajudicial executions and the
recruitment of children by armed groups and criminal
networks. Consequently, the Committee imposed
measures on individuals and entities it designated as
being complicit in or having participated, directly or
indirectly, in activities that threaten peace, security
or stability in Haiti. Those measures include a travel
ban on individuals designated by the Committee; an
assets freeze on persons or entities designated by the
Committee, as well as or any individuals and entities
acting on their behalf or at their direction, or any entities
owned or controlled by them; and a targeted arms
embargo to prevent the direct or indirect provision of
any arms and related materiel to, or for the benefit of, the
individuals and entities designated by the Committee.
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

I was appointed Chair of the Committee on
2 December. I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for the confidence they have
placed in me and my delegation to lead this important
subsidiary body of the Council. On the same day that
resolution 2653 (2022) was adopted, the Secretariat
launched the 2653 Committee website, where
information on sanctions measures and the work and
mandates of the Committee can be found and will be
updated regularly.
In paragraph 19 (d) of resolution 2653 (2022), the
Security Council decided that the Committee would
establish and promulgate such guidelines as may
be necessary to facilitate the implementation of the
measures imposed by the provisions of the resolution,
namely, the travel ban, the assets freeze and the
targeted arms embargo. Following consultations with
its members, a set of draft guidelines was forwarded to
the Committee and its under consideration.
With regard to the appointment of the Panel of
Experts, I would like to point out that, on 12 December,
I circulated to the Committee a letter from the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, which included a list of four candidates
with expertise on arms, armed groups and criminal
networks, financial matters and humanitarian affairs.
We expect that in January, after the Panel of Experts
has been appointed, that those on it will travel to New
York to assume their duties, consult with the relevant
stakeholders and meet with the Committee, before
travelling to the region to begin to collect, examine and
analyse information in accordance with their mandate.
The Security Council has tasked the Committee with
seeking and reviewing information on individuals and
entities that are alleged to have engaged in the activities
described in paragraphs 15 and 16 of resolution 2653
(2022) and pose a threat to the peace, security or stability
of Haiti, as well as designating individuals and entities
to be subject to the measures imposed by the Council. In
that regard, I would like to echo the call in paragraph 23
of the resolution, in which the Security Council urges
all Member States, as well as international, regional
and subregional organizations, to ensure cooperation
with the Panel of Experts. The same paragraph also
urges all Member States to ensure the safety of the
members of the Panel of Experts and to grant them
unrestricted access, in particular to persons, documents
and sites in order for the Panel to execute its mandate.

S/PV.9233

The Panel of Experts must provide to the Security
Council an interim report in its progress no later
than 15 March 2023, in accordance with 2653 (2022).
That report will be reviewed by the Committee
before being submitted to the Council. The Panel
of Experts has also been tasked with assisting the
Committee in fulfilling its mandate, including through
providing timely information that that may be used
to subsequently identify individuals and entities
engaged in the activities described in the resolution.
I have had a number of initial contacts regarding the
implementation of resolution 2653 (2022). As mandated
by paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2653 (2022), I will
report to the Security Council on an annual basis on
ways to strengthen the effectiveness of the measures
imposed by the resolution.
The President: I thank Ambassador Biang for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ives.
Mr. Ives: I thank the members of the Security
Council for this opportunity to present our analysis of
the situation in Haiti.
I have been reporting on and in Haiti for the past
48 years, most recently last month when I travelled
there with my colleague, journalist Dan Cohen, to
investigate the fuel crisis stand-off. Using a drone, we
assessed barricades, police movements, shipping traffic
and open-air markets. Despite the gas shortage and
insecurity, we visited hospitals, clinics, an internally
displaced persons camp, an industrial park, wealthy
quarters and sewage-choked slums.
I have been asked to present the facts. But the facts
themselves are not neutral. They speak to a history
in which international law has been violated and the
principles of peace and self-determination, on which
the Council was founded, have been trampled. Those
precedents spawned the current crisis. In the past
three decades, Haiti has been the victim of three coups
d’états: in 1991, 2004 and, most recently, 2021. After
each of those crimes, which involved international
actors, the Security Council was asked, as it is being
asked today, to militarily intervene in Haiti. The
Council agreed to do so in the first two cases, thereby
essentially cementing in place an unjust and illegal
status quo. The victims of those coups — the Haitian
masses — were the ones policed, repressed, terrorized,
demonized, sexually violated, politically bullied and
economically sanctioned.

22-766895/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

That is why the 16 million Haitian people — 12 million
living in Haiti and some four million living abroad — are
patently and almost universally opposed to any more
United Nations interventions, with the exception of
Haiti’s tiny bourgeoisie. Haiti is the only country in
the Western Hemisphere to endure a United Nations
military occupation, and not once, but twice.
What is the situation today? The members of the
Security Council have been given half-truths, but as the
Indian writer Anurag Shourie notes, a half-truth is even
more dangerous than a lie, because half a truth is sure
to mislead you for long. Council members have been
told that Haiti is under the rule of gangs and that the
power of this world body is needed to punish and crush
them. The other half of the truth that members have
not been told is that the previous two United Nations
military interventions, together with the coups d’état,
have so weakened the Haitian State that it has opened
the void for the growth of such criminality.
As a result, the Haitian people have been left to
fend for themselves, forming what Haitians dubbed in
the 1980s “vigilance brigades” to combat the criminals.
Through this means, they have effectively created
neighbourhoods that are not plagued by criminals,
where the citizens are able to go about their daily affairs
in peace and security.
However, today we see some analysts, who report
to the Security Council and even publish their accounts
on authoritative media networks, conflating the
criminal gangs, which openly and unabashedly commit
kidnapping, extortion, rape, and other crimes, with the
autonomously formed civilian self-defence committees
combating
criminality.
These
self-constituted
defence committees are the very embodiment of selfdetermination and organic community action and
response. In short, the Council is lumping together the
“good guys” with the “bad guys” in one basket called
“the gangs”.
The irony is that the Security Council is now
threatening to uproot this germinating sprout of
Haitian self-defence. Indeed, in its resolution 2653
(2022) of 21 October 2022, the Security Council chose
to sanction one and only one person, accusing him of
threatening “the peace, security and stability of Haiti”
(resolution 2653 (2022), annex) and charging, on the
grounds of contested allegations, that he has “planned,
directed or committed acts that constitute serious
human rights abuses” (ibid.).
6/27

21/12/2022

The sanctioned man was not Joseph Wilson, alias
“Lamò Sanjou”, the leader of the 400 Mawozo gang, who
admittedly and publicly kidnapped 17 North American
missionaries, five French priests and two nuns last year.
It was not the self-professed kidnapper known as “Izo,”
leader of Village de Dieu’s Five Seconds gang, which
killed four Haitian cops and wounded seven others in
March 2021. It was not Renel Destina, alias “Ti Lapli,”
another proud kidnapper, whose criminal gang controls
the area of Grand Ravine and with “Izo” has cut off the
highway leading to Haiti’s southern peninsula — 40 per
cent of the country — for almost two years. It was not
Kempes Sanon, the leader of the Bel-Air gang, who was
convicted and sentenced to life in prison for kidnapping
but escaped in February 2021, killing the civilian director
of the Croix-des-Bouquets prison during his getaway.
The man whom the Security Council sanctioned
was Jimmy Cherizier, known as “Barbecue,” who is the
spokesman for a federation of neighbourhoods known
as the “Revolutionary Forces of the G9 Family and
Allies, Mess with One, You Mess with All”, which is
dedicated to keeping kidnapping, extortion, rape and
other crimes out of their midst. Cherizier got his start
as a stellar cop fighting criminal gangs. Furthermore,
Cherizier’s G9 coalition sought to decrease violence
and succeeded in establishing a truce in July 2020
between its neighbourhoods and those controlled by the
criminal gangs.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) stated in a report dated 25 September 2020
that “[i]ntentional homicides reported to the police
decreased by 12 per cent” (S/2020/944, para. 17) during
the three months from June to August 2020, a period
coinciding with the start of the G9’s truce. The mere
observation of this statistical fact so alarmed the Haitian
oligarchy that it began to spin the fiction through its radio
stations, paid pundits and political formations on both
the left and right that the BINUH and its chief Helen La
Lime had federated the G9 and were controlling it. This
rumour spread widely despite the fact that the report,
only a paragraph earlier, had characterized the G9 as
“notorious,” stating that
“[i]ts creation raised concerns among political and
civil society actors about the detrimental impact
partisan gangs can have on State institutions” (ibid.,
para. 16).
This case illustrates how quickly fiction, through
mere repetition, can become accepted as fact in the
popular discourse, leading the United Nations to target a
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

crime-fighting, truce-promoting leader in Haiti’s slums.
That an error of this magnitude can happen also shows
how easily misguided, counterproductive and blunt an
instrument the Security Council’s Chapter VII power
can be, especially when it is receiving inaccurate and
skewed information.
Sanctions should be evidence-based, not the result
of political machinations. For example, on 26 September
2022, Ms. La Lime informed the Security Council that
Haitian Prime Minister Ariel Henry wanted
“dialogue as a means to create the necessary
security, constitutional and political conditions for
elections by the end of 2023” (S/PV.9136, p. 2).
She should have noted that Ariel Henry is a de facto
Head of Government with virtually no popular support
or legal mandate. What little legitimacy he might have
had expired on 7 February 2022, with the definitive end
of the late Jovenel Moïse’s term. In the 17 months that
he has held power, thanks to his appointment by the socalled Core Group of ambassadors led by La Lime and
Washington, Henry has made absolutely no progress
establishing dialogue or in creating the groundwork
for elections. On the contrary, he disbanded the sitting
Provisional Electoral Council two months after taking
power and has not reconstituted it. Most observers
agree that the likelihood of free and fair elections
taking place in the coming year is practically nil.
She also told the Council that Henry decided
“to reduce regressive subsidies on fuel which costs
the State some $400 million a year, as a means of
increasing revenue for social programmes” (ibid.).
On the contrary, the fuel subsidies, which allow
Haitian public transport, open air markets and tens
of thousands of small peasants and enterprises to
function, were not “regressive”. They were one of
the few measures that helped to ease the burden of
crushing poverty on Haiti’s masses, and there are no
social programmes in Haiti to speak of. It was therefore
predictable that Henry’s move, which Brian Nichols,
Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere
Affairs, said were “actions that we [ha]ve wanted to see
in Haiti for quite some time”, precipitated, as Ms. La
Lime reported,
“roadblocks [that were] set up throughout the
country, generating a countrywide lockdown”
(S/PV.9136, p. 2).

S/PV.9233

Ironically, the response being proposed to such
uprisings is yet another foreign military intervention.
The last sustained United Nations military mission
to Haiti — the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti — lasted 13 years, from 2004 to 2017, at a
cost of about $7 billion, or on average approximately
$538.5 million a year. Leaving aside moral and political
principles, would it not be more cost effective to
underwrite the Haitian State with fuel subsidies for
$400 million annually than deploy troops at a much
higher cost?
Council members were also told that
“one of the largest alliances of criminal gangs in
the capital blocked the nation’s main fuel terminal
in Varreux, in Port-au-Prince” (ibid.).
First, why does Ms. La Lime refer in this context
to “criminal gangs” but then does not characterize
Ariel Henry as a “criminal”? He has been credibly
accused, based on phone records, of many extended
phone conversations with Joseph Félix Badio, the man
said to have ordered Colombian mercenaries to fatally
machine-gun President Jovenel Moïse on 7 July 2021.
Henry fired a Haitian judge who sought to question
him about the calls, which occurred both before and
just hours after the murder.
Secondly, the alliance of so-called criminal
gangs La Lime refers to is the G9, the crime-fighting
federation headed by Jimmy Cherizier. The barricades
they erected outside the Varreux fuel terminal, which
is one of three fuel depots in the capital, were in
solidarity with the nationwide lockdown and the entire
population’s demands.
Thirdly, with barricades established throughout the
country, why did she focus on just the barricades near
the fuel terminal? What difference does it make if a fuel
truck can travel five blocks instead of one block? The
many road barricades and demonstrations throughout
the city would have curtailed fuel deliveries at that
time, but the principal factor disrupting gas distribution
was the price hike, which more than doubled the cost of
fuel overnight.
Council members were told in the briefing that
the Varreux barricade was “creating shortages across
the country and closing down hospitals” (ibid.). This is
another half-truth. Over a month after the September
briefing, in early November, we visited the General
Hospital, Haiti’s largest, where the administrator told us

22-766897/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

that the hospital had never closed down and that it had
been harder to obtain fuel since August, when supplies
became short due to the Government not paying its gas
bills, and even more difficult after the price hike.
The Special Representative concluded her briefing
by saying that “[a]n economic crisis, a gang crisis and
a political crisis have converged into a humanitarian
catastrophe” (ibid, p. 3), having just underlined “the
very real limits of the national [police] force” (ibid.).
We believe this was clearly setting the stage for Ariel
Henry’s 9 October request to the Security Council
for foreign military intervention, which is in flagrant
violation of the Haitian Constitution’s Article 263-1,
which forbids foreign troops on Haitian soil.
The proponents of foreign intervention in Haiti are
well aware of the Haitian people’s opposition and its
bad optics before the eyes of the world, especially since
it has been tried before, unsuccessfully. Former United
States Ambassador to Haiti Pamela White suggested
this month that the Biden Administration deploy 2,000
armed law enforcers to Haiti, but to send in a couple of
hundred at a time, over six months, with little fanfare.
Some officials have also suggested deploying small
special forces units to train the Haitian National Police.
As in Viet Nam in the early 1960s, that risks simply
becoming the thin edge of the wedge. Tellingly, the
same Pamela White recommended, in a March 2021
congressional hearing, that President Moïse be “put
aside” and that Washington embrace what she called
“the Prime Minister option.” That has effectively come
to pass.
Those power dynamics are what is most alarming
about the situation in Haiti today. Foreign actors are
deciding what leaders Haitians should have, and a
Prime Minister with no legal or popular mandate is
running roughshod over the Haitian Constitution.
Now foreign nations are debating yet another military
invasion, supposedly to save unwilling Haitians from a
so-called “humanitarian catastrophe.”
We at Haiti Liberté strongly believe that the
situation in Haiti cannot be resolved through foreign
intervention, military force or even sanctions. The
Haitian people, acting with full sovereignty, must be
allowed to sort out their own problems, just as they
did 219 years ago when they founded Latin America’s
first nation. The only thing the United Nations or any
other foreign entity might do is provide Haiti with
disinterested economic support to rebuild their ravaged
8/27

21/12/2022

economy and political institutions destroyed by three
decades of coups d’états, military interventions and
neoliberal austerity.
We call on the Council to respect the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular Article 2, paragraph 7, which states that:
“[n]othing contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state”.
The President: I thank Mr. Ives for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Special Representative Helen La
Lime for their briefings. We also thank American
journalist and editor of Haiti Liberté, Mr. Kim Ives,
for his fascinating and open-minded insight into the
situation in the country. We believe it very useful to
invite briefers who can provide the Security Council
additional information that enables us to consider issues
on the agenda from different perspectives. We also
welcome the participation of the Foreign Ministers of
Haiti and the Dominican Republic in today’s meeting.
Much was said today about the current situation in
Haiti. We will not repeat it. The depth of the political,
economic and humanitarian crisis that the country
that the country finds itself in is obvious to everyone.
It is also clear that there are no ready-made recipes
to resolve the crisis and return Haiti to the path of
sustainable development.
Short-term decisions might ease the pain of the
long-suffering Haitian nation, but they will not be
able to cure it. If we consider the unblocking of the oil
terminal, which was presented as a panacea, it did not
facilitate the population’s long-awaited access to basic
goods and services. Just like a majority of Haitians, we
have doubts that the option of sending an international
military force could fundamentally change the situation.
If we want to identify truly effective steps, it is
important to have a holistic understanding of the causes
of the current situation in Haiti. The chronic crisis of
governance, socioeconomic collapse and institutional
and legal decay of the island State is, to a large extent, the
result of many years of external political engineering.
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

The historical responsibility for that rests not only with
Washington, which has repeatedly interfered in Haiti’s
internal affairs, including militarily, but also with
Paris. It was colonial France that, for more than 100
years after the liberation of Haiti, received from it socalled “payments for independence”, imposed through
blackmail and military ultimatums. That was the first
and only time in history when those freed from slavery
were forced to pay their oppressors. Huge remittances,
equivalent to billions of dollars today, were transferred
to French bankers and landowners, instead of serving
the development of a young country.
Today the former colonial Powers have changed
their methods, but not their colonial approaches.
Interference in Haiti’s internal affairs takes place
through the imposition of decisions and the installation
of political actors outside Haiti’s legal framework. As
a result, the country has no authorities legitimately
chosen in accordance with the national Constitution.
Ongoing international involvement in Haitian affairs has
instilled in some local elites the feeling of dependency
and permissiveness and has led them to believe that
their future depends not on the will of the people, but
on the benevolence of external patrons and sponsors.
In that connection, the true task of the international
community is to help initiate a nationwide political
dialogue in order to develop a level playing field for
forming a truly legitimate Government. Haitian political
forces, both those in power and opposition parties, need
to act constructively in order to independently put their
own house in order.
We are surprised that this clear political signal to
the Haitian elite is not coming from the United States,
which is quick to brand the Governments of some Latin
American countries as unconstitutional, while at the
same time is very protective of other regimes that are
loyal to it. Is there not a 2001 Inter-American Democratic
Charter in force that establishes clear criteria under
which a suspension of the constitutional process can take
place and the procedure for an international response?
Where is the reaction, in accordance with that charter,
to the dubious legitimacy — to be generous — of most
Haitian authorities?
We know what Washington does when it needs
to subjugate yet another country. It utilizes unilateral
sanctions against the undesirable political figures and
aimed at cleaning up the political field in a way that is
favourable to the United States. Canada does the same.

S/PV.9233

For example, we know that the Canadian sanctions
list includes at least two former Prime Ministers of
Haiti who intend to contest this decision. We warn
against presenting these measures as a reaction of
the entire international community in the framework
of the Security Council Sanctions Committee. The
Committee was established pursuant to a Security
Council resolution precisely to avoid unilateral
action and elaborate joint solutions while engaging
specialized experts in order to assess the feasibility and
appropriateness of possible restrictions.
The information shared today by Mr. Ives should
compel all of us to adopt an even more thorough
approach with regard to sanctions. Otherwise, we risk
imposing sanctions not against gang members, but
rather against the political opposition, who could take
part in the nation-wide dialogue, but for whatever reason
are undesirable to the United States and its satellites.
I once again stress that unilateral measures by the
United States and Canada do not represent the will of
the international community and should not serve as a
cornerstone for the new Sanctions Committee on Haiti.
We count on the productive work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti, with Gabon
as its Chair, es well as the selected experts who we
know to be outstanding professionals. We note that
the sanctions resolution provides for the examination
of the sources and routes of arms smuggling, including
through the use of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime channels.
Ultimately, we need to not only identify but also
to eliminate financial and material resources fuelling
gangs, first and foremost, in the areas of weapons and
drug trafficking, which are the lifeblood of the criminal
groups reigning over Haiti and the main reason for the
breakdown of law and order. For our part, as a permanent
member of the Security Council, we stand ready to
continue to help ensure that the Haitian people enjoy not
only order and the rule of law, but are provided with the
opportunity for a free and democratic political process
and sustainable economic development and prosperity,
which is not only important for Haiti, but for the
Dominican Republic as Haiti’s immediate neighbour.
The extent to which the situation is important for the
Dominican Republic is demonstrated by the presence
of that country’s Foreign Minister at this meeting. And
it is important for the entire region.

22-766899/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the briefings by Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Helen La Lime
and Ambassador Biang, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), concerning Haiti. We take note of the briefing
by Mr. Ives and welcome the Foreign Ministers of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic and the representative
of Canada.
When Mexico joined the Security Council in 2021,
the focus was centred upon the holding of a constitutional
referendum and elections. The assassination of
President Moïse, the circumstances of which remain
unclear, further exacerbated the existing violence
that prevented and continue to prevent the holding of
elections, while gangs have taken over key parts of the
country and obstructed the delivery of humanitarian
aid and basic goods. Those and many other factors
led us to sponsor a resolution to target those criminals
with sanctions. I underscore that they are not sanctions
against the Haitian population. We have taken note
that, following the adoption of resolution 2653 (2022),
which was adopted unanimously, the new sanctions
regime has begun to have an impact on the situation
on the ground. We are confident that, as the Sanctions
Committee begins its work, supported by a newly
appointed independent group of experts, measures
will continue to be taken against those responsible for
the violence and instability, including — I stress this
point — those involved in arms trafficking.
It is clear that sanctions alone will not bring about
all the changes needed and that further action is required
to support the Haitian people. We acknowledge that we
must maintain a sense of urgency. But, at the same time,
we must draw on lessons learned, as we must carefully
determine the best way, or ways, to continue supporting
Haiti. Concurrently, the main political actors in Haiti
must also reach the minimum consensus with regard to
the future of their own country. The domestic political
work to be done must be done by the Haitians and the
Haitians alone.
Meeting the many needs of the Haitian people
also, of course, involves acknowledging their social
root causes — the legacy of colonialism, exclusion,
abuses, human rights violations and environmental
degradation, to name a few of the factors that must
be considered. It is also imperative to end corruption.
10/27

21/12/2022

When he spoke specifically on the matter before the
Council in November 2021, President Andrés Manuel
López Obrador said,
“corruption is the main cause of inequality, poverty,
frustration, violence, migration and serious social
conflicts.” (S/PV.8900, p.6)
As the first independent nation in Latin America
and the Caribbean and an example of freedom,
resistance and perseverance, Haiti must not be allowed
to fall prey to petty political rivalries or geopolitical
games of chess. Mexico will continue to urge that we
must respond on multiple fronts to the Haitian crisis,
and it will maintain its cooperation programmes with
all Haitian institutions. But we must also explore
new avenues of support as long as the measures that
have been taken are insufficient. We therefore call on
the international community and the United Nations
system to avoid inertia and burnout with regard to the
Haitian issue and urge Haitian leaders to shoulder their
responsibility in creating the conditions necessary for
stability in the genuine interests of the Haitian people.
As this is the last statement on behalf of my
country as an elected member of the Security Council
and as co-penholder, together with the United States
of America, on this dossier, I would like to say that
Mexico will continue to follow closely developments in
the situation in Haiti and will stand ready to continue
cooperating with the Council and the authorities and
the people of Haiti to the best of its ability.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
the briefers for their participation. Before I give my
remarks, I would like to welcome Foreign Ministers
Généus and Álvarez Gil at this meeting today, and I
look forward to hearing their perspectives on the
current situation in Haiti.
The United States continues to work to address
Haiti’s insecurity and worsening humanitarian crisis
and support Haitian-led efforts to facilitate a political
accord that would benefit all Haitians. We understand
Prime Minister Henry is hoping for an agreement on a
broad-based political accord before the end of the year.
We are cautiously optimistic following the 8 December
statement from influential members of Haiti’s private
sector, which expressed support for a consensus-based
accord. That is the first time Haiti’s private sector
leaders have united to such an extent in support of a
political accord and democratic institutional reforms.
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.9233

We appreciate Ambassador Biang’s update on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti, and the
sanctions covering the first 60 days following its
21 October adoption establishing the sanctions regime.
We are pleased that four highly qualified candidates
have been selected to fill critical Panel of Experts
vacancies covering finance, humanitarian affairs,
armed groups, criminal networks and arms. We are
also grateful for the progress Gabon has made to draft
working guidelines for the Sanctions Committee.

following the August 2021 earthquake, the United States
has provided more than $171 million in life-saving
humanitarian assistance and early-recovery, riskreduction and resilience programming since fiscal year
2021. We are also expanding our emergency assistance
to respond to growing protection concerns, help stem
the cholera outbreak and deliver essential food and
other commodities to the most vulnerable communities
in Port-au-Prince and throughout the country. We call
on other donors to increase support during this critical
period for Haiti.

Together with our partner and co-penholder,
Mexico, we introduced the resolution establishing
a sanctions regime as an important step to help the
Haitian people. The United States has also placed visa
restrictions on parties known to have colluded with
criminal gangs in Haiti. Those steps have already
begun to have a chilling effect on gang leaders and
the political and economic elites that are causing and
financing the ongoing crises in Haiti. But we do not
plan to stop there. We will continue to target violent
gang leaders and their financiers. We are identifying
additional targets to nominate at the United Nations in
order to halt funding to those involved in the unrest
in Haiti.

We recognize that any security gains must also be
tied to a political accord among Haiti’s various actors,
and we call on the Haitian people to find a way to achieve
an inclusive, broad-based consensus on moving forward
with a political accord. We recognize the need to support
institutional reforms, in addition to addressing Haiti’s
immediate security and humanitarian needs. Through
the 10-year Global Fragility Act plan, the United States
seeks to address the root causes of instability, building on
justice sector reform, while addressing civic engagement
and economic opportunity. We also urge partner nations
to contribute to the United Nations basket fund, given
the dire need to change the security situation in Haiti.

We are encouraged by the fact that the Haitian
National Police was able to re-establish control over
the Varreux fuel terminal. Despite that positive
development, violence and insecurity remain an
everyday concern for Haitians. Ongoing kidnappings,
the use of sexual violence and rape by gangs, clashes
between gangs and the blockage of the country’s main
roads remain significant challenges. For that reason, we
continue to advocate for international security support,
including a non-United Nations multinational force, as
requested by the Haitian Government.
The United States has provided more than
$90 million in security support to Haiti in the past 18
months and will continue to provide critical bilateral
support. We also continue to provide life-saving aid
as the Haitian people struggle to cope with a rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation that includes
famine-like conditions in parts of Port-au-Prince and
the country-wide spread of cholera.
For its part, the United States has always been
the largest humanitarian donor to the historically
underfunded United Nations appeal for Haiti. In
response to heightened humanitarian needs, including

Without improved security, progress on the political,
economic and humanitarian fronts will be impossible.
We encourage the international community to continue
focusing on Haiti and to work to address all those needs.
Ms. Miley (Ireland): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Mohammed and Special Representative La
Lime for their sobering briefings, and Mr. Ives for
his analysis. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Gabon for his first briefing as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), concerning Haiti. I also wish to acknowledge the
presence in the Chamber of the Foreign Minister of Haiti
and the Foreign Minister of the Dominican Republic, as
well as the Ambassador of Canada.
In the two months since we last met (see S/PV.9153),
there have been few positive developments in Haiti.
Instead of the progress called for and that the Haitian
people so desperately need, we have seen a further
entrenching of violence and deprivation. I wish to speak
about three areas of enduring concern.
First, there has been no end or respite to the savage
control and repression exercised by criminal gangs
against the Haitian people. Each day sees an increasing
toll of violence, kidnappings and systematic rape and

22-7668911/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

murder. The use of sexual and gender-based violence
as a weapon against an already traumatized community
is abhorrent. Ireland again condemns such violence in
the strongest terms. Those responsible must end their
onslaught against the Haitian people. Those responsible
must be brought to justice.
Haiti’s leaders from all sides need to come together
to end the cycle of violence and impunity, which has
plagued Haiti for too long. While we welcome the
end of the blockade of the Varreux terminal, which
liberated some supply of fuel into Haiti, it does not
signal a return to law and order. The people of Haiti
will know peace only when the State regains control of
the national territory. Ireland welcomes efforts in that
regard to provide support to the Haitian National Police.
Secondly, a humanitarian catastrophe is in evidence
in Haiti. The most recent update on conflict and hunger,
issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Food Programme,
underlined what we already knew — an increasing
number of Haitians have been driven to catastrophic
levels of food insecurity and famine-like conditions.
People are dying from lack of food, lack of water and
lack of access to basic services.
Ireland commends the efforts of the humanitarian
community, which has stayed and delivered in the face of
intimidation, kidnappings and violence. Its actions hold
communities back from the brink, while maintaining
families on the edge of survival. Those desperate and
life-saving efforts require the continued support of the
international community. The humanitarian response
remains less than half funded, and more lives will be
lost without increased support to actors on the ground.
Thirdly, the prolonged suffering of the Haitian
people will persist without an immediate and
sustainable political resolution. Ireland reiterates its
urgent call to political actors in Haiti to set aside their
vested interests, enmity, division and personal gain
and come together in solidarity to take action that is,
finally, in the best interests of the Haitian people.
The unanswered calls of the international
community and of the Haitian people for a political
breakthrough serve only to condemn more people
to food insecurity; more communities to the scourge
of gang violence; more women, girls and LGBTIQ+
individuals to sexual and gender-based violence and
more children to a life dominated by fear.
12/27

21/12/2022

Time and again, we have heard that political
settlement is possible. Yet the people of Haiti are
sentenced to endure further suffering due to the lack
of political will. Peace, stability and dignity cannot be
assured for the Haitian people without a sustainable,
inclusive political solution, owned and led by the Haitian
people. That solution should lead to the restitution of a
functioning Government, a functioning legislature and
a functioning judicial system.
We call on all relevant actors in Haiti to act and
take a courageous step for the good of their country.
The people of Haiti deserve no less. Bold, urgent action
must be taken before Haiti passes the point of no return.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Helen La
Lime and Ambassador Michel Biang of Gabon for
their comprehensive briefings. I also took note of the
briefing made by Mr. Ives.
I would like to congratulate Ambassador Biang on
his assumption of the chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022),
concerning Haiti. I wish him the best of luck in that
important position.
I thank Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Worship of Haiti, and Mr. Roberto
Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic, for being here today.
Since our previous meeting in October (see
S/PV.9153), there has been some progress on the ground,
especially with the liberation of the Varreux fuel
terminal, which is responsible for 70 per cent of Haiti’s
fuel supply. That shows the capacity and commitment
of the Haitian National Police. However, the overall
situation remains challenging and worrisome as gangs
continue to be a disruptive force within the society,
making it almost impossible for the resumption of
institutional normalcy and the proper functioning of
public services. Furthermore, the current outbreak
of cholera will pose significant risks to the Haitian
population if it is not adequately controlled.
As Haiti remains deeply plunged in a
multidimensional crisis, the lack of progress on the
political front over the past month is staggering. The
current political deadlock and the humanitarian and
security crises in Haiti reinforce each other. A political
agreement among the main political groups in Haiti is
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

key for the country to begin the process of healing and
to re-establish institutional and democratic governance
No significant progress will be possible in Haiti if the
main political constituencies remain entrenched and
averse to compromise.
We hope that the sanctions regime adopted
unanimously in October will effectively establish
targeted sanctions against those engaging in or
supporting violence, whether powerful or not. As some
Council members are already imposing unilateral
sanctions against some Haitian individuals, we believe
that it is time for the Security Council Sanctions
Committee on Haiti to move forward with its own
deliberations. We took note of the options conveyed
by the Secretary-General in his letter of 8 October
(S/2022/747) to increase security in Haiti and the
appeal by Government of Haiti to receive specialized
armed support to help control the crisis in the country.
We look forward to engaging with Council members on
a draft resolution on the matter, whenever the details of
such a response are ripe for multilateral consideration.
Haiti needs change that goes well beyond the
control of criminal activities. Besides security
measures, socioeconomic progress in Haiti is essential
for addressing the crisis in an effective and sustainable
way. Haiti remains a top priority in Brazil’s international
cooperation projects, and we urge the donor community
to step up its efforts towards effectively fostering
economic and social development.
In conclusion, Brazil would like to once again
exhort all Haitian political actors to deepen the current
dialogue and urgently agree on a political way forward.
Brazil believes in Haitian-led solutions, which will
materialize only if Haitian stakeholders accept to talk
and compromise, paving the way for fair elections and
the resumption of the normal functioning of Haitian
institutions. For our part, I would like to underline that
Haiti has been a priority for Brazil and will remain so.
Brazil has made a long-standing contribution to peace
and stability in Haiti and remains fully committed
to supporting the country, particularly in these
challenging times.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): We thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Helen La
Lime, as well as Ambassador Michel Biang, Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), concerning Haiti, and Mr. Kim Ives, Editor of

S/PV.9233

Haiti Liberté, for their briefings. We also welcome the
participation of Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Worship of Haiti, and Mr. Roberto
Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic, in today’s meeting. I also look
forward to the statement to be delivered by Ambassador
Bob Rae of Canada on behalf of the Economic and
Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.
Looking back at the past two years, the situation
in Haiti has gone from bad to worse. At the root of the
crisis is a governance deficit that must be addressed.
That deficit is the outcome of an outrageous history
of economic punishment for Haiti’s revolution against
slavery and colonialism. It has been worsened by
failed foreign interventions and the unholy alliance
among gangs, politicians and business elites. Such
is the scale of the immediate emergency that it often
obscures how critical it is to address those root causes
if Haiti is to truly recover. We therefore urge the
members of the Security Council and the international
community to ensure that action with and for Haiti
concurrently deploy emergency measures alongside
more structural efforts to provide credible, competent
and responsible governance.
In the short term, Haitians need more operational
support for the brave and dedicated Haitian National
Police (HNP). The HNP should receive training,
adequate equipment and capabilities that it may not yet
possess in adequate quantities. The focus should be to
make the HNP able to guarantee the safe and reliable
provision of emergency supplies of food, fuel and health
care, as well as to put a stop to the kidnappings and
the control of roads and other critical infrastructure by
gangs. Without such action to establish a floor to Haitian
misery, a transition to better governance and credible
elections will not succeed. We commend Canada, the
United States and other international partners for their
efforts so far to assist the Haitian National Police with
training and equipment. More such support is still
needed. We welcome the Government of Haiti’s request
to receive multinational support that provides targeted
assistance to the Haitian National Police, as well as
support for vetting, intelligence and rapid deployment.
Kenya is ready to contribute to such an effort.
Our assessment of the gangs and their links
to transnational crime, as well as their political
patronage and their recruitment of young people who
are unemployed, suggests that they operate like the
militias that the Security Council is familiar with.

22-7668913/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

Experience shows that they can be overcome by
coordinating mediation, a credible political process, a
strong enforcement capability, livelihood support and
institutional support. On the aspect of institutions, it is
crucial that immediate support be given to strengthening
the most important sections of the criminal justice
system that are required by an active police service.
That includes addressing prolonged pre-trial detentions,
expediting court cases and establishing functioning
court registries.
In addition to those efforts, the Haiti Sanctions
Committee should closely align its listings to
cause maximum disruption to the nexus between
transnational crime, illicit business and the gangs. The
United Nations and the international community will
also need to support Haiti to implement its national
action plan on the Caribbean Community Road Map on
the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition.
A new intervention backed by the Security Council
should apply the valuable lessons learned in the past
without repeating the disastrous mistakes. It would have
a clear scope of tasks, a concept of operations and an
exit strategy. Moreover, in order to gain the confidence
of the Haitian people, it would consider including key
African and Caribbean contributions.
The actions I have recommended are necessary
but insufficient. If they are to succeed and if a newly
optimistic Haiti is to be reborn, the root causes of
the crisis need to be addressed. One way to do that
is by ensuring an inclusive political transition that is
committed to a national dialogue that delivers political
reforms that are embedded in a legal and — even
possibly — a constitutional dispensation. International
financial institutions should align their work in Haiti with
the efforts to provide security and a political transition,
strengthen critical governance institutions and provide
environmental-crisis recovery. The authorities in Haiti
should also consider engaging with the Peacebuilding
Commission and undertaking a nationally owned and
inclusive process alongside the political transition.
Next for consideration is a neutral and transparent
inquiry into the international and historical dimensions
of the multigenerational crises the Haitian people have
suffered. It should offer recommendations for the
international community and Haiti on a way forward.
From the beginning of our term as a member on
the Council, Kenya has engaged vigorously and in good
faith on this file. Our sense of fairness and inclusion has
14/27

21/12/2022

impelled us, and we have also paid heed to the African
Union’s recognition of our duty to reconnect with the
African diaspora. We have tried listening keenly to
Haitians and about the Haiti they want.
In 2021, Kenya, along with the other two African
members of the Council, the Niger and Tunisia, as well
as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — known then as
the A3+1 — worked to that end. We have also made such
efforts as part of this year’s A3, consisting of Gabon,
Ghana and Kenya, alongside other Council members,
to strengthen the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti and to apply sanctions to the gangs and those who
support and fund them, in order to stop illegal arms
trafficking and money laundering. This being the last
scheduled briefing before the end of our present term,
allow me to take the opportunity to reflect on what we
have learned about the Security Council that can best
be of service to Haiti in our opinion.
All conflict — and especially political
division — leads to exceptional levels of division and
mistrust. Such levels of mistrust can be identified in
today’s briefing. In Africa, the dynamics of internal
economic and political crisis and the mistrust of
outside intervention are familiar. What Africa has built
Haiti needs, namely, to be part of a strong regional
initiative that includes Haiti’s neighbours and the
CARICOM region. Our linkage with peers and peer
leaders, the use of regional consultations and the
rallying of international support to buttress regional
work have served us well. Africa’s peace and security
architecture has valuable lessons that I am certain
African countries and institutions would be willing to
share. From mediation to local peace work, anti-militia
demobilization and reintegration and enforcement, we
have experience in it.
Haiti inspired a worldwide movement for freedom.
Its revolutionary actions even led directly to the major
developments in the establishment of our host country.
Now we urge Haiti to look to the rest of its region
and to Africa for inspiration. Kenya will continue to
support Haiti bilaterally and in the multilateral arena,
including with the Economic and Social Council’s Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti and any other efforts that
are for the good of the Haitian people.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, for her
statement as well as Special Representative La Lime
for her briefing on the prevailing developments in
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti. I also thank the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), Ambassador Michel Biang, for his briefing on
the activities undertaken by the Committee since the
adoption of resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti. We
have also listened carefully to Mr. Kim Ives and noted
his perspectives. Further, we welcome the participation
of the Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican
Republic as well as the Permanent Representative of
Canada in today’s meeting.
Today’s discussion is happening at a critical time
for Haiti. Even as the Security Council is building upon
efforts to support Haitians in their quest for a Haitianled solution to the ongoing crisis, the country continues
to grapple with an ever-deteriorating situation on the
back of decades of challenges that threaten the very
lives of ordinary Haitians. As we have heard today,
our actions should therefore be decisive and proactive
if we are to effectively address the complex security,
humanitarian, socioeconomic and political situation
in Haiti.
As we have amply highlighted in the Security
Council, we owe the people of Haiti a duty to support
their long-held aspirations for peace, security, prosperity and inclusive growth. I would make two additional
brief points.
First, Ghana continues to be concerned by the
problem of armed gangs in Haiti. The grip of the gangs
on most of Haiti’s territory and the consequential
violence being perpetrated are troubling. It is evident
that until the activities of Haiti’s violent gangs are
reined in and replaced by a professional police force,
there can be no security and stability in Haiti.
Although in recent weeks the Haitian security
forces have managed to regain control of the Varreux
oil terminal, and fuel distribution has resumed in the
capital, gangsters control the main roads to the north
and south obstructing supply to other regions. In this
context, we look forward to the timely constitution
of the panel of experts and its important work, which
we believe will be instrumental in the effective
implementation of targeted sanctions against gang
leaders and their sponsors within and outside of Haiti.
We recognize, however, that sanctioning gang leaders
and their sponsors, by itself, is not enough, and much
more needs to be done to support Haitians on their path
to security and stability.

S/PV.9233

Secondly, we need to build upon the Council’s
unified efforts on the Haitian sanctions regime to
address another immediate challenge. We stated before,
and I repeat it today, that the Haitian National Police
must be capacitated to deal with the threat posed by the
armed gangs and bring needed respite to the people. We
therefore encourage enhanced regional consultations
with Haiti on the pending proposals for the deployment
of an international security assistance force to Haiti that
the Security Council can support. This would have to be
braced by support for the enhancement of the capacity
of the Haitian National Police and the strengthening of
State institutions, including the criminal justice system,
if we are to counter the immediate threat posed by armed
gangs in Haiti.
While we need to be guided by past mistakes, we
cannot afford inaction in the face of the deteriorating
situation in Haiti. We must therefore work more
collaboratively with other actors to move Haiti closer to
the much-desired security, prosperity and stability that
its people want, while bearing in mind the long-term
strategy to prevent the recurrence of the ongoing security
crisis, which will hinge on our collective and sustained
commitment to addressing such deep-rooted causes
as endemic poverty, unemployment and inequality in
Haitian society.
I cannot conclude without mentioning the elusive
sought-after solution to the political crisis in Haiti. We
call on all political actors to step up efforts to bring the
Haitian people into a national consensus in favour of a
Haitian-led political process that can define a path to
national elections. The gravity of the situation in Haiti
demands urgent action by all stakeholders, without
which we risk witnessing the continuing deterioration of
the socioeconomic, security and humanitarian situation,
with untold suffering for ordinary Haitians.
Finally, we reiterate our unwavering commitment
and support for the people of Haiti. We remain supportive
of a Haitian-led and Haitian-owned solution and express
our support for the work of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime
and Ambassador Biang for their briefings. I welcome
the presence of the Foreign Ministers of Haiti and
the Dominican Republic as well as the Permanent
Representative of Canada at today’s meeting. I also
listened attentively to the statement by Mr. Ives.

22-7668915/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

In 2022, a year that is drawing to a close, Haiti has
seen continuing political stalemate, with still-rampant
gangs, a resurgence of cholera, severe food and energy
shortages, and growing violence against women and
children. The Haitian people are struggling in ever
deeper agony and despair.
China attaches great importance to the situation
in Haiti. This year we pushed for three urgent
Security Council deliberations thereon and were the
first to propose sanctions against the gangs and their
supporters that undermine peace and security in the
country, request that the Secretary-General submit
recommendations on how to help the Haitian National
Police combat gangs, and ask the Haitian Government
to update the Security Council on its political process.
Thanks to the joint efforts of Council members, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2653
(2022) in October this year, imposing sanctions
measures, including a travel ban, an assets freeze and an
arms embargo against the Haitian gangs, and translating
into action the consensus on curbing gang violence and
crimes with a view to protecting the Haitian people
and restoring security and social order in the country.
China supports Gabon in fulfilling its duties as
Chair of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022) and hopes to see the Committee
and its panel of experts become operational promptly,
carry out their work as mandated with urgency, in
particular by reviewing and updating the sanctions
list and monitoring implementation of the sanctions
measures so that the sanctions regime will effectively
produce the expected effect of deterring gangsters and
curbing violent crimes.

21/12/2022

and the constitutional referendum have been postponed
repeatedly. The people of Haiti cannot wait indefinitely.
The state of anarchy caused by the shutdown of State
institutions must end as soon as possible. We urge all
political parties and factions in Haiti to engage in broad
dialogue and consultations in order to reach an early
consensus on the political process and arrangements for
the transition period and to come up with a clear and
feasible timetable.
Two months ago, the Haitian Government, pursuant
to resolution 2645 (2022), updated the Council on its
domestic political process. Given the ongoing political
stalemate in Haiti, the Security Council should
continue to ask the Haitian Government to provide
updates on relevant developments. The Council could
also consider engaging and conducting dialogues with
the representative political factions in Haiti, including
through Arria Formula meetings, in order to encourage
them to work together to advance an inclusive
political process.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti should play a constructive role in reaching a
Haitian-led and-owned solution and should provide
a platform for inclusive political dialogue among all
parties and factions in Haiti. At the same time, we must
act in accordance with the mandate, respect the choices
of the Haitian people and avoid creating the impression
of meddling, or even interfering in, Haitian politics. We
also encourage and support the efforts of the Caribbean
Community to help resolve the issue of Haiti and defuse
the crisis in the country.

The security situation in Haiti remains dire, with
no signs of any significant let-up in gang violence.
China has stressed on many occasions that preventing
gangs from illegally acquiring weapons is essential
to improving Haiti’s security situation. The Haitian
authorities must earnestly assume their responsibilities
in this regard. Equally indispensable are the support
and cooperation of neighbouring countries and the
relevant organizations. We see that some countries
of the region have recently announced new measures
to control arms exports to Haiti, and we expect those
measures to achieve positive results.

As the work of the Security Council draws to a
close this year, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and
Norway and to bid them farewell. We thank them for
their constructive participation in the Council’s affairs
and for their contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security during their tenure as
elected members. China looks forward to strengthening
cooperation with the five new elected members in order
to jointly promote solidarity and consensus, practice
multilateralism and work to ensure that the Security
Council can effectively fulfil the duties and mission
conferred upon it by the Charter of the United Nations.

Since the assassination of former President Moïse,
in July 2021, the Haitian Government, Parliament and
judiciary have been paralysed, and presidential elections

Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Helen La Lime for
her briefing and efforts as well as the efforts of the

16/27

22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). I
also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, for her introductory remarks. We also
congratulate Gabon on chairing the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), concerning Haiti, and thank its Permanent
Representative for his briefing as Chair of the
Committee. We welcome the participation of the
Foreign Ministers of Haiti, the Dominican Republic and
the representative of Canada in today’s meeting. We
also listened carefully to the briefing by Mr. Kim Ives.
As we continue to follow the concerning situation
in Haiti, the ending of the blockade of the Varreux fuel
terminal last month was an important development. It
will provide relief for many people in Haiti, who depend
on fuel for accessing services and basic commodities.
However, there are still many challenges that must be
addressed, including the closure of roads and control of
neighbourhoods by gangs. That directly impedes access
to ambulances, medical personnel, humanitarian aid
and basic commodities, in addition to the resurgence
of cholera in Haiti. We stress that the impact of gang
control on the daily lives and security of civilians is
unacceptable, and we should not ignore it.
We also remain concerned by the rampant levels
of sexual and gender-based violence in Haiti. Once
more, we reiterate the denunciation of the United
Arab Emirates to such unacceptable acts. The Council
must utilize the tools available to us to address those
challenges, including through the recently adopted
sanctions regime and the specific classification criteria
aimed at targeting those who perpetrate and facilitate
such abhorrent acts.
We underscore the need to achieve progress on the
political level in order to put Haiti on the path to peace
and improve the humanitarian, economic and security
situations in the country. It is also imperative to
maintain any progress made and continue to prioritize
an inclusive, Haitian-led and Haitian-owned dialogue.
As such, it is important to focus on the political
process, and we look forward to further updates in that
regard. Constructive engagement by the international
community and Haitian actors is necessary to chart a path
towards an environment conducive to holding peaceful
elections as soon as the security situation permits.
In all our efforts, we should work closely with
other stakeholders such as the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and the Economic and Social Council

S/PV.9233

Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. They play a critical
role in promoting development and stability in Haiti,
while ensuring consistent and sustained regional and
international support.
The United Arab Emirates stands ready to work
with the Council, the Haiti Sanctions Committee and
other relevant actors to address various challenges and
crises gripping Haiti.
In conclusion, as this is almost the last formal
meeting of the Council this month, I would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your presidency of the Security Council and on your
exceptional efforts during India’s membership of the
Council for the past two years. We would also like to
express our sincere appreciation and gratitude to all the
outgoing elected members whose membership ends this
month. We also wish the incoming members success
and look forward to working with all Council members
next year.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Mohammed, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General La Lime and the Chair of the new
Sanctions Committee, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022),
concerning Haiti, for their briefings. We also listened
to the intervention of Mr. Ives.
Let me draw the Council’s attention to four points.
First, Norway welcomes the important steps taken
towards operationalizing the 2653 Sanctions Committee
and congratulate His Excellency Ambassador Biang on
his appointment as Chair of the Committee. We believe
that the Committee should consider further designating
perpetrators of sexual and gender-based violence.
And, to ensure the efficiency of the sanctions regime,
it is important that the Committee keep up with its
intentions to safeguard due process by authorizing an
ombudsperson for this sanctions regime.
Secondly, we continue to be extremely concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Haiti. We fear that
we will see a further deterioration, as gangs continue
to retain significant territory. We commend the United
Nations and local and international humanitarian
workers who are tirelessly working to protect and assist
people affected by the crisis. They must be assured safe
and unhindered access to people in need.

22-7668917/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

Thirdly, many of the problems facing Haiti can
be traced to systematic failures. The breakdown of
the security and justice sector needs to be addressed,
including endemic corruption and impunity.
Climate-related security threats are also evident. Poor
disaster resilience leads to vulnerable people in rural
areas leaving their homes for cities where violence is
rampant. And children who are unable to go to school
owing to the violence are forced to turn to the very
people holding them hostage in order to be fed. The
situation is untenable, and we must not turn away.
Fourthly, the crisis in Haiti is multifaceted. We
regret that a political solution continues to be elusive.
That is why we strongly encourage Haiti’s political
actors to work together for their people and find a
sustainable Haitian-led political solution. However, the
current crisis runs so deep that it will require much
more than just organizing new elections to resolve it.
We need multiple and combined efforts in the security,
humanitarian and political sectors to pave the way for
a better future. The Secretary-General has proposed a
rapid action force to support Haiti’s police in improving
the security situation. Criminal actors who are fuelling
violence and disrupting humanitarian assistance must
be stopped. We welcome appropriate support from
countries and actors in the region to assist the Haitian
National Police to tackle the acute security situation.
Allow me to conclude by urging the international
community to remain engaged in Haiti. In the current
dire situation, as a Council, we should be united and
work together with Haitians towards creating a better
future. We call on the co-penholders to have wider
discussions on the draft resolution on the multinational
force. Norway will also continue to support the Haitian
people beyond our term on the Security Council.
Norway’s time on the Council has been characterized
by the turbulent global landscape, despite which we
leave the Council the same way we entered it: with an
inherent belief in the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and a firm commitment
to defend them. We continue to believe in the positive
impact that the Council can have on the lives of people
suffering from conflict and instability.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General La Lime and the Ambassador of
Gabon, in his capacity as the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022),
18/27

21/12/2022

concerning Haiti, for the information shared. We
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Généus
of Haiti, Foreign Minister Álvarez Gil of the Dominican
Republic and the Permanent Representative of Canada
at today’s meeting.
There is no other way to say it: Haiti is on the edge of
the abyss. Unrelenting armed violence has precipitated
the country’s descent into the worst human rights
and humanitarian situation in decades. Kidnappings
and sexual violence by gang members, which are at
their highest levels, as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General La Lime confirmed, are being
used as weapons to inflict severe pain and instill fear
among the population. Law and order have collapsed.
The State and its institutions are at an intolerable
standstill. Everything of importance seems to have
been compromised.
Allow me to highlight the following key points.
First, the unanimous adoption of resolution 2653
(2022) has sent a clear message with a unified voice to the
people of Haiti, and in particular to all the perpetrators
of, and those involved in, criminal activities that there
will be no tolerance for impunity. We are happy that
the resolution has resonated with the aspirations and
hopes of the Haitians. We expect the arms embargo
to help prevent the direct and indirect supply of arms
and ammunition to gangs or criminal groups, which
are undermining the rule of law and have turned the
country into a no-man’s land.
Secondly, the situation of the total breakdown
of law and order, with gangs controlling most of the
critical infrastructure in the country, has further
exacerbated an already-acute humanitarian crisis,
coupled with food insecurity, water and fuel shortages
and the cholera outbreak. As a result, thousands
of people are fleeing their homes and country. We
applaud the extensive efforts made by the United
States to secure medical assistance to Haitian people
in isolated areas, together with other health workers
and non-governmental organizations, as well as joint
efforts with Canada in providing security equipment
for the Haitian National Police.
Thirdly, with regard to the perpetuation of the
political deadlock, it is crucial that, together with
international efforts, all Haitian political actors and
stakeholders act with a sense of responsibility and
urgency, make concrete efforts to chart a course for
the country to exit the deadlock, dismantle corruption
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

and restore confidence in Haitian institutions and law
enforcement authorities. The ship is in danger, and
there is no time for routine politics, power bargaining
and uncompromising positions because, if the Haitian
leaders and the elite continue in that way, there will
be little else to share other than the commensurate
misery of a completely failed State. And they will
only have themselves to blame. Haitian politicians
must understand that help may and should come from
outside, but solutions have to come from within Haiti.
Haiti and Haitians deserve better — much more than
political irresponsibility, institutional incapacity and
everyday impossibility.
Fourthly, the reports of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees are
alarming. There is a desperate need to tackle the root
causes of inequality and violence, including the systematic corruption and rampant impunity that have
crippled the country’s development for decades. We
reiterate the crucial importance of strengthening the
judicial sector and other accountability mechanisms,
including by establishing specialized judicial divisions,
to address financial and gang-related crimes.
Haiti needs help, and it needs it now. We hope that the
Security Council will deliver with the same constructive
spirit for the establishment of the international security
assistance mission, in order to help restore safety and
security in the country, in response to the Government’s
request and as recommended by the Secretary-General.
For anything meaningful to happen in Haiti, there is
an urgent need to break the grip that gangs have on
the country.
Allow me to reaffirm our full support for the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for
their work, critical role and efforts in bringing key
political actors to the table to agree on a mutually
acceptable political framework, despite the heightened
violence, insecurity and, above all, mindsets based on
“damned if you do and damned if you don’t”, as we have
heard. We strongly believe that a sustainable solution
to the complex situation in Haiti can be achieved only
through the restoration of law and order and through
substantive, inclusive and responsible dialogue among
all political actors and the private sector, which has
been raised, including civil society and women and
youth representatives, paving the way for free and
democratic elections, as soon as feasible.

S/PV.9233

Lastly, as this is the last formal meeting of the month,
the year and India’s term as President of the Council, let
me congratulate you and your team, Madam President,
for your contribution to the work of the Council and
excellent cooperation this year. The same goes to our
colleagues from Ireland, Mexico, Norway and Kenya.
We are grateful for the cooperation, as well as for how
much we have learned from them. We wish them every
success in January when we meet again as previously
elected members of the Council.
The President: We appreciate the sentiments
expressed by the representative of Albania.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): We thank our
briefers, including the Chair of the new Committee
established by resolution 2653 (2022) for his first update.
I also welcome the Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the
Dominican Republic and the Permanent Representative
of Canada.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing dire humanitarian situation in Haiti,
which is being compounded by chronic insecurity and
political gridlock. As we heard today so clearly from the
Deputy Secretary-General and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General La Lime, the actions of armed
gangs have displaced thousands of people, limited the
free movement of people and goods and denied citizens
access to medical services during the resurgent cholera
outbreak. The United Kingdom remains convinced that
the perpetrators and sponsors of the gang violence must
be held to account and denied the capacity to spread
further instability and suffering. Therefore, we are
pleased to see progress on sanctions that are imperative
for tackling criminal behaviour. The sanctions are a
necessary tool to break the cycle of criminal violence
that so disastrously impacts the Haitian people.
However, sanctions alone will not work. That is why
the international community must consider seriously
any request for assistance from the Haitian Government
and society, including on security. That must support
and empower Haitian efforts to improve the security
situation on the ground to create the conditions for
elections so that the Haitian people may choose their
next Government.
The United Kingdom continues to support action
that moves Haiti closer to security and stability, with
a return to democratic processes as soon as possible.
We therefore welcome signs of movement towards
resolving the political gridlock, but there must now be

22-7668919/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

determined efforts to reach a political consensus. An
urgent route forward is needed to address the insecurity
and the humanitarian and economic crises and prevent
further deterioration of the situation.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): In my
capacity as the Permanent Representative of Gabon,
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Helen La Lime, for their respective briefings. I also
listened closely to the briefing made by Mr. Kim Ives.
I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic
and the representative of Canada to today’s meeting.
I would like to make four points.
The first point relates to the security situation. Haiti
is located less than 2,500 kilometres away from the place
in which we are meeting right now. The country faces
a complex multidimensional crisis. Several observers
are quick to describe the country as being in chaos or in
a state of collapse. Heavily armed groups wreak havoc
daily and sow fear. They operate by raping women,
kidnapping for ransom and carrying out atrocities
against civilians.
The police force is overwhelmed by the magnitude
of the task, either due to a lack of human resources,
inadequate equipment or simply because it is infiltrated
by gangs. Regrettably, the only option for the millions of
men, women, children, older persons and, in particular,
young people is to escape by sea and head to neighbouring
countries or join gangs.
The Council must act swiftly to address the situation
and respond to the distress calls from the towns and
villages, from men, women and children of a population
that has been traumatized. The Haitian people need
international solidarity now more than ever before. When
fire engulfs a neighbour’s house, although our own doors
and windows are closed, the overpowering and haunting
stench of the smoke from the ruins of the neighbour’s
house remains. Solidarity in such a situation is a moral
duty. That duty falls under the mandate and functions of
the Security Council.
Haiti urgently needs security. Without security,
the Haitian economy will struggle to recover from the
combined effects of manifold crises and epidemics. It will
be even less able to retain the talent and labour it needs
for its own development. It is a fact that the majority of
young Haitians opt to leave their country as soon as they
have the opportunity to do so.
20/27

21/12/2022

My country, Gabon, welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2653 (2022) and the initial benefits of
sanctions targeting individuals with links to organized
crime. We call on all countries to work together to
implement the sanctions regime, in particular by
sharing relevant information. We must take action.
Every day that we do not take action here is another day
of distress and trauma in Haiti.
Secondly, a catastrophic humanitarian situation is
unfolding. The re-emergence of cholera, exacerbated
by deteriorating health conditions, the effects of natural
disasters and insecurity, leave many Haitians by the
wayside every day. As there is no immediate response
or better prospects, nearly 5 million Haitians face a
food crisis that is already under way, and thousands
more are at risk of famine.
There are recent reports about the displacement
of nearly 10,000 people who were forced to flee Petite
Rivière because of a turf war among armed gangs.
According to the most recent report of the International
Organization for Migration, the number of displaced
persons tripled over the past few months. Between June
and August this year, the number of displaced persons
rose to 113,000.
Thirdly, I would like talk about the economic
situation. The end of the blockade of the Varreux
terminal is a step in the right direction. It is to be hoped
that all logistical obstacles will be removed to enable
the resumption of efficient fuel distribution in order
to revive the Haitian economy. Grassroots initiatives,
spearheaded by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti and the Haitian National Police, along with the
customs department, should also work well to stem the
loss of approximately $600 million in customs revenue
every year, according to United Nations estimates.
Fourthly, and lastly, the political stalemate will
not end without a return to social peace and security.
We would like to encourage Haitian political actors
to continue their dialogue, with a view to reaching an
agreement that would allow for the right conditions for
the holding of elections that will be accepted by everyone.
That means that everyone must put the interests of the
country ahead of their own personal interests. In that
regard, we commend civil society for its commitment.
We would like to encourage all regional and
international initiatives aimed at providing the
response and solidarity the Haitian people expect as
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

they strive to get back on their feet. We stand ready to
work within the Security Council and beyond with all
those driven by their readiness to bring Haiti out of the
cycle of violence.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen La Lime for their briefings.
I also thank Ambassador Biang for his briefing on the
implementation of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti.
I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic and the representative of Canada
to today’s meeting.
As we just heard, Haiti can wait no longer. France
urges the international community to step up its
efforts. We must urgently end the cycle of violence and
destitution affecting the country. Allow me to touch on
four points.
First, the security situation calls for a more
stringent collective response. Renewed control over the
Varreux terminal is encouraging, but it must not mask
the actual situation on the ground. The issue remains
an all-encompassing one. Gangs are perpetrating more
kidnappings, sexual violence and murder, with absolute
impunity. In response, our aim must be to continue to
provide much greater and more effective support to the
Haitian National Police, which is on the front lines.
As we know, the force needs equipment, funding and
training. To restore security, the Haitian authorities have
requested assistance from the international community.
We stand ready with our partners to do more to rectify
the situation on the ground.
Secondly, France welcomes the sanctions regime
targeting individuals who pose a threat to peace and
security in Haiti. Sanctions are a deterrent to criminal
groups and all political allies that support and finance
them. The establishment of the 2653 Committee is
a positive development, and we hope that, under
Gabon’s leadership, the Committee can put forward
swift proposals.
In addition to sanctions, it is also important to
rebuild justice in Haiti. The country does not have the
means to carry out that task given that the weakening of
its judicial institutions undermines State authority and
is a threat the security of the Haitian people. Combating

S/PV.9233

impunity and strengthening the entire penal chain
must be a key priority if we ever hope to put an end to
the violence.
Thirdly, we will continue to urge Haiti’s political
actors to find a compromise. The political dialogue
needs to culminate in the organization of democratic
elections when the security conditions are met. France
calls for responsible engagement from the political
community in order to break the current deadlock.
Fourthly, as many others here today have
reminded the Security Council, the crisis in Haiti is
multidimensional. That is why France is committed
to facilitating humanitarian assistance, particularly in
view of the ongoing cholera epidemic that broke out in
the country in October. The population is also suffering
from hunger, children are no longer going to school
and the humanitarian situation is deteriorating. France
cannot accept the current situation, and it has increased
its food assistance to Haiti.
France would like to reaffirm its solidarity with
the Haitian people. We will continue to resolutely
support the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
which is carrying out essential work in extremely
difficult conditions. Together with the International
Organization of la Francophonie, we will continue
to mobilize the international community in order to
provide Haitians with the necessary assistance.
Finally, Madam President, before I conclude, I also
want to commend India, as well as Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico and Norway for their successful terms on the
Security Council, as well as to thank them for their
excellent work and all of the cooperation they facilitated
throughout their terms and to wish them all the best in
the new year. And I commend you, Madam, on your
perfect presidency of the Council this month.
The President: I thank the representative of France
for her kind sentiments.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of India.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Helen La Lime, as well as Ambassador Michel
Biang, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti, and
civil society briefer Mr. Kim Ives, for their remarks.
I welcome the presence of Foreign Ministers of Haiti

22-7668921/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

and the Dominican Republic in today’s meeting. I
also deeply appreciate the presence here today of
Ambassador Bob Rae of Canada in his capacity as Chair
of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti.
As we heard from all the briefers today, it is a matter
of concern that the security and humanitarian situation
in Haiti has not seen any significant improvement since
the adoption of resolution 2653 (2022) in October. The
security situation has worsened owing to the impunity
with which armed groups and criminal networks are
having a free run. The killings of civilians, kidnappings
and other human rights violations have increased. There
have been high-profile killings as well, including of a
former presidential candidate. Access to health care and
essential services, including water, food, sanitation and
supply services, has remained limited. Fuel shortages
are negatively impacting every aspect of society. The
outbreak of the cholera epidemic has further aggravated
the situation. The response capacity of the health
system is under strain. Given that dire situation, the
need of the hour is for the international community and
United Nations agencies to enhance their humanitarian
assistance. Clearly, the situation demands sustained
attention of the Security Council.
However, the immediate priority has to be to reign
in the criminal gangs and to bring a semblance of
order, particularly in the capital city, Port-au-Prince. In
that regard, we welcome the security assistance being
extended by countries in the region. We hope that those
steps will help the Haitian National Police authorities
in addressing the persistent, destabilizing criminal
activities perpetrated by armed gangs. The capacitybuilding needs of the Haitian National Police also need
particular attention. Any decision on the deployment of a
regional security mechanism should be carefully thought
out, taking into consideration experience from the past,
including that of United Nations missions.
The multifaceted political, security and economic
crisis in Haiti demands all Haitian stakeholders to
engage in meaningful negotiations. There is an urgent
need to arrive at a consensus on a political road map for
holding of the long-due elections. The Haitian parties
also need to ensure that the process is both inclusive and
legitimate. In the long term, institutional stability, good
governance and the rule of law are essential to preventing
a relapse of the current phase of the political impasse.
In that regard, we commend the facilitating role of the
22/27

21/12/2022

Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti. We also note
the proactive engagement of partners in the region in
support of Haiti.
The Haitian people continue to suffer from the
effects of a multidimensional crisis that unfortunately
has been prolonged for decades. Today more than ever,
they require the unwavering support of the international
community. India enjoys long-standing relations with
Haiti and its people. In the past, we have contributed
to capacity-building and training initiatives in the
country, and today too we stand ready to continue our
support to the people of Haiti in their efforts to emerge
from the current challenging situation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti.
Mr. Généus (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to commend India on its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December,
as well as to thank all the members of the Council
for their unwavering interest and commitment
concerning Haiti’s aspirations. I also welcome the
presence in today’s important meeting of the Deputy
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic and the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti.
I also thank Ambassador Bob Rae of Canada for his
statement, which will include details of his visit to
Haiti. My Government appreciates the international
community’s support and commitment to finding a
lasting solution to the nightmarish crisis that continues
to affect Haiti.
I welcome today’s meeting, convened at the request
of the Russian Federation, to review the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the country and
the effects of the sanctions regime on actors linked
to armed gang violence, pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), adopted in October.
The Government of Haiti highly appreciates
the work of the Sanctions Committee chaired by
Ambassador Michel Xavier Biang of Gabon. We hope
that the Committee’s work will be successful and
hereby pledge the Government of Haiti’s full support
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

to it. My Government also takes note of the upcoming
formation of the Panel of Experts, which will support
the Sanctions Committee in its work. We also call for
the establishment of a list of the major actors linked
to gang violence and money laundering. In that regard,
the Haitian justice system and the various prosecutors’
offices throughout the country have embarked on
efforts to find the best formula to give full effect to
resolution 2653 (2022) in Haiti.
Since the Council voted, on 21 October, to
adopt resolution 2653 (2022), we have seen a
tentative resumption of activities in the country.
Notwithstanding those developments, there should be
no misunderstanding with regard to the situation on
the ground. While renewed control over the main oil
terminal in Varreux has eased some of the pressure on
the population and on economic activities, Haiti is far
from having resolved the structural problem posed by
the actions of armed gangs, which continue to hinder
the actions of the Government and the population in a
number of areas.
Murders, rapes, kidnappings and hijackings of
cargo trucks continue. In the commune of Cabaret,
a town located 32 kilometres from the capital, 12
peaceful citizens were massacred in one evening, and
more than 10 houses were burned down. According to
the Department of Civil Protection, in Petite Rivière
de l’Artibonite, more than 10,000 people had to flee
their homes.
Two weeks ago, the Director of the National Police
Academy was insidiously shot by armed bandits. Nearly
60 police officers have suffered the same fate since the
beginning of the year. A political party leader actively
engaged in seeking an inclusive political agreement
was brutally murdered. I still find it astonishing that,
in this forum, we can market and promote gangs that
kill and murder; it is certainly not by promoting armed
gangs that the cries of distress of the Haitian people can
be stifled, nor their desire to end this nightmare.
The country is living under the threat of a
humanitarian crisis that plunges half of the population,
approximately 4.5 million people, into food insecurity.
The situation stems from structural causes that have
been considerably aggravated by the blocking of
roads and the hijacking of trucks transporting food to
the cities, as well as by actions carried out by armed
gangs. The effects of the gangs’ actions are also

S/PV.9233

reflected in surging inflation, which makes the few
foodstuffs available unaffordable to people living in
precarious conditions.
This phenomenon is amplified by the hostage
situation at the northern entrance to the capital, which
makes the Lafito container port inaccessible; there,
nearly 3,000 containers of food, pharmaceutical
products and commodities for assembly plants are
being blocked. Some products are starting to run out,
and prices are soaring as a result of their scarcity. The
only wheat-flour factory has been shut down for several
months because it was sabotaged by gangs. The same is
true of the national cement factory, which is located in
the same industrial zone.
A serious and unexpected health crisis caused by
the resurgence of cholera is evolving at an exponential
rate and causing a high number of victims; it is a real
public-health threat for the country in particular and for
the region in general. A recent report from the Ministry
of Public Health states that as of 18 December 2022,
there were 17,629 suspected cases, 14,972 hospitalized
cases and 316 deaths. It should be noted that children
aged 1 to 4 years are the most affected, followed by
people between 20 and 29 years of age. This disease,
which broke out in two disadvantaged areas of the
capital, is currently affecting all departments except
the North-East Department. I take this opportunity
to express the gratitude of the Haitian people for the
emergency support provided by friendly countries to
the Ministry of Public Health to contain the spread of
the disease.
The Haitian people appreciate the unanimous
decision by the Security Council to sanction certain
important players that have been contributing to
political instability through their support for armed
gangs (resolution 2653 (2022)). This has had a clear
impact in the current context, and it should help
facilitate inter-Haitian dialogue and support for
a national compromise that could lead to general
elections in 2023. The implementation of sanctions will
prevent the injection of dirty money into the electoral
process. It will also reduce the ability of the promoters
of violence to obtain arms and ammunition.
Insecurity remains an urgent priority for the
Haitian people, who have suffered enough from the
multidimensional crisis that is plaguing the country.
Without establishing an adequate security environment,
it is deceptive to think that we will be able to emerge

22-7668923/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

from the crisis for the long term. The data that led
the Haitian Government to request the assistance of a
specialized force to accompany the Haitian National
Police in its fight to eradicate or at least contain the
phenomenon of armed gangs, restore order and impose
respect for the rule of law throughout the country have
not changed much
The beginning of the resumption of activities
is not a direct consequence of the operations carried
out by the forces of law and order. The gangs have
slowed down in some areas but continue to terrorize
the population in others. Their capacity to cause harm
has remained virtually intact, and they have the ability
to resume their abuses whenever they want. It is urgent
that Haiti’s friends provide this assistance which, if
sufficiently robust, can help the Haitian National Police
overcome the armed-gangs phenomenon.
It is also important to know that the vast majority
of the Haitian people are in favour of receiving this
assistance, regardless of what some people — who
do not propose any alternative solution — may say.
Portraying bandits and criminals who kill, rape and
kidnap as revolutionary and opposition leaders simply
does not comport with reality. Numerous reports from
national and international human rights institutions
have demonstrated the indisputable guilt of these
individuals. To try to whitewash them and make them
look like something they are not is doing a disservice
to Haiti.
Prime Minister Ariel Henry has always believed
that dialogue is the best way to resolve even the most
complex political problems. He has done everything
possible by reaching out to the various sectors of
national life, which allowed him to conclude the
11 September 2021 agreement. Nevertheless, he was
not satisfied with this, because he and the Government
as a whole wanted to do everything possible to broaden
the consensus.
Many have criticized him for having wasted too
much time courting those who remain recalcitrant,
striving to bring them back to the negotiating table. But
as he reiterated two days ago when receiving greetings
from the diplomatic and consular corps, he does not
regret trying. It is in unity that the Haitian people have
been able to achieve great things in the past; it is in
unity that they must find a way to put an end to this
crisis that has lasted too long.
24/27

21/12/2022

Like speakers before me, I am pleased to announce
that Prime Minister Henry met this morning with
representatives of civil society, the business sector
and political parties to finalize and sign a national
consensus agreement for an inclusive transition and
to form a High Council for the Transition in order to
move forward during 2023 on organizing transparent
elections that will allow the Haitian people to freely
choose the elected officials who will take over the
management of their country’s affairs.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Álvarez Gil (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We recognize the designation of Gabon as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti.
We would like to thank Ambassador Biang for his
briefing in that capacity, wish him success in his
sensitive and important duties and pledge the support
of the Government of the Dominican Republic.
I also wish to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Haitian Foreign Minister Jean Victor Généus, and
Ambassador Rae of Canada for their participation today.
Data has been presented ad nauseam in the Council
reflecting the terrible violations to which the Haitian
people have been subjected by the criminal gangs that
control a large part of the territory, including 60 per
cent of Port-au-Prince. To those misfortunes we now
add a cholera outbreak and widespread famine. A few
days ago, a shipment of 1.2 million vaccines arrived in
Haiti to combat the outbreak of a strain of cholera that
is even more virulent than the original one, which killed
at least 2,000 people in just a few months. However,
violence is again hampering their proper distribution.
Three months ago, criminal gangs blocked the Varreux
port terminal, preventing the distribution of fuel and
leaving much of the country without power. According
to our sources, in the Port-au-Prince area, virtually all
babies in incubators died, as did most of the people in
need of oxygen.
There is now sufficient evidence to attribute the
recent cholera outbreak to that fuel shortage, which
interrupted the supply of drinking water by Haiti’s
national water company, DINEPA. Let us recall that the
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

original cholera epidemic in Haiti, in 2010, spread to
other countries of the region, such as the Dominican
Republic, Cuba and Mexico.
Given that situation, we ask ourselves: If violence
makes it difficult to deliver vaccines and fuel, how can
food be delivered to some 5 million people at risk of
acute food insecurity in 2023, including some 2 million
children and adolescents, of whom approximately
250,000 are acutely malnourished? Against that tragic
backdrop, how can we expect to distribute ballots for
the long-demanded elections in Haiti? How can we
conceive of a nation surviving a constant siege of death,
sexual violence and kidnappings?
To the best of our ability, the Dominican Republic
is doing its part to support our neighbour. For example,
since the closure of the Varreux fuel terminal, our
country has been facilitating the supply of fuel for the
maintenance of some basic services in Haiti. In various
operations between October and mid-December, at
the request of the Haitian authorities, we facilitated
the purchase of hundreds of thousands of gallons of
diesel, gasoline and fuel oil. That fuel is destined for
hospitals, supermarkets, free zones, agro-industries,
banks, embassies of third countries, some of which are
represented on the Security Council, and international
organizations operating in Haiti, such as the
United Nations.
We have also received and responded to requests
for security support for the transport of diplomatic
personnel from other countries and international
organizations in Haiti — not to mention the provision
of health services to tens of thousands of Haitians who
come to seek them in our public network due to the
impossibility of accessing them in their own country. For
example, 32.4 per cent of births in our public hospitals
are of Haitian migrants. Moreover, those services are
provided free of charge. However, as President Luis
Abinader Corona has expressed on repeated occasions,
the Dominican Republic cannot shoulder the Haitian
crisis alone.
The Haitian Government and the Haitian National
Police are making considerable efforts to regain control
of their territory. However, the task requires the
cooperation of all States represented here. We know and
insist that the solution to the Haitian crisis can come
only from the Haitian people and their leaders through
tenacious dialogue and lasting political consultation.
We welcome the announcement made just now by

S/PV.9233

Minister Généus. We hope that the dialogue will bear
fruit and continue to spread, but today Haiti cannot
do it alone, as the most senior Haitian authorities have
repeated on various occasions.
First of all, the necessary conditions must be created
on the ground in order to make such dialogue and
consultation possible. Our Government has therefore
expressed its emphatic support for the position of the
Secretary-General, António Guterres, that while aid for
police training is being consolidated, a robust force is
needed, capable of restoring peace and putting an end
to the violence unleashed by armed gangs, infiltrated
by political and economic power.
We recognize that resolutions 2645 (2022) and
2653 (2022) have borne their first fruit through the
imposition of bilateral sanctions against those who
finance the gangs. We now hope that in January the
2653 Sanctions Committee and the Panel of Experts
mandated in those resolutions will begin their work in
order to more effectively prosecute the criminals. In
our opinion, the threshold of good intentions has been
crossed. We urge the Council to implement, as soon as
possible, the recommendation of resolution 2645 (2022)
of building a multinational force in support of the
Haitian National Police, as that is the only viable way
in the short term to redeem the Haitian people from
their current horrendous situation and thereby bring
well-deserved peace of mind to our America.
Finally, we wish to bid farewell to Mexico and
thank Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
and Mexico, as a member of the Security Council, for
all their efforts as co-penholders of this issue of such
vital importance for our country and for our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada) (spoke in French): I am pleased
to speak on behalf of the Economic and Social Council
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. The Advisory
Group comprises 21 Member States that are committed
to supporting Haiti’s long-term socioeconomic
development. I am proud to see my colleagues from
Rwanda, Kenya, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Barbados, the Dominican Republic and Haiti, who are
with us today. I also want to personally thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime,
whom I still see on the screen via video-teleconference
patiently listening to us. I also want to thank my

22-7668925/27

S/PV.9233

The question concerning Haiti

colleague from Gabon, who is doing such important
work in the cause peace and justice, and I commend
him on his briefing today.
Two weeks ago, I visited Port-au-Prince in my
national capacity for three days and was at first struck by
the prevailing calm in the streets. Unfortunately, it was
not at all because the security situation had improved.
The streets were quiet because people were unable to
leave their homes out of fear. Or they had perhaps already
fled. Thousands of people have left the country to find a
safe haven for them and their families. That is the reality
of the situation. Heavily armed gangs currently control
most of Haiti’s capital. I will say with all due respect
to everyone listening to me that that is not a myth; it is
the reality of the situation, which cannot be denied. It
is having a significant impact on the flow of fuel, food
and the needed medicines, while humanitarian aid is
unable to be delivered to the population. The situation
remains very grave. The main national roads running to
the north and south of the capital are blocked. Imagine
if major artery Interstate 95 were blocked every 20 or
30 kilometres. Would that be a tolerable situation for
the people of New York, New Jersey or elsewhere?
No, it would not; it would make life is impossible.
The people in Haiti are living in impossible
conditions vis-à-vis their daily lives and economy. It is
impossible to talk to anyone in Port-au-Prince who has
not experienced a kidnapping in their family, which was
a reality brought up in the discussions that I had. I spoke
with people who said that they had to pay ransom for their
mother or brother. It is not an exception; it is part of life
in Haiti. Women and girls are subjected to horrific sexual
violence. It is not a myth; it is a reality that is documented
in all the reports of the Human Rights Council.
Many schools remain closed. Most children are
not attending school. That is a reality, not a myth.
Farmers cannot plant or harvest food. Businesses
cannot operate without having to pay out bribes to
make their way through a labyrinth of intimidation.
The humanitarian situation is extremely serious and
entirely unacceptable. The number of cholera cases is
increasing, with a significant impact on children. Many
have already died. We do not know exactly how many,
as the means for recording the names of those who have
lost their lives are lacking.
As many have said, the challenges facing the
country are complex, multidimensional, historical
and interrelated and pose a serious threat to
the country’s peace, security and prospects for
sustainable development.
26/27

21/12/2022

(spoke in English)
Since Haiti’s recent multifaceted crisis emerged
following the assassination of President Jovenel
Moïse last summer, our Advisory Group has met
on 10 occasions, including at the leadership level in
September. It has issued six joint statements as the crisis
has unfolded. The Group has grown, with the Republic
of Kenya and Barbados having recently joined. Members
of the Advisory Group are fully aligned in their desire
to support Haiti. We are based principally in the region,
but additional countries are planning to come on board.
In that regard, on behalf of the Group, I would like to
emphasize four key points.
First — others have said it, but I will repeat it — the
international community can help only if we recognize
that the approaches that have been taken in past decades
have not worked. They have not been sustainable. They
have not lasted. They have not taken hold in the country.
They have not effected the changes that have to be made.
It is clear — once again many have said it, but we must
not only say it, but mean it — that solutions must be led
by the people and the leadership of Haiti, not Canada,
the United States, anyone here, any country or the
United Nations. And we need to make a concerted effort
to understand the needs of Haitians and to support the
country’s plan to address the crisis. But plans have to
come from within the country, and they have to be the
result of a deep and sustained political dialogue there.
Secondly, we cannot lose sight of the root causes of
Haiti’s challenges, many of which have been mentioned:
extreme poverty, impunity and the corrupt collusion
between the political and economic actors. Sanctions are,
I believe, one important tool, and, yes, they are having
reverberations on the ground. It will be key that we all
strongly continue supporting the full implementation
of resolution 2653 (2022). Much work remains ahead
to support Haitians in addressing poverty, corruption,
lawlessness and violence at every level.
Thirdly, while there are no “quick fixes”, which is a
phrase that I have heard many times, to Haiti’s current
crisis, we need immediate action. We cannot merely use
the line that we cannot fix the problem quickly. Rather,
we need to think systematically about the steps we need
to take. We need to meet humanitarian needs, address the
acute security situation and mount an effective response
to cholera. If we fail to turn the dial back on cholera
and quickly reduce the current wave, it will threaten to
overtake everything else that we are doing, which would
be very serious. We also have to support Haiti for the
22-76689

21/12/2022

The question concerning Haiti

long term, which I believe is critically important. We
cannot come and go in our engagement. We cannot stay
for a bit without figuring out a way to make our support
sustainable. In doing so, humanitarian, human rights,
development and peacebuilding actors operating within
and outside of the country must significantly enhance
integration and coordination in order to maximize the
impact of such efforts.
We know that the Secretary-General and other
countries, including my own, have received a request
from acting Prime Minister Henry for a multinational
force. The Secretary-General has written to us about
the possibility of rapid response force. Canada and
other countries are having detailed discussions with the
Haitian National Police (HNP). We will not do anything
without thoroughly engaging with the HNP on what its
plan is, how it intends to implement the plan and exactly
what assistance is needed. All kinds of various proposals
have been thrown around. I believe that is important
for us to start at the practical level of working closely
with the Haitian Government to find out what will be
needed, which involves not working just with the current
Government of Haiti, but working with the broad political
community, including all civil society and other actors,
who need to be engaged in helping us find a solution.
I am glad that a number of countries have contributed
to the security basket fund. Canada has so far contributed
more the 50 per cent of the money that is in the fund.
And we will continue to assist in the effort to increase
the capacity of the HNP, including with equipment
and training.
I want to stress that the Advisory Group has
no specific mandate on peace and security. We are
thoroughly respectful of that. We are an advisory group
to the Social and Economic Council. But peace, security,
economic growth and development go together. I know
some people are not enthusiastic about using the language
of the nexus, but it is actually true. The nexus is a real
thing. You cannot have investment without security. You
cannot have economic development without investment
and security. You cannot have security without people
having a sense of hope for their economic future. Those
things all go together. We will continue to work hard on
that issue, and we are committed to addressing security
as a precondition for democratic development and
political solidarity.
Fourthly, we encourage Haiti to ensure that the
voices of women and youth are heard and reflected
in plans to move the country forward. There needs

S/PV.9233

to be more women and young people involved in the
leadership of the country. It is their future that is at stake
and, from what we are seeing, they are the ones who
principally suffer.
The inclusive national dialogue, to which my friend
the Foreign Minister of Haiti referred, is a critically
important element. Everybody has to put a bit of water
in their wine to get there, but we have to get there. Last
week, the Advisory Group heard from young Haitian
women, who despite the very difficult situation, held
out much hope for what they saw as being their future.
I believe that Haitians continue to demonstrate their
remarkable resilience in the face of hardship, but they
need sustainable and predictable assistance from the
international community on every front in order to break
out of the cycle of crisis.
I want to say a few words in my national capacity.
Those who bribe, extort, steal, rape, kidnap and/or
kill must be stopped in their tracks. We cannot let that
continue. It is not a political theory; it is a real thing.
If we cannot deal with that issue, then it will not be
possible for us to deal with anything else. I do not know
how anyone who blockades, bullies, threatens or extorts
can be considered to be performing some kind of public
service. That is nonsense. It does not pass any kind of
smell test as an analysis of the situation.
Finally, we have heard it said in other contexts,
but it must be said again — nothing for Haiti without
all of Haiti. That must be a principle in how we conduct
ourselves. Canada has been vigorous. The representative
of Russia singled us out, and I take it as a badge of honour.
I believe we were mentioned three times in his statement
today. We continue to be vigorous in our pursuit of the
end of impunity, and I will tell members why. It is because
we all made the mistake of not paying attention to the
corrosive impact of corruption. We will not make that
mistake again. My friend the representative of Mexico
quoted his President talking about how corruption is
at the core. We cannot deal with corruption without
sanctions, but sanctions are not enough. Sanctions are
just what other Governments impose. Haiti itself has to
take measures against the corrosive nature of corruption,
and we all have to recognize that economic development
and political development and the social justice needs
of all people of Haiti go together. Efforts will be led by
Haiti and must be supported by all of us.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

22-7668927/27
