S/2018/981

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 November 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 16 July to 15 October 2018.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in
Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in
Kosovo, in line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008
(S/2008/692). The United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with
the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
During the reporting period, the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, and the
President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, reintroduced the notion of territorial delineation
as part of their continued efforts to reach a comprehensive agreement on the
normalization of relations. In their respective remarks at the European Forum in
Alpbach, Austria, on 25 August, they both emphasized the need for such an
agreement, which, they argued, might include territorial delineation.
4.
In the context of territorial delineation, following a meeting with representatives
of the Preševo valley region of southern Serbia on 26 July and in subsequent
statements, President Thaçi called for the “legitimate demand of representatives of
the Preševo valley to join Kosovo”, to be discussed in the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. The President ’s
pronouncements in favour of a “peaceful border correction” with Serbia provoked
criticism from representatives of the opposition and civil society groups, as well as
members of the governing coalition, including the Prime Minister of Kosovo,

18-18039 (E)

061118

*1818039*

S/2018/981

Ramush Haradinaj, who, during the reporting period, reiterated his opposition to any
territorial changes.
5.
On 12 September, the leaders of the Kosovo opposition parties Democrati c
League of Kosovo, the Movement for Self-Determination (Vetëvendosje), the Social
Democratic Party of Kosovo and Alternativa addressed a joint letter to the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Federica Mogherini, expressing disagreement with the “border adjustment” proposal
put forth by Presidents Vučić and Thaçi and warning about the potentially negative
impact of “border adjustments” on peace and stability in the region. On 29 September,
Vetëvendosje organized a protest march in Pristina against the proposal of
President Thaçi to include “border adjustments” in any final agreement with
Belgrade, with around 20,000 people reportedly in attendance.
6.
On 6 October, the Kosovo Albanian members of the governing coalition agreed
on a draft resolution setting out the position of Kosovo in the European Union facilitated dialogue with Belgrade and the composition of the negotiating team of
Kosovo. The draft resolution, inter alia, notes that the dialogue between Belgrade an d
Pristina should result in a legally binding agreement that would enable mutual
recognition based on the “inviolable and unnegotiable borders” of Kosovo. The
Serbian List and opposition parties did not support the draft resolution. Consequently,
efforts within the Assembly of Kosovo to establish a broad -based negotiating team
representing Kosovo at the European Union-facilitated dialogue with Belgrade
remained unfulfilled by the end of the reporting period.
7.
Statements by Serbian and Kosovo political leaders about territorial delineation
caused concern among the Kosovo Serb communities, as well as disagreement
between Belgrade officials and leaders of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo.
In separate public appeals at the end of July, Bishop Teodosije o f Raška-Prizren and
the Abbot of the Dečani Monastery, Father Sava Janjić, criticized alleged plans for
the “partition of Kosovo”. On 12 August, however, the Serbian List declared that a
“delineation with Kosovo Albanians would be acceptable if it guarante ed the rights
and freedoms of Kosovo Serbs’’. In an open letter on 15 August, the mayors of the 10
Serbian-majority municipalities and members of the Serbian List expressed support
for President Vučić in negotiating a compromise solution with Pristina.
8.
The references by Presidents Vučić and Thaçi to territorial delineation also
triggered reactions within the region and the broader international community,
ranging from calls to let the parties explore all avenues towards a comprehensive
settlement, to expressions of serious concern about the repercussions that any
territorial adjustments might have for stability in the region.
9.
In a separate development, on 13 September, the Prime Minister of Kosovo
approved and submitted for consideration by the Assembly of Kosovo three draft laws
on the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into an army. President Thaçi, in
expressing support for the initiative, called for close coordination with the
international community on the issue. The Serbian authorities an d the Serbian List,
however, expressed strong opposition to the draft laws, reiterating their position that
such a transformation would be in violation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).
10. During the reporting period, Kosovo institutions continued to work towards
meeting the benchmarks set by the European Union in their respective areas. On
18 July, the Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship of the
European Commission, at a joint press conference with President Thaçi in Brussels,
announced that Kosovo had fulfilled all required benchmarks for Schengen -area visa
liberalization. On 13 September, the European Parliament voted to initiate
negotiations with the Council of the European Union to liberalize the visa regime for
2/16

18-18039

S/2018/981

Kosovo. On 20 September, the Assembly of Kosovo approved a broad package of
laws in line with the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance established by the
European Union for Kosovo, which includes financial assistance in the areas of
human rights, energy efficiency and the economy.
11. The security situation in Kosovo during the period under review remained calm,
although intercommunity tensions were manifested in a number of incidents. On
28 August, a planned visit of displaced Kosovo Serbs to Gjakovë/Đakovica to mark
“Assumption Day” in their former town was cancelled owing to safety concerns.
According to Kosovo police, on that day approximately 70 Kosovo Albanians
gathered in front of the Church of the Holy Virgin, the planned venue of the
commemoration, to protest the visit; five of them were arrested for damaging property
and obstructing the Kosovo police.
12. During the reporting period, the return of Kosovo fighters from conflict areas
abroad continued to be a matter of concern. On 17 July, the Basic Court of Pristina
convicted seven individuals for organizing and participating in terrorist groups,
sentencing them to a total of 17 years and four months in prison. On 31 July, the Basic
Court of Pristina convicted another defendant of attempting to join a foreign armed
group, sentencing him to two years’ imprisonment. On 5 October, the Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an indictment against six individuals, including a
woman, for allegedly planning terrorist attacks in Serb-majority areas and against
KFOR troops. The defendants had been arrested in late June following a joint
international police operation. On 10 October, one person was sentenced to one and
a half years in prison for distribution via social media of materials in support of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS).

III. Northern Kosovo
13. On 16 July, six months after the murder of Kosovo Serb politician
Oliver Ivanović, which remained unsolved, friends and family attended a me morial
service at the scene of the murder in North Mitrovica. Subsequently, on 30 August,
the municipal assembly of North Mitrovica approved the renaming of a street after
Mr. Ivanović.
14. On 8 August, the Director of the Government of Serbia ’s Office for Kosovo and
Metohija, Marko Đurić, and the Secretary-General of the Presidency of the Republic
of Serbia, Nikola Selaković, visited northern Kosovo, where they met with
representatives of the Kosovo Serb community.
15. On 8 and 9 September, President Vučić visited the four northern municipalities
of Kosovo. He addressed a public gathering in North Mitrovica, met with community
representatives and visited the Gazivode reservoir and hydropower plant. A planned
visit to the village of Banja/Banjë in the municipality of Skenderaj/Srbica had to be
cancelled owing to protests and roadblocks organized by the Kosovo War Veterans
Association. KFOR was present at the scene. President Vučić also laid a wreath at the
site of Oliver Ivanović’s murder.
16. On 29 September, President Thaçi also paid a brief, unannounced visit to the
Gazivode reservoir, accompanied by Kosovo police, including special units,
provoking strong reactions from both Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade officials. KFOR
was present at the site of the visit, closely monitoring the situation. Following
President Thaçi’s departure, around 250 local Kosovo Serb political leaders and
residents gathered at the Gazivode reservoir to protest the visit and the presence of
Kosovo police special units. In a televised address on the same day, President Vučić
said that Thaçi’s visit was an “attack” by Pristina “paramilitaries” on the north and

18-18039

3/16

S/2018/981

violated the provisions relating to freedom of movement of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations (Brussels Agreement) of
19 April 2013 between Belgrade and Pristina, as well as Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). Serbian military and police units were reportedly placed on a heightened
state of readiness in response to the visit.
17. On 10 October, Kosovo Serbs held a rally in North Mitrovica to mark 2,000
days since the adoption of the Brussels Agreement, which, inter alia, provides for the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-majority municipalities. Over
1,500 people attended the rally, including municipal officials from northern Kosovo,
Kosovo Serb members of the government of Kosovo and representatives of the
Government of Serbia.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
18. On 18 July, the European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy hosted a high-level meeting of the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina in Brussels. According to the commun iqué
issued by the European External Action Service after the meeting, Presidents Vučić
and Thaçi “reviewed progress made in discussions on the framework of a legally
binding agreement on comprehensive normalization of relations between the two
sides”. Following the meeting, President Thaçi stated that it had been the “shortest
and most difficult meeting of the last six years”. President Vučić expressed
disappointment at what he described as “Pristina’s uncompromising attitude” but
noted that agreement had been reached on continuing the talks to find “a common
denominator of a compromise solution”.
19. On 4 August, the management team responsible for drafting the statute of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities announced the completion o f
its work by the deadline set by Pristina. The team further indicated its readiness to
share the draft document with both sides at a technical-level meeting in Brussels,
which was not convened during the reporting period. Throughout the drafting process,
Belgrade and Pristina maintained their opposing positions regarding the powers and
competences of the association/community. On 13 August, Pristina ’s chief negotiator
in the technical-level dialogue with Belgrade expressed dissatisfaction at the lack of
information from the management team about the content of the draft statute and
warned that Pristina might reject the draft if it were found to be incompatible with the
Constitution of Kosovo.
20. On 7 September, President Vučić and President Thaçi met separ ately with the
European Union High Representative in Brussels but declined to meet face to face.
In her statement to the press after the meetings, the High Representative expressed
confidence in the commitment of the sides to “reach in the coming months a legally
binding agreement in line with international law”. President Vučić and President
Thaçi also stated that they would continue to meet separately with the High
Representative until a joint meeting could take place. Earlier the same day, the
Kosovo authorities had revoked their authorization for President Vučić to travel to
the Gazivode reservoir during his planned visit to Kosovo on 8 and 9 September.
Serbian officials protested the decision, and the government of Kosovo subsequently
announced that the visit could proceed as planned.

4/16

18-18039

S/2018/981

V. Returns, reconciliation, cultural heritage and
community relations
21. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 53 voluntary returns to Kosovo by
members of non-majority communities (29 Kosovo Serbs, 16 Egyptians, four
Montenegrins and four Bosniaks). This brings the total number of voluntary returns
to Kosovo by members of non-majority communities since 2000 to 27,937 (13,707
women and 14,230 men). Challenges related to property restitution, allocation of land
for housing construction, security and socioeconomic opportunities for returnees
continued to have a negative effect on prospects for sustainable returns.
22. During the reporting period, there were renewed tensions between the Serbian
Orthodox Church and the government of Kosovo owing to construction work on a
road leading to the special protective zone of the Visoki Dečani monastery. On
26 July, representatives and Heads of mission in Kosovo visited the special protective
zone of the Visoki Dečani monastery, together with the Minister of Infrastructure of
Kosovo. In a statement issued after the visit, the representatives of European Union
member States stressed that, prior to any activity affecting a special protective zone,
the Implementation and Monitoring Council should be consulted and its decisions
fully respected. The Implementation and Monitoring Council did not meet during the
reporting period.
23. On 17 August, the Serbian Orthodox Church sent a letter to the municipality of
Lipjan/Lipljan, objecting to the construction of a commercial building and residential
units within the special protective zone of the Serbian Orthodox Church of the
Presentation of the Virgin in Lipjan/Lipljan to wn. The Eparchy of Raška-Prizren
requested the municipal department of planning, urbanism and environment to bring
the matter to the attention of the Implementatio n and Monitoring Council. On
24 September, 250 Kosovo Serbs submitted a petition to the mayor of Lipjan/Lipljan
opposing the plans by the municipal administration to construct an administrative
centre for the Islamic community within the same special protective zone.
24. Following the decision of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kosovo, taken on
5 July, on civil registration of non-majority communities in Kosovo, the civil registry
offices in Shtërpcë/Štrpce and Graçanicë/Gračanica municipalities began transcribing
civil registration documents issued by Belgrade-sponsored institutions between
10 June 1999 and 14 September 2016, allowing affected residents to obtain Kosovo
documents.
25. During the reporting period, UNMIK continued to monitor developments
related to the rights of Ashkalija, Egyptian and Roma communities in Kosovo. On
7 September, the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of Kosovo, with
support from the European Union, announced 500 scholarships for Roma, Ashkalija
and Egyptian secondary school students for the current academic year. Meanwhile,
the trust fund to support the Ashkalija, Egyptian and Roma communities affected by
lead poisoning in Kosovo, established in 2017 to follow up on the recommendations
of the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel, remained unfunded.

VI. Rule of law and human rights
26. On 16 July, the Court of Appeals of Kosovo confirmed an indictment against a
former member of the reserve forces of the Yugoslav police or paramilitary unit for
allegedly committing war crimes in the village of Krushë e Vogël/Mala Kruša between
15 and 26 March 1999. On 7 August, the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed

18-18039

5/16

S/2018/981

an indictment before the Basic Court of Pejë/Peć against a former Serb police officer
for allegedly committing war crimes against the civilian population in Klinë/Klina
municipality during June and July 1998.
27. On 23 July, the Basic Court of Pristina acquitted the Minister of Economic
Development of Kosovo of allegations that, as a public official in 2014, he had
directed funds to a non-governmental organization that he had founded. On 25 July,
the Basic Court of Gjakovë/Đakovica upheld an indictment against the Minister of
Infrastructure of Kosovo alleging abuse of official position for distributing illegal
subsidies in his capacity as mayor of Gjakovë/Đakovica but dismissed the crimin al
charge of “misappropriation in office”. The Minister continued to hold his post while
awaiting trial. Ensuring that public officials are held accountable for alleged abuses
of power is an important demonstration of the commitment of the authorities of
Kosovo to good governance. Fair and impartial trials of such cases help promote
public trust in the institutions of Kosovo.
28. On 13 August, Special Prosecutor Elez Blakaj resigned over alleged political
interference in and threats in connection with his investigation of several high-profile
cases, including a case of suspected benefits fraud involving Kosovo Liberation Army
veterans. The resignation triggered public protests in Pristina on 22 August and
26 September, in which demonstrators called for the resignation of the Chief
Prosecutor and a review of the current list of Kosovo Liberation Army veterans
maintained by the government of Kosovo. On 14 September, the Special Prosecution
Office of Kosovo filed an indictment before the Basic Court of Pristina against 12
former members of the government commission responsible for verifying the
veterans’ status. They stand accused of abusing their official position by illegally
issuing pensions, resulting in the loss of approximately €68 million. In addition, at
the end of September, the Basic Court of Pristina issued separate investigative
detention orders for two members of the Assembly of Kosovo for publicly
intimidating members of the judiciary.
29. The Kosovo government commission responsible for the verific ation and
recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence received 179
applications during the reporting period, of which 27 resulted in the granting of
survivor status, 49 were rejected and 103 are pending verification. This bri ngs the
total number of applications received since February 2018, when the government of
Kosovo officially opened the application process, to 782, with 137 women and 6 men
having been granted survivor status and 103 applications rejected. The issue of
reparations for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence was discussed at a
workshop organized by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), with support from the European Union, on
15 October in Pristina.
30. At the request of the joint working group on persons who are unaccounted for
in connection with events in Kosovo, UNMIK facilitated the provision from the
Global Service Centre in Brindisi of a ground-penetrating radar system. It was
deployed in August at sites proposed by the joint working group in an ongoing effort
to identify potential grave sites.

VII. Women, peace and security
31. In early August, the issue of domestic violence attracted increased public
attention in Kosovo following the alleged murder of a woman and her daughter by
the woman’s ex-husband in Gjakovё/Đakovica. Civil society groups organized
demonstrations in Gjakovё/Đakovica and Pristina. On 24 August, the Security and
Gender Group, a multi-stakeholder group chaired by UN-Women and comprising
6/16

18-18039

S/2018/981

international, government and civil society representatives, issued a statement calling
for a strengthened institutional response to prevent violence against women.
According to UN-Women, the true scope of the problem continues to be masked by
underreporting owing to perceptions of domestic violence as a private matter, coupled
with social stigma, fear of retaliation, lack of trust in competent authorities and
economic dependence on the perpetrator.
32. During the reporting period, members of the Security and Gender Group
supported amendments to the Kosovo Criminal Code to include a more
comprehensive definition of domestic violence, and to the Law on Family to include
provisions for the equal division of joint property. These amendments were approved
by the first reading of the Assembly of Kosovo on 23 July. On 10 August, the mayors
of Skenderaj/Srbica, Vushtrri/Vučitrn and South Mitrovica signed a memorandum of
understanding pledging support for the improvement of physical and living conditions
at the regional shelter for victims of domestic violence in South Mitrovica.
33. During the reporting period, a further step towards advan cing the role of women
in judicial institutions was taken with the establishment, on 5 September, of a
women’s association in the Kosovo Correctional Service. The Association seeks to
promote women leaders in the Kosovo Correctional Service and improve the
effectiveness of correctional institutions in Kosovo.
34. In the framework of the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on 15 September UN-Women, with support from UNMIK, organized a
dialogue event with the Regional Women’s Lobby for Peace Security and Justice in
Southeast Europe and members of parliament from the region. The event provided a
platform for women political and civil society leaders to discuss ways to empower
women to advance peace and security, including by positively influencing ongoing
political processes.

VIII. Partnerships and cooperation
35. During the reporting period, UNMIK, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Kosovo Team, began a new cycle of programmatic activities in the areas of
intercommunity trust-building, rule of law and human rights. United Nations partners
in Kosovo jointly continued activities in support of law enforcement, correctional and
court institutions, with a focus on equitable access to justice, integration of the
judiciary, the combating of domestic violence and the strengthening of legal aid
mechanisms.
36. Following the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum held in Ljubljana
from 6 to 8 May, UNMIK, in partnership with the United Nations Kosovo team,
provided strategic guidance and support to the realization of the initiatives identified
by participants at the Forum. In July, UNMIK conducted six follow -up workshops to
guide future action plans in each thematic area addressed at the Forum. Support for
the action plans was integrated into the Mission’s planned programmatic activities
and coordinated with international partners, including the Council of Europe, the
European Union, EULEX and the OSCE Mission in Kosovo. The rep ort of the Forum
was publicly released in September and presented by my Special Representative to
the Prime Minister of Kosovo, who pledged the government ’s cooperation and
support in the implementation of the recommendations of the Forum.
37. From 3 to 6 August, UNMIK provided training for the new members of the
Kosovo Youth Task Force, with a focus on how to bring issues to the attention of local
authorities, youth action councils, civil society representatives and religious
community leaders. On 11 August, at the invitation of the mayor of

18-18039

7/16

S/2018/981

Kamenicë/Kamenica and with support from UNMIK, 120 youths from communities
and representatives of the local authorities in Kamenicë/Kamenica participated in an
open consultation to mark International Youth Day.
38. On 9 August, UNMIK, in partnership with the United Nations Kosovo Team,
launched a documentary on the nexus between domestic violence and traditional
interpretations of property rights at the Prizren film festival. The screening was
followed by a panel discussion, which was moderated by the head of the UN -Women
office in Kosovo and which included the Deputy Minister of Justice of Kosovo, a
legal activist and one of the survivors featured in the film.
39. During the reporting period, UNMIK continued to provide document
certification services, processing 634 documents, including 367 relating to pensions
and 267 to civil status, such as high school and university diplomas, and marriage,
birth and death certificates. UNMIK also continued to facilitate liaison betw een the
Kosovo authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization. UNMIK
received and processed six requests for the issuance of international wanted notices.

IX. Observations
40. I welcome the continued engagement of Belgrade and Pristina in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue on normalization of relations. In acknowledging the
challenges that leaders on each side face in the pursuit of a solution, I remain
encouraged by their determination and commitment to resolving outstanding issues
through dialogue and urge greater involvement of all segments of society on both
sides in the process.
41. The European perspective continues to be vital for consolidating peace and
stability in the western Balkans and for its people to realize their aspirations. In this
respect, I wish to acknowledge the continued support and engagement of the
European Union, including through the European Commission’s western Balkans
strategy and its facilitation of the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina.
42. I welcome the work spearheaded by UNMIK, with support from the United
Nations Kosovo team, towards implementation of the important recommendations
reached at the United Nations Kosovo Trust-building Forum held in Ljubljana from
6 to 8 May. In this respect, I encourage continued engagement with the government
of Kosovo, civil society, and bilateral and international partners to ensure their active
support for intercommunity trust-building efforts in Kosovo. At the same time,
UNMIK, working closely with the United Nations Kosovo team and international
partners, should continue to contribute to societal reconciliation, which is crucial for
stability in Kosovo and for the creation of conditions conducive to compromise. The
empowerment of women, youth and civil society will remain at the centre of the
Mission’s efforts in this regard.
43. I am concerned at renewed tensions in connection with construction activities
in the special protective zones. I call on all concerned to uphold their commitment to
protect the religious heritage and reiterate the importance of addressing such matters
in line with the legislation of Kosovo and decisions of the Implementation and
Monitoring Council.
44. Domestic violence remains a serious concern in Kosovo. Addressing the root
causes, as well as ensuring effective implementation of relevant legislation, requires
sustained attention and genuine commitment from all institutional actors. I encourage
the Kosovo institutions to take further initiatives to address domestic violence,

8/16

18-18039

S/2018/981

including by strengthening existing legislation and by increasing support for rights based rehabilitation and reintegration of victims of domestic violence.
45. I note with regret the lack of response to the appeals of the United Nations for
contributions to the trust fund established in support of the Roma, Ashkalija and
Egyptian communities affected by lead poisoning in Kosovo. Contributions to the
trust fund would be a tangible demonstration of international support for these
vulnerable communities and their urgent needs.
46. I thank my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, and all UNMIK staff for the
energy, creativity and dedication they put into the Mission’s work. I reiterate my
gratitude to the long-standing partners of the United Nations in Kosovo, KFOR,
OSCE, the European Union Special Representative and offices on the ground, and to
the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, for their continued teamwork
and collaboration with UNMIK.

18-18039

9/16

S/2018/981

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
from 16 July to 15 October 2018
1.

Summary
Following the start of its new two-year mandate in mid-June 2018, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued its reconfiguration, which
will last six months and is due to end in mid-December. The Mission is undergoing a
recruitment process for both international and local staff under the new structure and
aims at reaching full operational capability by mid -December.
A major reconfiguration-related task consists in the finalization of the process
for handing over to the local authorities of thousands of prosecution and police case
files related to organized crime and war crimes.
At the same time, EULEX, in coordination with the European Union Special
Representative/European Union Office in Kosovo, has been preparing the ground for
a smooth transition of some of its monitoring functions to the European Union Special
Representative/European Union Office in Kosovo. As the latter progressively recruits
and deploys experts to assist the Kosovo Police Service, and the Judicial and
Prosecutorial Councils and Civil Registry of Kosovo, EULEX counterparts will
facilitate this process by briefing in detail their colleagues on the state of affairs and
the challenges ahead in each of these rule of law institutions.
The process of reconfiguring EULEX goes hand in hand with progressively
increased responsibilities relating to the rule of law on the side of the Kosovo
counterparts. A case in point is the recent launch of Justice 2020, an initiative led by
the Minister of Justice, in cooperation with the chairs of the judicial and prosecutorial
councils of Kosovo and supported by the European Union Special
Representative/European Union Office in Kosovo, EULEX, as well as the embassies
of the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland in Pristina, to improve the performance and accountability of the
justice system of Kosovo. EULEX will support this locally owned initiative by
providing, under its new refocused mandate, its monitoring capability to the justice
system.

2.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

2.1.

Monitoring
EULEX has continued the monitoring of selected cases and trials in the Kosovo
justice system, including, but not limited to, some of the transferred EULEX cases.
Selected cases, handed over to local counterparts, have been monitored closely and
assessed on their adherence to Kosovo law and human rights standards, among other
legal criteria. When it comes to the handling of sensitive and/or high -profile cases,
EULEX has identified a concerning tendency to terminate or amend proceedings in
the interest of defendants without sufficient reasoning and/ or any legal basis since
EULEX phased out its investigative, prosecutorial and judicial functions in mid -June
2018. For instance, a high-profile defendant was recently released by the court from
house arrest on the grounds that the prosecution had failed to request an extension of
detention. According to article 193 of the Criminal Procedure Code, however, it is the
court that has to examine ex officio whether the reasons for detention still exist.

10/16

18-18039

S/2018/981

As far as the Kosovo Correctional Service is concerned, t he selection process
for supervisors, senior supervisors and heads of units has been finalized, with only
some selected candidates awaiting final approval by the Director General of the
Kosovo Correctional Service. This is a positive development, as numero us staff
members had been holding acting appointments for a long time, which had a great
impact on the Service’s efficiency. Moreover, the Service is going to publish a call
for 120 new vacancies for correctional officers soon.
Preferential treatment of a select group of high-profile prisoners remains of
concern. During the hospitalization of several high-profile prisoners at the University
Clinical Centre of Kosovo, EULEX again observed a lack of adherence to the
regulations by Kosovo Correctional Service officers. In response, EULEX provided
senior management of the Service with a set of recommendations. These include the
amendment of the current regulation on hospital guarding, which was agreed to start
as a joint task in September; the provision of a specifically designed training
programme and the reinitialization of the corresponding Kosovo Correctional Service
internal oversight mechanism. A secure ward at the University Clinical Centre of
Kosovo would also help to minimize the risk of preferential t reatment, escape and
unauthorized visits. However, the currently designated space for a secure ward is not
in use.
There have lately been a couple of serious incidents in the Dubrava correctional
centre, including the suicide of a prisoner in a psychiatric ward, raising concerns
about medical treatment and the incident itself, and an escape by two prisoners,
pointing to the negligence of the responsible Kosovo Correctional Service staff. In
recent months, the Service has transferred 10 prisoners of Albani an ethnicity to the
Mitrovica detention centre. Four Kosovo Correctional Service staff members of
Albanian ethnicity have as a result also been transferred to the Centre, marking an
important step towards establishing a multi-ethnic Mitrovica detention centre. The
opening of the Pristina Detention Centre, which had been planned to be operational
as of August, is, however, still pending owing to a lack of catering services. While
the intention initially was to close the Lipjan/Lipljan Detention Centre and to use its
staff and supplies in the Pristina Detention Centre, the plan to shut down the
Lipjan/Lipljan Detention Centre has changed in the meantime and the Kosovo
Correctional Service is looking for a new solution.
EULEX, in coordination with several local non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), as well as local institutions and international organizations (including the
Kosovo Women’s Network, the Office of Gender Equality, UN -Women and the
United States Department of Justice International Criminal Investi gative Training
Assistance Program), has contributed to the launch of the women ’s association in the
Kosovo Correctional Service. The aim of the new internal Association is to advance
the position of women within the Service, to raise awareness of and to promote gender
equality and to offer professional development opportunities for women. Currently,
women constitute 13 per cent of the Kosovo Correctional Service staff, and only a
few of them hold decision-making positions. In line with the Law on Gender Equality,
all public institutions in Kosovo are obliged to promote gender equality and ensure
equal gender representation.
There has been no notable progress regarding the implementation of the
integrated border management technical protocol facilitated by the European Union.
All integrated border management meetings were cancelled by Belgrade in March
until further notice. The establishment of the permanent common crossing points has
continued, with the ongoing construction of two of the six common crossing points,
namely Merdarë/Merdare and Mutivodë/Mutivode. The work on drafting the new
integrated border management strategy/action plan for 2018–2023 is progressing.
There has also been some headway made with regard to implementation of the
18-18039

11/16

S/2018/981

National Centre for Border Management development plan for 2014–2018, following
formal approval of the review of the National Centre for Border Management and
associated action plan by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Integrated Border
Management Executive Board.
EULEX continues to monitor, mentor and advise on the implementation of the
freedom of movement agreements. The Mission conducted field visits to all civil
registration and civil status offices in the four northern municipalities. While the civil
registration offices for the issuance of documents, identification documents,
passports, driver’s licenses and vehicle registration are all operational, with former
officers of the Ministry of Interior of Serbia being integrated and working, the civil
status offices are operational only in the Albanian-majority areas and the integration
into these offices of the now 37 officers formerly of the Ministry of Interior of Serbia
has still not been completed despite budgetary arrangements being in place. EULEX
has shared its findings with the local authorities, the Civil Registration Agency and
the Ministry of Internal Affairs. EULEX has in these findings highlighted the
particular importance of establishing the civil status offices and the administrative
infrastructure to provide the respective services, as well as the recognition of the
documents of birth, marriage, death and vehicle registration that were issued by
Belgrade-sponsored structures.
As regards the newly integrated Basic Court of Mitrovica, the integration
continues to proceed as per agreement. Language barriers have remained a significant
obstacle, affecting case allocation. Progress was made in deploying additional
translators to the Court and eventually the President of the Mitrovica Basic Court
assigned more than 1,000 cases stemming from the 2001–2008 period and 500 cases
stemming from November 2017 to the judges.
EULEX provided monitoring, mentoring and advising in response to the
investigation of the murder of the prominent Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanović,
facilitating meetings between the Kosovo police and Serbian police to increase the
exchange of information and cooperation on the investigation.
2.2.

Operations
In view of the expiry of the previous mandate and the phasing out of executive
judicial competencies of the Mission, EULEX judges either completed or handed over
to local counterparts all the remaining cases prior to 14 June. The Mission progressed
in the transfer of prosecution and police case files to Kosovo institutions. The
handover is progressing towards completion by 14 December 2018.
In line with its new mandate, the Mission continues to provide support to the
Kosovo Police in international police cooperation. In this regard, EULEX has
facilitated exchange of information between the national central bureaus of the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the International Law
Enforcement Coordination Unit of the Kosovo Police under the umbrella of the
UNMIK INTERPOL Liaison Office. In addition, the Mission has provided
recommendations to Kosovo Police in order to help Kosovo Police officers
specializing in the field of illicit trade of works of arts; a study visit to Rome on the
subject has also been conducted. The Mission has also maintained an information
exchange with the Ministry of Interior of Serbia. However, the exchange of
information regarding the Oliver Ivanović case remains challenging.
EULEX forensic experts are still waiting for a formal letter of invitation from
the Ministry of Justice to continue assisting the local authorities in dealing with
missing persons cases after the new EULEX mandate entered into force. At the end
of July, the Ministry of Justice unexpectedly withdrew confirmation of a contract
renewal for the local company that was providing technical support in conducting

12/16

18-18039

S/2018/981

field assessments with EULEX forensic experts, with a decision to republish the
tender. While the selection process is still ongoing, this has resulted in the cessation
of all field work as from the beginning of August. At the end of August, the acting
director was appointed by the government as director of the Institute of Forensic
Medicine, following a lengthy recruitment process resulting from a lack of interest
from qualified candidates.
The EULEX formed police unit continues to maintain capabilities as a second
security responder. In order to ensure operational readiness of the formed police unit,
internal training sessions, as well as joint training sessions with Kosovo Police and
KFOR, have been held.

3.

Other key issues
Nothing significant to report.

18-18039

13/16

S/2018/981

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
During the reporting period, the Specialist Chambers made considerable steps
towards the finalization of the Code of Professional Conduct for Counsel and the
Legal Aid Regulations for the managed provision of legal assistance to accused and
victims. The Specialist Chambers also continued monitoring the establishment of an
independent representative body for all counsel admitted to practise before the
Specialist Chambers. Counsel on the lists of specialist defence counsel and victims ’
counsel have set up a working group with the aim of defining the contours of the
independent representative body.
The Specialist Chambers continued to take further steps to ensure transparency
and access to information relating to future proceedings through the development of
a dedicated database on its website for public access to public court records, which
will allow searches in the three official languages o f the Specialist Chambers
(Albanian, English and Serbian).
The Specialist Chambers continued to promote its outreach activities in Kosovo
and Serbia to increase knowledge of its mandate and procedure among civil society
and to bolster direct communications with affected communities. From 16 to 19 July,
the head of the Victims’ Participation Office of the Specialist Chambers met with
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society organizations in Kosovo,
holding informational sessions with potential victims’ communities. Between 3 and
8 September 2018, representatives of the Specialist Chambers travelled to different
cities in Kosovo to engage in outreach activities, including a round table with youth,
a meeting with local partners to plan future outreach activities and informational
sessions for Roma, Ashkalija and Egyptian communities on the procedure for the
participation of victims in proceedings before the Specialist Chambers. From 17 to
19 September 2018, representatives of the Specialist Chambers met with several
victims’ associations and held consultative meetings with NGO partner organizations
in Belgrade to plan the future outreach strategy of the Specialist Chambers in Serbia.
The representatives also met with the President of the Serbian Bar Association to
prepare an informational session for Serbian counsel on the process of application for
admission to the lists of counsel practicing before the Specialist Chambers.
During the reporting period, the Registrar was requested by the International
Gender Champions to join the leadership network. The Registrar has pledged to
further enhance gender mainstreaming in the Specialist Chambers and will host an
outreach event to receive recommendations on the integration of gender issues i nto
the provision of judicial support services.
The Ombudsperson for the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor ’s
Office, Pietro Spera, has increased the visibility of his office by publishing full details
of the role and functions of the Ombudsperson on the Specialist Chambers website.
In furtherance of his mandate, on 12 September 2018, the Ombudsperson adopted a
code of professional conduct for the Ombudsperson, as well as a complaints
procedure for persons alleging human rights violations as a r esult of their interactions
with the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office. As part of his
outreach strategy, the Ombudsperson undertook his first official visit to Kosovo from
3 to 5 October, holding a courtesy meeting with the Kosovo Omb udsperson and giving
interviews to media outlets.
The judges of the Specialist Chambers conducted a three -day workshop hosted
together with the National Institute for the Judiciary of Bulgaria between 26 and

14/16

18-18039

S/2018/981

28 September in Varna, Bulgaria, focusing on the efficient management of
proceedings, interlocutory decisions and drafting of judgments.
In September 2018, the President of the Specialist Chambers met with the new
Civilian Operations Commander and Director of the Civilian Planning and Conduct
Capability of the European External Action Service in Brussels to provide updates on
the latest developments at the Specialist Chambers. She also met with ambassadors
of a number of European Union Member States.
The engagement of the Specialist Chambers with the host State and other
external counterparts remains ongoing in relation to the renovation of and transition
to the future premises of the Specialist Chambers in The Hague. The Registrar has
regular contact and meetings with the Ambassador for International Organizations of
the Netherlands, and the Ministry of Justice and Security of the Netherlands, to ensure
that the services to be provided by the host State are available to the Specialist
Chambers.
Jack Smith, a United States prosecutor with experience in international criminal
investigations, took up his position as Specialist Prosecutor on 11 September. He
succeeded David Schwendiman, the first Specialist Prosecutor and formerly the Lead
Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force, who stepped dow n at the end of
March, when his term as a Senior Foreign Service Officer in the United States State
Department expired. In the intervening period, the Deputy Specialist Prosecutor,
Kwai Hong Ip, headed the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, leading the investigation
into the allegations contained in the January 2011 report of the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking
in human organs” and ensuring continuity.
Under the law establishing the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office, the Specialist Chambers has primacy over all other courts in Kosovo. The
Specialist Prosecutor has, among other things, the authority to call upon the
institutions of Kosovo to assist him. In addition, EULEX, under its new mandate,
provides logistical and operational support to the Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office. As the investigation moves forward, such assistance, as well as
that of the Belgrade authorities, the European Union and the wider international
community, will become increasingly important. The Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office
requires the continued engagement and full support of the international community,
international organizations and individual States in all its activiti es.

18-18039

15/16

S/2018/981

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 1 October 2018)
Country

Women

Austria

1

Men

Total

1

Bulgaria

1

1

Finland

1

1

Germany

1

Hungary
Russian Federation

1

Turkey
Total

3

1
2

2

2

3

2

2

8

11

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 1 October 2018)
Country

Women

Men

Total

Czechia

1

1

2

Poland

1

1

Republic of Moldova

1

1

Romania

1

1

Turkey

1

1

Ukraine

2

2

7

8

Total

16/16

1

18-18039
