S/PV.9406

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9406th meeting

Friday, 25 August 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Kesse Antwi
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-25113 (E)
*2325113*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: At 3.50 a.m. local time on 24 August,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conducted
what it described as its “second launch of a military
reconnaissance satellite” from the Sohae Satellite
Launching Station. The launch follows a previous
attempt to launch a satellite on 31 May. According to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the launch
failed “due to an error in the emergency blasting system
during the third-stage flight”. Official media said
that a third reconnaissance satellite launch would be
conducted in October.
While the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
issued a pre-launch notification to the Japanese
Coast Guard, it did not issue airspace or maritime
safety notifications to the International Maritime
Organization, the International Civil Aviation
Organization or the International Telecommunications
Union. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
unannounced launches represent a serious risk to
international civil aviation and maritime traffic.
On 24 August, the Secretary-General strongly
condemned this launch of yet another satellite
using ballistic missile technology. Any launch by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea using
ballistic missile technology is contrary to the relevant
2/18

25/08/2023

Security Council resolutions. He reiterated his call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease
such acts and to swiftly resume dialogue without
preconditions to achieve the goal of sustainable peace
and the complete and verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
It should be recalled that developing a military
reconnaissance satellite was part of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s five-year military
development plan, unveiled in January 2021. In line with
the plan, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
significantly increased its missile launch activities in
2022 and 2023, including more than 90 launches using
ballistic missile technology, in violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
As we have previously briefed, there is a need
for practical measures to reduce tensions, reverse
the dangerous dynamic and create space to explore
diplomatic avenues. I emphasize the importance of
re-establishing communication channels, particularly
among military entities. Exercising maximum restraint
is critical to avoiding unintended escalation. Diplomacy
and dialogue, not isolation, are the only way forward. In
that respect, the Secretary-General commends Japan,
the Republic of Korea and the United States for their
continued willingness and offers to engage in dialogue
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on any
issue without preconditions.
Pending the complete and verifiable denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula, it is imperative that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea maintain the
highest level of safety at its nuclear facilities, in order
to prevent nuclear accidents that would be disastrous
for the region and the world.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2397
(2017), reaffirmed its decisions that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea shall suspend all activities
related to its ballistic missile programme, abandon all
nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes, in
a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner, and
immediately cease all related activities.
Since our last briefing on 13 July (see S/PV.9376),
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has openly
displayed its nuclear-weapon delivery systems during
both a weaponry exhibition and a military parade. Such
displays undermine the global nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that underpins it.
23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

I would like to highlight once more our concerns
regarding the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, compounded by climate
hazards and ongoing border closures. The United
Nations is ready to assist the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in addressing the basic needs of its
vulnerable population.
We have been closely following reports of an
easing of border restrictions by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Given the progress in
vaccines and treatments and the declaration by the
World Health Organization Director-General on 5 May
that the coronavirus disease no longer constitutes a
public health emergency of international concern,
we urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to allow the unimpeded re-entry and rotation of the
international community, including the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and other international United
Nations staff. A collective return would have a positive
impact on international support to the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and strengthen
communication channels.
Let me close by stressing that the unity of the
Security Council is essential.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States of America.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
informative briefing.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
once again defied the Council. It has defied the Council
by continuing to pursue its unlawful ballistic missile
programme. On 23 August, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea attempted yet again to launch a
satellite, using a space launch vehicle. But although
that launch failed and although we were given advance
notification, this is another violation of Security
Council resolutions — a violation the United States
condemns in the strongest possible terms.
The Security Council has repeatedly demanded that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not conduct
any further launches using ballistic missile technology.
Those launches directly undermine the non-proliferation
regime. They move us away from our collective goal
of disarmament and threaten the neighbours of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the entire
world. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9406

claims, as it always has, that its pursuit of a nuclear
weapons programme is an act of self-defence. But we
all know the truth. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea puts its paranoia and selfish interests over the
dire needs of the North Korean people.
The war machine of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is fuelled by repression and cruelty,
as the Council heard from United Nations experts just
last week (see S/PV.9398). It is shameful and a grave
threat to global peace. The most recent launch of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea caused an
evacuation alert in Okinawa, Japan, raised tensions
in North-East Asia, destabilized the security situation
in the region and increased the risk of triggering
military escalation. With each test, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea further refines its weapons
capabilities, and Pyongyang has already announced its
commitment to launching another satellite in October.
I urge every single member of the Council to condemn
that launch and discourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from conducting another test.
The vast majority of Council members have
affirmed their opposition to the unlawful actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and called for
Council unity to address them. We thank those members.
We thank them for their continued partnership and
dedication to non-proliferation. But Council members
must listen closely today to the representatives of those
countries that condemn and oppose the continued
pursuit of nuclear weapons by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and pay equal attention to those that
do not. We must pay attention to which countries try to
shield Kim Jong Un from criticism by pointing fingers
at those of us calling out and defending ourselves from
the regime’s reckless behaviour. This should be an issue
that unifies us.
We have all reaffirmed our commitment to the
global non-proliferation regime time and time again.
But since the beginning of 2022, the Council has
failed to live up to its commitments because of the
obstructionism of China and Russia. That is a relatively
new phenomenon here and an increasingly troubling
one, I have to say. If we go back and watch Council
meetings from a few years ago, in 2017, every Council
member condemned or opposed the unlawful actions of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We used to
stand together, and we used to stand united.

23-251133/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Let me be clear, the United States and our allies
have not changed our positions. We have always been
committed to defending against the continued pursuit of
nuclear weapons by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and our defensive joint military exercises
are not new. So, what changed? Why are some in the
Council now offering up excuses for the pursuit of
nuclear weapons by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea?
Last month, senior Russian and Chinese officials
stood beside Kim Jong Un for a celebration of the
regime’s ballistic missile advancement — I repeat, a
celebration. The nuclear threat posed by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is growing, and Russia
and China are not living up to their responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Instead,
they are celebrating violations of Security Council
resolutions and continuing to block Council action.
While the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
refuses entry to international aid workers, who could
help alleviate the suffering of the North Korean people,
the regime invites foreign leaders to Pyongyang to
show off its unlawful weapons development.
I want to reiterate that the United States remains
committed to diplomacy, publicly and privately. At
senior levels, we have repeatedly urged the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to engage in dialogue. I
offer that to the Ambassador today. We are prepared to
engage in diplomacy. We have made clear that we have
no preconditions for engagement and are prepared to
discuss any topic of concern to his Government. But
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has still not
responded to our offers.
We must return to an era in which we used our
collective voice to curb nuclear proliferation. We
must unequivocally denounce the unlawful behaviour
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We
must call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to fully and faithfully implement all relevant
Security Council resolutions. We must address the
global revenue-generating activities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that fund its unlawful
weapons programme.
Division only empowers the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Let us therefore work together once
again to confront this pressing threat to international
peace and security.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
4/18

25/08/2023

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
Albania strongly condemns the launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime of a
space vehicle carrying the country’s first military
reconnaissance satellite. This is Pyongyang’s second
failure in two months to put a spy satellite into orbit.
We further condemn the announcement by the regime
of a third attempt of this kind in October.
Despite the fact that such efforts have failed so far,
the biggest and the most worrisome aspect of all of this
is the regime’s failure to comply with its obligations
under international law. Such actions and statements
are in violation of Security Council resolutions that
prohibit North Korea from testing any technology
that can be used to build ballistic missiles; the regime
openly challenges these resolutions. We deplore that the
regime has immured itself into a posture of defiance to
the international community and continues to pursue
its efforts to strengthen and modernize Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s military capabilities, in
a display of egregious behaviour that exacerbates the
volatile security situation across the entire Korean
peninsula. We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease these
acts and swiftly resume dialogue without preconditions.
Today’s meeting is yet another important occasion,
at a critical time, for the Security Council to come
together and show unity, promoting the clear and
strong message that enough is enough. Security
Council resolutions are not concept notes, non-papers
or talking points. They are mandatory legal documents,
with which the regime has an international obligation
to comply. Therefore, attempts to show understanding
for the regime’s provocative and escalatory actions or
whatever efforts that are undertaken to protect it on
its dangerous course have the direct and proven effect
of emboldening the regime on its erroneous course.
They are the same as providing Pyongyang with a
licence to breach Security Council resolutions, violate
a comprehensive sanctions regime and remain an
unwarranted threat to peace and security.
Let us face the truth that such a conciliatory
approach has failed in practice. It has not helped to
bring the regime closer to fulfilling its obligations,
nor has it led to any de-escalation. In short, it has
23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

not brought any sense of security to the people of the
Korean peninsula. Quite the contrary, that approach
has convinced the regime that it could get away with
committing crimes. This is unacceptable because it is
wrong and dangerous. The warmongers in North Korea
must know that actions have consequences.
We regret that the voice of the majority of Security
Council members, which is calling for the Council to
react to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
illegal, unprovoked and reckless actions, has not so
far been taken into consideration. By being disunited
on this issue, the Council is failing its mandate and is
not discharging its core responsibility. We therefore
reiterate our position that not talking the talk to the
North Korean regime when it persists in its defiant,
escalatory and dangerous behaviour is not a contribution
to peace and security. In this respect, we wonder about
the real impact and usefulness of the Russian Minister
of Defence’s visit to Pyongyang amid suspicious and
illegal arms deals with a country that is threatening
its neighbours.
That is why, more than ever, we believe that the
situation requires the Security Council to respond with
diplomatic tools and a strong unified response. We
do not have to wait for the worst to happen before we
react. This is one of the best cases for fully exploring
prevention efforts. Such efforts must be fully explored.
All of North Korea’s neighbours, including Japan
and the Republic of Korea, need to be assured that the
Council takes the threat posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea regime seriously and is determined
and committed to responding in a prompt and proper
way. Just a few days ago, in this Chamber, we discussed
the dire and worsening humanitarian and human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
that has resulted from the deplorable path chosen by its
regime to deny its population food they need and provide
itself weapons they do not (see S/PV.9398).
In concluding, let me reaffirm that we will continue
to advocate and support genuine efforts to address the
threat posed by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea through collective preventive diplomacy and
ensure that the regime ends its weapons-of-massdestruction, ballistic and nuclear-weapons programmes
fully, transparently, comprehensively and irreversibly.
We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to give diplomacy more than just a chance. It is high
time for the Security Council to come together again,

S/PV.9406

speak with one voice and be united in a clear response
as soon as possible.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Khaled Khiari, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific,
for his briefing. I acknowledge the presence of the
Permanent Representatives of the Republic of Korea
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at
today’s meeting.
Ecuador strongly condemns the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s new failed attempt, on
23 August 2023, to launch a satellite. My delegation
sympathizes with the people of Japan for the risks they
faced with this launch.
This act is a further example of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s flagrant violations of the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council prohibiting
any kind of launch using ballistic-missile technology.
On 2 June 2023, in this very Chamber, the majority of
Security Council members condemned the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s first attempt to launch
a military reconnaissance satellite (see S/PV.9336).
Only three months later, we are faced with this new
situation, which again challenges the actions of the
Security Council.
On 21 June 2023, the Foreign Ministers of the
States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization issued a statement in which, inter alia,
they declared that:
“the prevention of an arms race in outer space
and its preservation for peaceful purposes must
be the immutable political norm for states and a
universally recognized international commitment”
and further, pledged:
“to take every possible measure to prevent outer
space from being turned into a battlefield and to
ensure the safety of space activities”.
That is why we expect those States’ condemnation
of this launch, which is undeniably a violation of
international law, the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolutions 2087 (2013) and
2270 (2016), and resolutions of the General Assembly.
Ecuador also recalls the importance of observing the
basic principles for the peaceful use of outer space,
set forth in the Treaty on Principles Governing the

23-251135/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies.
My delegation demands that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea fully comply with its obligations
under the resolutions of the Security Council, refrain
from further attempts to launch satellites using ballistic
technology, and resume cooperation to achieve the goal
of sustainable peace in the region as well as its complete
and verifiable denuclearization.
In conclusion, I reiterate the call for the Security
Council to strive for unity and undertake a dialogue
based on good faith that will allow for a diplomatic and
political solution to be found for the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
On 24 August, North Korea once again attempted to
launch a military satellite. That attempt, like the one on
31 May, is a flagrant violation of international law. France
strongly condemns that provocative and destabilizing
action, which deliberately violates Security Council
resolutions and international law and represents a
triple threat: to international peace and security, to the
integrity of the international non-proliferation regime
and to the authority of the Council.
Since 2009, the Security Council has repeatedly
called on North Korea to refrain from ballistic missile
activities designed to be capable of delivering nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction.
Given the close similarity of the technologies used
in space launches and ballistic launches, this launch
bears witness to the already worrisome progress made
by North Korea in its ballistic missile programme.
It demonstrates the determination to continue the
escalation of recent months, which have seen an
unprecedented acceleration in launches and an increase
in irresponsible statements made by Pyongyang.

25/08/2023

without conditions with a view to North Korea’s
complete, verifiable and irreversible abandonment
of its nuclear and ballistic programmes, in line with
Security Council resolutions.
France therefore urges North Korea to comply
with its international obligations without delay and
to return to the negotiating table by responding to the
offers of dialogue that have been presented to it on
several occasions.
In the light of North Korea’s provocations, which
threaten regional and international peace and security,
the Council must be exemplary and united to ensure
the implementation of its resolutions and to combat in
particular the circumvention of sanctions.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing.
Brazil joins the international community in
condemning the use of ballistic missile technology in
the launch of a satellite launch vehicle by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on 24 August.
While fully recognizing the right of all countries
to pursue peaceful space programmes, Brazil stresses
the imperative for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to strictly comply with all of its obligations under
international law and Security Council resolutions. As
we noted in June (see S/PV.9336), the Chollima-1 rocket
uses engines similar to those used in the liquid-fuelled
intercontinental ballistic missile Hwasong-15. That
constitutes a clear violation of resolution 2094 (2013),
which prohibits the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
from conducting “any further launches that use ballistic
missile technology” (resolution 2094 (2013), para. 2).

The Council cannot remain inactive and must
respond in unison to the new violation of its resolutions.
We will not accept North Korea becoming a nuclear
State. France will not accept the trivialization of such a
threat to regional and international peace and security.

Brazil will continue to make efforts to promote a
meaningful engagement that can contribute to lowering
tensions and reducing the risks of escalation. At the
same time, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
I reiterate, must comply with all its international
obligations, just as any State must, by abiding by
international law in general and the Charter of the
United Nations specifically.

As such, it is essential that all members of the
Council ensure that no support is provided to North
Korea for the further development of its nuclear and
ballistic programmes. We must collectively continue to
call for de-escalation and the resumption of dialogue

We urge all parties to exercise restraint when
responding to space launches and stress that meaningful
engagement, not isolation, remains our best path
towards a Korean peninsula that is peaceful, stable and
free of nuclear weapons.

6/18

23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his informative briefing.
Malta is deeply concerned about the recent attempt
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
launch a satellite and strongly condemns it. The launch
is another blatant violation of resolution 2397 (2017),
which prohibits the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea from conducting any launch using ballistic
missile technology.
We are gravely concerned about the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s intention to conduct
another launch in October, which would constitute yet
another act of defiance and destabilization.
Even though this launch has failed, such tests can
help the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
improve its technology and advance its programme.
Malta joined others in calling for this meeting as it
recognizes that those acts increase tensions and risk
further destabilizing the region. They pose a serious
threat to international peace and security and erode the
global non-proliferation regime.
We recall that the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2397 (2017). At the time (see S/PV.8151), it
had also established that it would act and place further
restrictions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in case of new violations.

S/PV.9406

Malta calls on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to restore access to the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors in order to provide its population
with the aid it requires.
In conclusion, we reiterate that our shared objective
is peace and the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula. In order to achieve that, we need a strong
and united Council. Divisions and inaction will only
postpone our objectives indefinitely.
To that end, Malta remains supportive of a Council
product to express the Council’s determination in
ensuring peace and security on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing. I welcome
the participation of the representatives of the Republic
of Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea at this meeting.
On 24 August, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea made yet another failed launch of a military
reconnaissance satellite. It triggered Japan’s local alert
system in Okinawa. This was yet another grave violation
of Security Council resolutions and a brazen effort to
further expand the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s military programme. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has said it will try again.

We remain firm in our belief that the Council
cannot be silent in the face of these provocations.
Persistent inability to act would simply undermine the
Council’s credibility as the guarantor of international
peace and security.

Claims that so-called provocations, or rather,
legitimate and transparently declared military exercises,
cause those launches are baseless. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is not reacting: this is part of
a long-established, clearly defined plan that has required
extensive scientific and technological investment.

We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to cease all provocative acts, engage in
meaningful dialogue and adhere to its obligations
under Security Council resolutions. It must completely,
verifiably and irreversibly abandon its ballistic missiles
programme and return to the Non-Proliferation Treaty
and International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.

Kim Jong Un said it himself in January: the
National Aerospace Development Administration will
launch the first military satellite at the earliest date
possible by pushing ahead with the full preparation
for a reconnaissance satellite and its vehicle, a major
task to boost the political, ideological, military and
technical strength of his army.

Malta also remains deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in the country, the restrictions
to humanitarian access and the grave human rights
violations perpetrated by the regime, as highlighted
during last week’s discussion (see S/PV.9398). Serious
humanitarian needs continue to be ignored by the
leadership of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Instead, it chooses to allocate resources to its
costly ballistic missile and illegal weapons programmes.

The Council must take action. All of us here have
signed and ratified and support the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. All of us should
be committed to the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions. We have a responsibility to uphold
those obligations.
Our words and deeds matter. They are the message
we send to the world about our commitment to

23-251137/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

preventing nuclear non-proliferation globally. We took
note of the presence of permanent members, including
the Russian Defence Minister, at a weapons exhibition
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
with intercontinental ballistic missiles on display.
Interactions such as those signal support for United
Nations-sanctioned weapons programmes. The United
Kingdom urges the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to cease the launches, to return to dialogue and
to take credible steps towards denuclearization and
peace on the Korean peninsula. We hope its presence at
this meeting is a step forward in that regard.
The biggest victims of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s military programme are the North
Korean people. Resources are diverted away from
their basic economic needs. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea should open its borders and engage
with the United Nations.
All United Nations States Members have an
obligation to fully implement Security Council
resolutions, including sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. I call on all members of
the Council to reiterate their condemnation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s illegal nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, in line with their
responsibilities as United Nations Member States and
signatories to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for his briefing.
It is regrettable that we are here yet again to
discuss the same issue as we discussed in June and
July concerning the latest intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) launch (see S/PV.9336 and S/PV.9376).
North Korea’s series of actions — including this week’s
launch using ballistic missile technology, which flew
directly over the Japanese archipelago — severely
threaten the peace and security of Japan, the region and
the entire international community. Those aggressive
acts are flagrant violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and pose a serious challenge to the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. Japan
joins the Secretary-General in strongly condemning
North Korea for the recent launch.
This is not about the right to use outer space. This
is not about exercising the right to self-defence. This
is about violations of Security Council resolutions.
8/18

25/08/2023

This is about the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
In the face of North Korea’s unlawful nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes, the Council has adopted
many resolutions prohibiting any launch using ballistic
missile technology. That is why the Secretary-General
and the majority of Council members condemned the
satellite launch at our June meeting, regardless of
whether it carried a satellite or not and regardless of
whether it failed or not. Nevertheless, North Korea
has continued to ignore and deny its international
obligations, and instead chose to pursue its military
ambition according to its five-year plan. It has even
shamelessly announced its intention to conduct another
launch in October.
North Korea is disrespectful towards the Council
and the Charter of the United Nations. Let me remind
fellow colleagues once again that our solemn duty as
responsible Council members cannot be fulfilled by
simply sitting and discussing the matter from our seats
in the Chamber. It requires taking concrete actions
when confronted with violations of the Council’s own
resolutions. Furthermore, our responsibility is to never
celebrate a military parade that includes ICBMs, which
demonstrates a clear violation of Security Council
resolutions. I urge all Council members to be aware of
our responsibilities and to restore the unity that was
shown in 2017.
Last week, when we gathered in this Chamber to
discuss the human rights situation in North Korea, we all
heard shocking remarks from a North Korean defector:
“The Government turns our blood and sweat into
a luxurious life for the leadership and missiles that
blast our hard work into the sky. We used to think
that the money spent on just one missile could feed
us for three months, but the Government does not
care.” (S/PV.9398, p.5)
Let me ask again: if the money spent on launching
numerous satellites and missiles towards neighbouring
countries had been spent on people in North Korea
instead, how many would have been fed? How many
lives would have been saved? It is high time for North
Korea to stop developing unlawful weapons of mass
destruction and stop disseminating propaganda to
justify its actions and instead prioritize improving the
welfare of the people in North Korea.
23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Japan urges North Korea not to conduct further
launches and once again calls on North Korea to
immediately and fully comply with all relevant
resolutions and resume substantive dialogue with the
countries concerned towards complete denuclearization.
The path to dialogue remains open.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Khaled Khiari for his briefing. I welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representatives of the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
at this meeting.
We are meeting again this afternoon following the
attempted launch of a spacecraft by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. My country condemns that
act, which has raised the level of tension and fear to
such an extent that some neighbouring countries have
had to put their missile defence systems on alert.
It is more necessary than ever that the Council
mobilize in the face of the scale of the threat hanging
over the Korean peninsula and seek to open up a way
out of the vicious circle. The status quo is not a viable
option, because it increases the risk of a catastrophe
with potentially irreparable consequences. All parties
must return to the negotiating table to find a solution
that will guarantee security for all and peaceful
coexistence in the region.
As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, Gabon is opposed to any use or
threat of use of that category of weapons. Given the
current international security context, we are very
concerned about the trivialization of nuclear risk. This
generation is seeing a clear retreat from the ground we
have covered and the hard-won gains we have made in
the fields of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
The current trend, which runs completely counter to
history, is unacceptable.

S/PV.9406

the International Atomic Energy Agency to keep
diplomatic channels open with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and to do its utmost to restore and
guarantee the confidence needed between the parties
for peaceful negotiations.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing and welcome the participation of the
representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea in our deliberations.
Switzerland has observed with great concern the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s second attempt
to launch a military reconnaissance satellite using
ballistic missile technology. We therefore welcome the
convening of today’s meeting. The Security Council
must not remain passive in the face of those tests
which, together with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s nuclear programme, constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
Allow me to highlight three points.
First, Switzerland condemns any launch using
ballistic missile technology as a violation of the relevant
Council resolutions. As we discussed in our meeting
at the beginning of June (see S/PV.9336), the issues of
rocket payload and early warning are not decisive in
such a situation. The latest launch is therefore a violation
of international law. In view of that, as members of the
Council, it is our duty to condemn and respond to it. We
reiterate our call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to renounce any future attempts to launch
ballistic missiles.

We call on the parties to de-escalate, to refrain from
unilateral initiatives and to give priority to dialogue
in order to achieve a lasting solution to the situation.
Tensions on the Korean peninsula must be reduced and
confidence restored for talks to resume. We urge all
parties to avoid any provocative actions or rhetoric that
could fuel antagonism.

Secondly, while the obligations arising from the
resolutions apply first and foremost to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, they also apply to all
States, which are required to effectively implement
the sanctions of the Security Council. Furthermore,
as members of the Council and as States parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
we all have an obligation to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. The attempt to publicly legitimize
the development of the nuclear programme of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea requires our
continued vigilance, and we must be committed to
disarmament and to maintaining the nuclear taboo.

Finally, I would like to call on those countries
that have influence over the protagonists to encourage
the resumption of negotiations. I would also urge

Thirdly, we must not forget the suffering of the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The serious and systematic violations of human rights

23-251139/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and the impunity of the perpetrators must cease. We
welcome the first signs of a relaxation of the heavy
restrictions put in place by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in connection with the pandemic.
Those restrictions are a major obstacle to humanitarian
aid and to respect for and the exercise of human
rights. We stress that the opening of the borders of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must go hand
in hand with rapid, safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian aid. To that end, the entry of international
personnel into the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is of the utmost importance.
The Council plays an indispensable role in
encouraging dialogue, de-escalation and the quest for
diplomatic solutions. They are essential instruments
for facilitating the implementation of a peaceful,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the situation on
the Korean peninsula. We have a common goal and a
shared responsibility in that respect. Switzerland will
remain committed to moving forward in that direction.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Khaled Khiari, for his valuable briefing.
The United Arab Emirates joins the SecretaryGeneral in his strong condemnation of the attempt by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to this week
once again launch a military reconnaissance satellite,
following its previous attempt in May. Those events
constitute a source of grave concern and a dangerous
escalation on the Korean peninsula.
We also express our concern about the announcement
by official media of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea that the country would conduct yet another
launch, after the failure of the ballistic missile carrying
the satellite. In that regard, we recall that the Security
Council has banned the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea from carrying out launches using ballistic
missile technology. We therefore strongly urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease its
illegal, dangerous and provocative activities.
In the context of today’s meeting, the United Arab
Emirates would like to stress the following three points.
First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must stop terrorizing and scaring civilians through
its repeated launches. We stress that the pre-launch
notification issued by the relevant authorities in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea does not give
10/18

25/08/2023

any legitimacy to such operations. It is regrettable that
civilians in the Okinawa region of Japan had to deal with
warning alarms at 4 a.m., caused by the dangerous and
illegal actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We reaffirm our solidarity with the neighbouring
countries and peoples and with the entire region.
Secondly, the Council must send a unified message
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, stressing
that it must comply with Security Council resolutions
and stop conducting such tests. We reiterate our call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return to
diplomacy and dialogue. A path to complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization, including a return
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, is the only way for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the international community to
achieve peace and security on the Korean peninsula.
Thirdly, continued attention must be paid to the
dire and alarming humanitarian conditions in which the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
live. While the exemption mechanism created by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) allows the delivery of aid to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the grave situation on the
ground requires those concerned in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to prioritize the interests
of the people and take measures to alleviate their
suffering, including by allowing the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations to return to the country to
provide humanitarian relief assistance.
In conclusion, the Security Council was more
effective in maintaining international peace and
security when it stood together, especially on the issue
of the Korean peninsula by taking a unified stance
to curb the illegal pursuit of nuclear weapons by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
Arab Emirates is fully prepared to discuss ways to
again unify the stance on that dossier in order to enable
the Council to play its role in maintaining international
peace and security.
Ms. Kesse Antwi (Ghana): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari
for his helpful briefing to the Security Council. We
welcome the participation of the representatives of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea and look forward to their statements.
Consistent with Ghana’s position on the nuclear
weapons and ballistic technologies programme of the
23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, we strongly
deplore the second attempted launch of a military satellite
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in three
months. The launch, which involved technologies related
to the intercontinental ballistic missile programme,
violates multiple Security Council resolutions banning
any launch using ballistic technologies. We call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to abate its
long-term ambitions for a nuclear weapon capability
and embrace the international community’s call, as
well as the unconditional offer of the United States for
dialogue in resolving the interconnected concerns of
the dispute relating to the Korean peninsula.
In the meantime, we strongly urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to refrain from further
launches using ballistic missile technology and
to comply with its international obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions. The envisaged
and acceptable solution to the problems on the
Korean peninsula cannot include a State with nuclear
capabilities, or the possibility of there being a nuclear
arms race in the region.
We therefore underscore the need for a resumption of
constructive and credible dialogue between the parties
concerned and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to find an enduring, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the issues on the Korean peninsula, in a
manner that recognizes regional and global security
concerns as well as those of the parties.
We have a responsibility to steer the region away
from the path of catastrophe and preserve peace
and lives on the peninsula. As a founding member
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, it is
Ghana’s hope that the resolution of the situation on
the Korean peninsula will contribute to a nuclearweapon-free world.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Khaled Khiari, Assistant
Secretary-General, for his briefing.
We acknowledge the presence in the Chamber
of the Permanent Representatives of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea.
Mozambique echoes the concerns expressed by
fellow Security Council members in the light of the
recent missile launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We strongly urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to respect and adhere

S/PV.9406

to Security Council resolutions and to recommit
to denuclearization and a peaceful resolution of
the persistent crisis on the Korean peninsula. We
call upon all stakeholders involved in the matter of
non-proliferation on the Korean peninsula to act with
the utmost responsibility. It is imperative to avoid any
unilateral actions that may exacerbate the already
tenuous détente in the region.
It has been clear that continued tensions on the
Korean peninsula have the potential to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security in the
region and the world at large, at a time when complex
challenges emerge and multiply. Mozambique therefore
appeals to all members of the Security Council to reflect
on the best actions to be taken in order to seek peace and
harmony on the Korean peninsula and the region and
avoid the reoccurrence of the use of force or any other
retaliatory measure. We must intensify our diplomatic
engagement and seize every available window of
opportunity to re-engage all parties in constructive
dialogue and accept the important goodwill role of the
international community.
Mozambique reiterates its belief that all peaceful
forms of seeking peaceful solutions to the tensions on
the Korean peninsula have yet to be exhausted. The
Council has the primary responsibility to contribute to
international peace and security through all peaceful
means possible. Therefore, the Council must not spare
any effort in urging the parties, as well as recommend
to them, to take the best path to peace. We call on
the Council, which shoulders the responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security, not to
vacillate in the pursuit of a permanent resolution of this
serious threat to peace and prosperity on the Korean
peninsula and the region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): This meeting yet again this month
exemplifies the brazen approach of the United States
presidency in using its seat on the Security Council to
advance its narrow, self-serving politicized agenda.
While the presidency requested an open briefing on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in its national
capacity, together with Albania, Ecuador, France, Japan
and Malta, it did not bother to create even the semblance
of consultations among Council members on the need
for such a discussion and its format. They were the
ones who requested this meeting, and they immediately
scheduled it themselves. By taking such actions, the
United States shows that it does not care at all about the

23-2511311/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

opinion of other Council members. Clearly, convening
this meeting today is nothing more than a cynical and
hypocritical attempt by the United States and its allies
to ramp up pressure on Pyongyang and divert attention
from the reckless escalatory actions of Washington
and its allies in the region, which account for the real
source of threats to international peace and security. At
the same time, in its customary fashion, Washington
is hypocritically shifting the blame on others, while
refusing to acknowledge any responsibility for the
escalation in North-East Asia. Like Caesar’s wife, of
course, the United States is beyond suspicion.
We are surprised by the fact that not even a single
mention of the destructive military activity of the
United States, the Republic of Korea and Japan in
North-East Asia was made by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari in his briefing. We regret that such an
important aspect has been completely disregarded by
the Secretariat, which should take an impartial and
objective stance. Russia has consistently opposed any
military activity that poses a threat to the security of
the Korean peninsula and its neighbours. Meanwhile
Washington and Tokyo, together with Seoul, have
regularly escalated the situation around the peninsula.
In particular, the allies’ regional military exercises
are aimed at achieving that goal within the framework
of their concept of so-called extended deterrence of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the scale
of which is steadily increasing. That is a blatantly
provocative approach that further complicates the
possibility of initiating dialogue, which is essential to
strengthening regional security.
Let us not forget the series of United-South Korean
aerial exercises in June, which included United States
fighter jets and strategic bombers, and the presence of
a United States nuclear submarine in the vicinity of the
Korean peninsula. The attempts by the United States
and its allies to create new “boundary lines” in the
region to please Washington through the establishment
of closed alliances, as well as plans to move part of
NATO’s military infrastructure there, have had an
extremely negative impact on the situation. There
are also concerns about contradictory messages from
United States allies in North-East Asia — Tokyo
and Seoul — concerning the purported strengthened
cooperation with Washington in nuclear development,
which could easily be taken to mean that United States
nuclear weapons might be deployed on their territory
and that those countries might develop their own.
12/18

25/08/2023

Certain Council members have attempted to sweep
all of those circumstances under the rug, although they
ultimately are the primary reasons for the deterioration
of the situation in the region. Every delegation here
today is well aware of that, but there has been no attempt
to ameliorate the situation. We note that the pressure
on Pyongyang has not been exclusively limited to
military activity. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has also been used as a platform. The convening of a
meeting last week on human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (see S/PV.9398), which was
absolutely pointless from a practical standpoint, further
attests to that. In order to promote their biased agenda,
those who organized the event disregarded the mandate
of the Council, which is not mandated to deal with
human rights issues.
Against that background, it is not surprising that
tensions in North-East Asia, as well as the entire AsiaPacific region, only continue to rise. We would like to
recall that the relevant Security Council resolutions
call for seeking ways to find a political and diplomatic
settlement of the situation on the Korean peninsula.
The latest developments involving the peninsula point
to the need for immediate de-escalation, abandoning
provocations and returning to negotiations. In that
regard, we once again draw attention to the fact that the
Russian-Chinese action plan aimed at a comprehensive
settlement of the situation on the Korean peninsula,
involving concrete steps in all problem areas, remains on
the table. Undoubtedly, its implementation will require
the establishment of a mutually respectful dialogue
and the consideration of the legitimate concerns and
rights of all States involved, including, of course, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. However, at
this point in time, we have observed an unwillingness
to do so, owing to the positions of individual Council
members, whose statements continue to hardly pay
attention to finding realistic ways to resolve the
cumulative issues of the subregion.
The Russian-Chinese draft political-humanitarian
resolution remains relevant as well. There is no doubt
that its potential adoption would bring much more
benefit than such a priori dead-end measures, such
as the demonization of Pyongyang and the inhumane
policy of increasing sanctions pressure. We are
convinced that the policy of harsh restrictions has long
been obsolete. It fundamentally contradicts efforts to
restore trust, which should be the primary concern of
the Security Council. We believe that the Council will
23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

actually be able to overcome this urgent problem if all
members stand ready to work in an unbiased manner,
while responding to threats to international peace and
security and taking into account all related factors,
rather than blindly continuing to recite hackneyed
propaganda clichés.
As always, for our part, we stand ready to engage
in constructive and substantive discussions on ways to
concretely address the full range of problems on the
Korean peninsula, in the same way we encourage other
Council members to do so.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for
his briefing. I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea at this meeting.
For some time, tensions on the Korean peninsula
have been intensifying. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has conducted multiple launches,
and certain parties, including the United States, have
continued to take part in military activities. Such a
state of affairs, which China would prefer to avoid, is
worrisome. Although, as usual, certain countries are
attempting to place all the blame on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, it must be pointed out that
the recent launches by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are closely linked to the military activities
of certain countries. Earlier this year, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea showed restraint for a period
of time and repeatedly appealed for ending hostile acts.
But the country’s calls failed to be addressed seriously.
I am not saying all this to attribute the deteriorating
situation to only one particular side, but rather to
encourage the parties concerned to take a rational and
a balanced perspective in the face of the current wave
of tensions on the peninsula. The parties concerned
should ask themselves: What went wrong? What do we
do next? What should the Security Council do?
First, the peninsula issue is not simply an issue of
nuclear and missile programmes. In essence, as a legacy
of the Cold War, it is a political and security issue. At
its heart is a lack of mutual trust and the absence of
a peace mechanism. The key to the issue lies in the
question of whether we want war or peace.
The United States has maintained a long-standing
hostile policy towards the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and has continued to exert pressure on the
country, which therefore feels increasingly insecure.

S/PV.9406

Last month, an American strategic nuclear submarine,
after a long 40-year hiatus, showed up again on the
peninsula. And last week, the United States, in its
capacity as President of the Security Council, insisted
on scheduling a meeting to consider the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(see S/PV.9398). In fact, as we speak, the United States
and its allies’ Ulchi Freedom Shield joint military
exercise is in full swing. Those acts will not help to
further mutual trust or to build a peace mechanism on
the peninsula, but will only aggravate tensions, increase
the risk of confrontation and conflict and could even
ultimately lead to war.
Secondly, the final resolution of the peninsula
issue depends on sound interactions among the major
countries and a conducive regional environment.
Looking back at the history of the peninsula issue,
it is not difficult to realize that diplomatic efforts on
the peninsula issue can be effective only if the major
countries of the region maintain generally stable
and cooperative relations. In recent years, certain
countries have used the peninsula issue as a pretext to
deliberately create tensions, incorporate the peninsula
into an Indo-Pacific strategy, strengthen alliances
and partnerships and significantly increase military
presence in the region, thereby seriously jeopardizing
the strategic security interests of the peninsula and the
neighbouring countries. Such practices, fraught with
Cold War mentality, only provoke bloc confrontation
and undermine mutual trust among the parties, serve
their own geopolitical interests and run counter to the
goal of maintaining peace and stability on the peninsula
and advancing its denuclearization.
Thirdly, dialogue and negotiation are the
only way to help the peninsula out of the security
conundrum. Over the years, there were times when
diplomatic efforts brought hope to the peninsula. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea participated
in denuclearization activities. However, the changing
policy of one of the countries concerned, its failure
to implement the action-for-action principle and to
deliver on commitments made in dialogues resulted
in the loss of those opportunities to resolve the issue.
Consequently, the situation on the peninsula has
become increasingly more complex and tense. Under
the current circumstances, all parties should exercise
restraint and stay calm, avoid mutual provocation and
try to do more to resume dialogue and to ensure peace
and stability.

23-2511313/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

25/08/2023

Fourthly, the Security Council should play a
constructive role in easing tensions and promoting
a political settlement. The draft resolution on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea jointly
proposed by China and Russia in the Council is
aimed at generating goodwill and positive signals
to encourage a political settlement of the peninsula
issue. Regrettably, irrelevant countries have chosen
to ignore the reasonable proposals of China, Russia
and other countries and are obsessed with the magical
power of sanctions and the leveraging of pressure. In
the statement she just delivered, the representative of
the United States made groundless accusations against
China and Russia’s positions on the peninsula issue.
Given where we are, the Council needs unity, not
fragmentation or confrontation. Its actions should be
constructive and not hinder a political settlement of
the peninsula issue. The irrelevant countries should
not use the Council’s platform to increase tension
and escalate the situation, but rather to come up with
practical actions and concrete proposals to respond to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s legitimate
concerns and to make efforts and create the conditions
for a resumption of the dialogue.

I want to recall what I said in my statement, that
we should pay attention to what other members of the
Council are saying. Thirteen out of 15 countries on the
Council are calling for an end to the development of
nuclear weapons by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Thirteen out of 15 are calling for an end to
their tests. And 13 out of 15 are calling for unity in
the Council. If there is not unity in the Council, it is
not because of the 13 countries. It is because of the
two countries. And I do join in calling for unity of
the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China’s
position remains unchanged, that is, it is committed
to the peace and stability of the Korean peninsula, to
the denuclearization of the peninsula and to finding
solutions through dialogue and consultation. We stand
ready to continue close communication with the relevant
parties and to play a constructive role in finding a
political solution to the peninsula issue and in realizing
enduring peace and stability in North-East Asia.

Just now in my statement, I pointed out that certain
countries habitually blame the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea for the tensions on the peninsula,
which runs counter to the fact that the launching
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are closely related to the intense military exercises
of the United States and its allies. Those military
exercises are not what the representatives of the United
States claim, namely, that they are routine, legitimate
and defensive in nature. It is not that simple. Recently,
the scale and frequency of those exercises have reached
a record level. And the United States and its allies have
also used strategic bombers and nuclear submarines in
the peninsula in those exercises. Although the United
States claims that it is willing to engage in unconditional
dialogues, when it comes to actions, it continues to
tighten sanctions and exert pressure. I would like to
ask, in that context, how can the dialogue be resumed?

The President: I shall now make a further
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.
We reject the disingenuous claims by Russia and
China that the United States is acting in a hostile manner.
United States-allied military exercises are routine, they
are lawful, and they are defensive in nature. And unlike
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s ballistic
missile launches, they are not prohibited by Security
Council resolutions.
As a reminder, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea had actually conducted six intercontinental
ballistic missile launches in 2022, before the United
States and the Republic of Korea resumed their
large-scale exercises in August of that year.
14/18

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the China has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
will listen to the statements of the Republic of Korea and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Therefore,
I will not take much of your time, Madam President, but
I would like to quickly respond to the statement by the
United States.

Everybody calls for unity in the Security Council.
Of course, China hopes to see unity in the Council.
However, that kind of unity requires the efforts of
all parties. China stands ready to maintain close
communication with the parties concerned and to make
constructive efforts in that regard.
23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): The satellite launch was the exercise of the
legitimate right of an independent and sovereign State,
which is undeniably recognized under international law.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
issued navigational warnings in advance to ensure
the transparency of the satellite launch, as well
as the safety of ships and aircraft. Moreover, the
satellite launch caused no harm to the security of the
neighbouring country.
As we have made clear time and again, our launch
of the reconnaissance satellite is an exercise of the
legitimate right to self-defence to deter the everincreasing hostile military acts of the United States and
its followers. At the same time, such a launch is aimed
at building our capabilities for self-defence.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Security
Council has convened a meeting, under a separate
agenda item, to take issue with our satellite launch, in
contravention of its mandate to maintain international
peace and security, thereby incurring further shame
for itself and disgracing its reputation. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea sounds a serious alarm
over — and condemns in the strongest terms — the
abnormal practice at the Security Council of declaring
our legitimate right to launch a satellite illegal.
At a time when fierce competition for space
resources is unfolding among national Powers, it
cannot but be a disgrace for the United Nations, which
represents 193 States Members of the United Nations,
that the Security Council is questioning solely the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s satellite
launch while making a false equivalence between a
satellite-carrier rocket and an intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM).
Calling on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to abide by the unlawful resolutions of the
Security Council, which has been reduced to being a
tool of the United States to implement its aggressive
strategy of world hegemony, is a brigand’s demand
that all sovereign rights be conceded to that belligerent
party, the United States. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has never recognized the Security
Council resolutions that infringe upon the rights of

S/PV.9406

a sovereign State, nor will it ever be bound by such
resolutions in future.
With regard to the illogical argument made by
the United States that our satellite launch includes
technologies directly linked to an ICBM programme, it
makes no sense that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would be persistently seeking to acquire
ICBM technology through satellite launches given that
it already operates an ICBM force. No one can deny
that, even now, the United States and the military
gangsters of the Republic of Korea are turning the
Korean peninsula into an area with the potential for
an immense thermonuclear war while clamouring for
regime change in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and engaging in the large-scale Ulchi Freedom
Shield joint exercise, which implicates theoretical
pre-emptive nuclear strikes on our State. Peoples of the
world are witnessing the stark reality that the United
States strategic reconnaissance assets, which it claims
to feature advanced technologies, are frequently flying
in the skies above the waters around our territory with
the aim of tracing, confirming and monitoring targets
for a pre-emptive strike. Let me ask a question: is
there any country that would remain idle when another
technically belligerent party gravely threatens its
security environment?
The Security Council should be aware that its
unfair, biased and irresponsible actions are now driving
the situation in the Korean peninsula and North-East
Asia further towards catastrophe. If it really intends
to contribute to peace and security on the Korean
peninsula, the Security Council should call into question
the manoeuvres of the United States and its followers,
which conduct large-scale nuclear war exercises that
mobilize several hundreds of thousands of armed forces
and sophisticated offensive weapons of all sorts, and
threaten the entire Asia-Pacific region, including NorthEast Asia. The Council should also condemn Japan’s
heinous crime against humanity that will jeopardize in
the extreme the safety and security of humankind and
the maritime ecological environment with its decision
to discharge nuclear-contaminated water containing a
large quantity of radioactive materials.
The more the United States and its followers
increase hostile pressure on and military threats
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
the more vigorously, courageously and unfailingly the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will exercise its
legitimate rights as a sovereign State, including through

23-2511315/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

military reconnaissance-satellite launches to safeguard
its sovereignty and security interests.
In conclusion, the international community
should be vigilant about and raise its voice against the
danger and gravity of the unlawful arbitrary attempts
by the United States and its followers to prevent the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from exercising
its sovereign rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Joonkook Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s open briefing of the Security Council. My
gratitude also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
Khiari for his briefing.
The Republic of Korea condemns in the strongest
possible terms the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s launch of a so-called reconnaissance satellite
on 24 August local time, which flagrantly violates
multiple Security Council resolutions. Any launch
that uses ballistic-missile technology, regardless of its
success or whatever payload it may carry, can contribute
to the further advancement of ballistic-missile
technology. That is why prior to 2017 the Security
Council unanimously adopted — with no abstention
or opposition — a great number of resolutions that
prohibit any launch using ballistic-missile technology
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
24 August launch clearly demonstrates how routinely
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea flouts with
contempt the solemn decisions of the Council, which
all States Members of the United Nations have agreed
to accept and carry out, in accordance with Article 25
of the United Nations Charter.
Just a week ago, the Security Council held a public
meeting on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (see S/PV.9398). Today
another Council meeting on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is being held, this time on its launch
using ballistic missile technology. Together, these two
agenda items accurately capture the very nature of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea issue. A holistic
approach is needed to better understand the true nature
of these agenda items and, accordingly, effectively
address them.
The late father of the current leader of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea once mentioned, in the year
16/18

25/08/2023

2000, that it cost about $300 million to launch a satellite.
According to that estimate, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will be spending nearly $1 billion
on satellites by the end of this year if it conducts a
third launch of its so-called satellite in October, as it
announced it would do two days ago. If we add all the
missile launches by North Korea this year, the figures
would be incomparably much higher than $1 billion.
A few days ago, the top leader of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea reportedly rebuked his
own Prime Minister and other senior officials for
their irresponsible handling of the recent flooding that
inundated farmlands. Yet their scarce resources continue
to be diverted to the development of weapons of mass
destruction. These resources would have been better
spent if they had been used to address humanitarian
needs and help the country’s undernourished people,
which North Korea failed to do again with this launch.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the
only country to have conducted a nuclear test in the
twenty-first century. It is also the only country that
joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and then openly developed nuclear weapons in
defiance of its obligations under the Treaty. It is also the
only country that explicitly targets specific countries as
it continues to test various types of ballistic missiles,
including intercontinental ballistic missiles. Moreover,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the only
country in the world that continues to develop nuclearweapon and missile programmes while blatantly
ignoring the great suffering of its own people. I need
not remind the Security Council that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is funding its weapons of
mass destruction programmes through illegal activities,
such as malicious cyberactivities, including hacking
and theft in cryptocurrency markets, and forced labour
by exploited workers dispatched overseas.
We have noticed in recent days that, after a long
lockdown, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is opening its borders. Railroad and maritime traffic
are slowly increasing, and several North Korean
commercial flights Beijing to Pyongyang took off from
for the first time in three years.
In the light of those new developments, there should
no longer be any excuse for not repatriating all workers
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
other Member States’ jurisdiction, as stipulated in
article 8 of resolution 2397 (2017). All such workers
23-25113

25/08/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

should have been repatriated by the end of 2019, but
tens of thousands still remain overseas. All of them
need to be returned without further delay.
It is regrettable that some Council Members are
still confusing the cause and effect of the situation
unfolding in the Korean peninsula. As we have
repeatedly pointed out, for more than three decades the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has developed
its unlawful nuclear and ballistic missile programme
based on its own playbook. It is astonishing to see
some delegations repeating the false claim of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that the root
cause is the so-called hostile policy of the Republic of
Korea and the United States. There is no such thing.
The Republic of Korea and the United States have, time
and again, provided numerous security assurances to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in various
forms. Pyongyang’s ever-growing threats are the very
reason we are strengthening extended-deterrence
cooperation with the United States, not the other
way around.
It is our duty, as a responsible Government, to
protect the lives and safety of our people from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s increasingly
menacing threats by maintaining a robust combined
defence-and-deterrence posture. As stated in the Camp
David principles last week, the Republic of Korea, the
United States and Japan will remain committed to the
complete denuclearization of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and to dialogue and diplomacy with
no preconditions.
Under the current circumstances, the unified voice
of condemnation by the international community and
the faithful implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions by all the States Members of the
United Nations are the only way to pressure Pyongyang
into reconsidering its ill-advised behaviour and policy.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to stop provocative actions, which endanger not
only the world, but also itself, and to respond positively
to our call for dialogue.
Our united action is essential to de-escalate the
tension on the Korean peninsula and change the course
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The President: The representative of Japan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

S/PV.9406

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): The representative of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea made a
reference to the water treated by the Advanced Liquid
Processing System. Although I do not see the relevance
of that argument to today’s topic, I would like to make
clear that this matter should not be subject to political
discussion. We cannot accept any baseless allegations
that lack scientific evidence. Japan remains fully
committed to upholding transparency by providing
information based on scientific evidence.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
did not intend to make a statement, but just now the
representative of Japan made reference to an issue on
which I would like to explain our position.
China is strongly opposed to the Japanese
Government’s unilateral actions — in disregard of
the objections of the international community and in
defiance of public opinion — of discharging nuclearcontaminated water into the ocean and thus, transferring
that nuclear threat to the whole world. The deliberate
discharge of the nuclear-contaminated water into the
ocean has no precedent, and there is no internationally
recognized standard for its disposal. For a long time,
serious concerns have been expressed with regard to
the impact of such water on food security, people’s
health and the maritime environment.
The legitimacy and legality of such actions are called
into question. We urge the Japanese Government to
correct its erroneous behaviour and to stop discharging
that water into the ocean. We urge it to engage in sincere
dialogue with the stakeholders and countries concerned
and to be responsible in its discharge of the nuclearcontaminated water.
The President: The representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has asked for
the floor to make a further statement. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): I would like to take the floor again to correct
some points made by the Japanese delegation.
The regrettable discharge of the nuclear-polluted
water into the ocean, is directly related to the mandate
of the Security Council. The discharge of nuclearpolluted water into the ocean is clearly a criminal act
of destroying the ecological environment of the ocean

23-2511317/18

S/PV.9406

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and threatening the existence of humankind. The
regrettable discharge of nuclear-polluted water into
the ocean is a typical manifestation of the two-faced,
double-dealing attitude of Japan, which talks about a
nuclear-free world.
Because it has been scientifically verified that the
so-called “clean water” filtered through the Advanced
Liquid Processing System still contain a large quantity
of radioactive material, the terrible discharge of
nuclear-polluted water into the ocean is absolutely
unacceptable. In the interest of the safety and future
of humankind, Japan should immediately reverse
its decision to discharge nuclear-polluted water into
the ocean.
The President: The representative of Japan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank the presidency for
giving me the floor.
With regard to the remarks put forward by our
Chinese colleagues and the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, they use

18/18

25/08/2023

the words “contaminated water”, “threatening the
ecological system” and so forth. I think that when they
use words such as “contaminated water” they must be
clear on the scientific basis. Why is it contaminated? Is it
because the water discharged from Japan contains more
nuclides than the label that is admitted by international
norms and rules? Is it because the discharged water from
Japan includes more nuclides than the level included in
other parts of the world?
This is very technical, so I do not want to delve
into the details, but I have to make clear that the water
treated by the Advanced Liquid Processing System
is sufficiently purified until the concentration of
radioactive materials other than tritium is below the
regulatory standard. The water will then be diluted by
more than 100 times before it is gradually released into
the sea. After dilution, the released water will be far
below the regulatory standard, including with regard
to tritium, and beyond three kilometres from the power
plant, the concentration of tritium and the other nuclides
will be the same as those already found in seawater.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

23-25113
