TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

4 SEPTEMBER

1

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1446/Rev.l)

,. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . , . . . . .

1

Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . , . .. . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda

. . .. . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . ,. , . . . .. .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September ‘1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Israel addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8794)
.. . , . . , .

1

SIPV. 1446

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

:,

;,

:
:,
:’

(
,!
j_:

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 4 September 1968, at 3.00 p.m.
President: Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

(Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l446/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:

Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8794).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:

Before turning to the formal work of
the Council which awaits our attention, I should like to
take this opportunity to express personally, most sincerely
and, I am sure, also on behalf of the other members of this
Council, our heartfelt admiration for the manner in which
our affairs were handled by my predecessor, Ambassador de
Araujo Castro of Brazil, during his tenure of the Presidency.
He brought outstanding credit to himself, to the great
country which he represents and to the group of Latin
American countries in the United Nations.
2. In a most troubled and busy month, Ambassador de
Araujo Castro set us a standard of patience coupled with
firmness, of statesmanship coupled with humour and, above
all, of impartiality and objectivity which those of us who
follow him in the Presidency will find it most difficult to
emulate and still less easy to equal.
3. With his example before us, may I express the hope that
in our work we will all do our utmost to ensure that during
the course of this month our labours on the Security
Council will not be in vain.
4. Mr. DE ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): Mr. President,
from my comfortable position among the ranks of the
former Presidents-or, shall we say, of the Presidents in
exile-I beg to convey to you my warmest thanks for your
kind and generous words. August indeed wasquite a hectic
month for the Security Council, and it was a great honour
for my country and me personally to preside over the
Council’s proceedings concerning the crisis which still
persists and may unfortunately go on unabated for some
time. I receive your praise in all humility, as I know it
springs from your kindness and from our friendship. The

only thing I can say is that I am indebted to you and to all
members of the Security Council for the assistance,
co-operation and understanding given me during the past
month. Let me welcome you to the Chair, and on handing
over the gavel to you I wish you the best of successand
express our entire confidence in your ability and leadership,
which will, I am positive, provide the Council with
excellent guidance for the conduct of our business on the
difficult matters of which the Council is seized. Although
you have been quite active from the first day of your
tenure of office, let me expresshope for a relatively quiet
September, during which there may be added reason for
praying for world peace.
5. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Brazil
for his kind remarks addressedto me.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8794)

6. The PRESIDENT: A letter dated 3 September 1968
(S/8797] has been received from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Israel requesting to be invited to participate in the discussion of the matter just placed on the
agenda. Therefore, if I hear no objection, I propose, in
accordance with the usual practice, to invite the representative of Israel to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table.

7. The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter dated
3 September 1968 [S/8799] from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic requesting to be invited
to participate in this discussion. Therefore, if I hear no
objection, I propose similarly to invite the representative of
the United Arab Republic to participate, without vote, in
the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. A. El Kony
(United Arab Republic) took a seat at the Council table.

8. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its examination of the complaint submitted to it on
2 September by the delegation of Israel [S/8794]. I would
also draw the attention of members of the Council to the

supplemental information circulated by the Secretary
General on 29 August and 4September 1968 [S/7930/

approximate map reference 74158705. Physical evidence
indicated that the patrol was ambushed.” [S/7930/

Add. 74 and Add. 761.

Add. 74, para. 5. /

14. By all indications the Egyptian force crossed the canal,
which is only 150 metres wide, in boats, with the clear
objective of taking up positions on the east bank, ambush.
ing the patrol known to survey the area, and killing or
capturing its men. The nature of the ambush, the professional manner in which it was conducted, the size of the
Egyptian force employed, established on the basis of the
footprints found in the area and the number of shelters dug
by the attackers, the fact that the weapons used are
standard equipment of the United Arab Republic Army,
the co-ordination of the attack with Egyptian military
positions on the west bank, leave no room for any doubt
whatsoever that this was a deliberate and planned military
attack by the United Arab Republic against Israel and that
the responsibility for it lies with the United Arab Republic.

9. The first name inscribed on my list of speakers is t’hat
of the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
10. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr.President, at the outset
allow me to expressto you our deep respect and admiration
and to extend my delegation’s best wishes for successin
your important task. I should also like to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, the representative of Brazil, who presided
over the prolonged deliberations in this Council in the
course of last month with brilliance and outstanding
effectiveness.
11. On 26 August a grave blow v&s struck again by Egypt
on the cease-fire agreed upon last year between Israel and
the United Arab Republic. In the darkness of the night an
Egyptian military Force consisting of approximately thirty
men crossed the Suez Canal at a point 1.5 kilometres south
of Lake Timsah, opposite Ismailia, dug itself in on the east
bank, planted mines on the patrol track, and ambushed the
regular Israeli patrol along the canal. The area of the west
bank of the canal concerned is under strict military control
by Egypt, and in it all activities are under close supervision
by the Egyptian military authorities. On the east bank,
where the incident occurred, there is no civilian population.

15. The entire area on the United Arab Republic side is a
military zone in which there is a heavy concentration of
troops. The Egyptian military positions are.located along
the canal at close distances from each other. In some places
the distances between these positions are less than 100
metres. These positions control all movement along the
west bank of the canal and on the canal itself on which,
under arrangements reached between the parties on 27 July
1967 [see S/80.53/Add.l] and renewed on 27 August 1967
[see S/8053/Add.2], all movement of boats and all military
activities are prohibited. It is significant also that the
Egyptian authorities refused to allow the United Nations
military observers to pursue their inquiry on the west side
of the canal.

12. The Israeli patrol consisted of two jeeps with three
soldiers in each. At approximately 2110 hours local time,
one of the Israeli jeeps ran over two mines laid by the
United Arab Republic forces on the patrol track, and was
blown up. Heavy automatic fire wasopened on the jeeps by
the Egyptian force which had dug in on the east bank. The
attackers also released flares and threw grenades, Two
’ Israeli soldiers were killed and the third was dragged across
the canal. This is fully corroborated by General Bull’s
report.

16. In the afternoon of 27 August, General Bull met with
the Israeli Minister of Defence, General Dayan, at the
latter’s request. General Bull reports that: “General Dayan
took a most serious view of this incident. In the course of
the meeting he requested most urgently the immediate
return to Israel of the missing soldier” [S/793O/Add.74,

13. An inquiry was carried out on the following morning
by United Nations military observersand General Odd Bull
reported on it asfollows:

para. 61.

17. General Bull met with Ambassador Gohar of the
United Arab Republic Foreign Ministry in Cairo on 28 and
on 29 August; Ambassador Gohar denied any knowledge of
this matter.

“Between the canal and the damaged jeep the military
observersexamined a number of positions which appeared
to have been hastily dug. In some of these positions
automatic Klashnikoff rifle cartridges were found, Close
to the positions were found some unexploded hand
grenades, some hand grenade safety levers and two signal
flare cartons with Russian markings. One entrenching tool
wasfound in one of the dug positions.

18. This attitude, untenable as it is in the light ofevident
facts, should not perhaps come entirely as a surprise to
those versed in Egyptian methods. When, for years until
1957, the Egyptian Army regularly sent raider units into
Israeli territory to mine roads, carry out grenade attacks on
civilian villages, and ambush vehicles, the Egyptian authorlties, frequently through Ambassador Gohar, denied all
knowledge or responsibility. It was only after documents
from the Egyptian Army headquarters in Gaza came into
Israel’s possessionthat the full truth about these nefarious
activities wasrevealed in formal Egyptian Army operational
orders.

“Near the canal edge the military observers saw a
bollard around which were many footprints. A few barely
distinguishable blood stains were also’ found. On the
down slope of the sand embankment near the canal edge
the military observerssaw some marks in the sand leading
to the bollard. These marks could have been made by a
body dragged in the sand
“. . .

19. On 29 August General Bull met again with the Israeli
Mi$ster of Defence and conveyed to him the Egyptian
reaction. General Dayan expressed deep dissatisfaction with
this information on the Egyptian attitude.

“The United Nations military observers’ finding was
that an Israeli Defence Force patrol was mined at
2

20. In view of these circumstances the Government of
Israel has decided to bring the matter before the Security
Council.

28. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Mr. President,
I should like to thank you and the distinguished members
for inviting me to address the Council.

21. The facts are clear. In violation of the cease-fire
established by the Security Council, i”n breach of the
arrangements prohibiting military activities in the canal, a
well-planned military attack was perpetrated against Israel
by Egyptian forces operating from the west bank. This is
the first time that Egyptian units have crossed the canal and
attacked the Israeli forces stationed along its east bank.
This development is fraught with the gravest dangers for the
maintenance of the cease-fire. No attempts to disclaim
responsibility, feign ignorance or confuse the problem by
introducing irrelevant allegations can alter the basic fact
that Egypt could have prevented this attack. The best proof
of this is that Egypt has prevented such incursions and
attacks until now.

29. It was with great surprise that we learned through the
information media that the Israeli authorities had decided
to request a meeting of the Security Council complaining of
an alleged involvement of United Arab Republic armed
forces in an incident which occurred on the east side of the
Suez Canal, at present occupied by the military forces of
Israel; when we were informed officially of this request our
surprise was increased further.
30. The reasons for this surprise are quite obvious. In the
first place, this is not a complaint that Israel is bringing
before the Council, but rather an ultimatum. It is unprecedented for the Security Council to be addressed in such a
tone, and I am confident that the Security Council will not
be intimidated by this arrogance.

22. Under these circumstances we address to Egypt two
simple questions and ask for simple unequivocal answers: Is
Egypt ready to take all the necessary measures to prevent
such attacks in the future? Is Egypt prepared to return the
Israeli soldier captured in the ambush and dragged across
the canal? The answers to these questions are vital for the
future maintenance of the cease-fire in the area.

31. In the second place, the Israeli allegations are groundless. As soon as news concerning the alleged incident
reached us an inquiry was ordered. The findings of that
inquiry-which
were later conveyed officially to General
Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, by the Under-Secretary of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs-showed
that no United Arab
Republic forces had taken part in any action in the
territories east of the Suez Canal which are still occupied by
the Israeli forces as a result of their aggression against my
country in June 1967. Apart from categorically denying
any involvement of United Arab Republic forces in the
incident, General Bull was assured by Ambassador Gohar of
the continued and scrupulous observance by the United
Arab Republic of the cease-fire, in conformity with the
Security Council resolutions.

23. As early as 27 August, Israel informed General Bull:
“From the nature of the operation, it may be inferred that
this was not meant to be an isolated incident, but the
initiation of a new policy of military aggression in the canal
area” /ibid., para. 41. Egypt undoubtedly realizes that
Israel will not acquiesce in such a development and will not
allow the lives of its soldiers or civilians to be put in
jeopardy by Egyptian attacks in violation of the cease-fire.
24. We have brought this matter before the Security
Council in an appeal to arrest further deterioration of the
situation, to condemn the military attack carried out in
violation of the cease-fire, to impress on Egypt the need to
abide by its obligations and prevent the recurrence of such
attacks in the future, and to return the captured Israeli
soldier.

32. As regards the missing soldier, Ambassador Gohar
stated that the United Arab Republic authorities had no
knowledge whatsoever of the matter.
33. I am under instructions from my Government to
reiterate these statements and, to confirm their contents
before the Council. In this connexion, I beg to submit to
the Council that the claims and allegations of the Israeli
representative regarding the involvement of United Arab
Republic armed forces in the incident are not substantiated
at all by the United Nations observers in the area. I further
submit that the report of General Bull, contained in
document S/7930/Add.74, lends no credence to these
fabrications.

25. In recent months the world has watched with growing
concern the general difficulties encountered by the Security
Council, and the obstacles placed in its way, which have
prevented it from discharging fully and equitably its
responsibilities under the Charter for the maintenance of
peace and security in the Middle East. The people of Israel
are greatly discouraged by the inability of the Council to
rise above the arithmetic of votes and vetoes and contribute
effectively to the termination of Arab violations of the
cease-fire,

34. I need not dwell at all on refuting the Israeli
arguments or stressing the discrepancies of the Israeli
allegations. Yet I should like to underline certain facts
which, by their mere recalling, readily belie the Israeli
claim. First, it is worth noting that there was a lapse of time
separating the alleged event from the request addressed to
General Odd Bull to undertake the inquiry. On this point, I
have only this to say for the time being: perhaps the Israeli
authorities desperately needed those fourteen hours to
plant the physical evidence in order to be able to build their
case; for, if the case is viewed so seriously by the Israeli
authorities as all their official statements proclaim, why did

26. Nevertheless, the Government of Israel has decided to
try again to seek redress at the Council table. It hopes that
perhaps this time it will find support in the Council for its
efforts to ensure the faithful observance of the cease-fire
and avert a serious aggravation of the situation.
27. The PRESIDENT: I call on the next speaker on my
list, who is the representative of the United Arab Republic.
3

they not immediately call on General Bull to carry out a
prompt investigation? SecondIy, the statement of the
Israeli second lieutenant does not bear close scrutiny. If, in
accordance with the report, he really had been at the scene
of the alleged incident, why did he not react in time in
order to save his kidnapped colleague? Thirdly, it is to be
noted that the bodies of the two soldiers claimed by Israel
to have been killed had not been examined in time by the
United Nations observers when they were on the scene.

<
I

I

35. But if those three figures of fiction, as I have argued,
do not exist, it is imperative for responsible people to
search and ask for the motives that have spurred Israel to
bring an unfounded casebefore the Security Council. What
makes the search even more urgent is our cognizance of
Israel’s past history, its present behaviour and its future
designs. Despite its membership in the United Nations and
its verbal acceptance of the Charter, Israel’s principles and
objectives have consistently maintained that among all the
membership of the United Nations it should be the one
entitled to take the law into its own hands. Very recently
Mr. Tekoah arrogantly informed this Council that no one,
and I repeat “no one”, has the right to adviseIsrael on the
conduct of its defence policy. That policy is pursued
regardless of its victims-be they innocent men, women and
children-the rules of international law, the principles of
the Charter, or even the basic tenets of human behaviour.
Israel’s past and present bodes ill for the future. This should
be the main concern of the Security Council.

39. Taking such declarations for a background, it is
evident that if these are vioIations committed in the Suez
Canal sector they are always committed by the Israelis. If
there is killing, destruction and atrocities, the perpetrators
are without exception the Israelis. Since their treacherous
aggressionin June 1967 they have consistently acted in the
most brutal manner. They have wantonly shelled the
Egyptian cities along the west bank of the Canal. Without
provocation they aimed their guns and flew their planes
over the innocent civilian population of these cities,
inflicting untold damage, as if the inhabitants of those cities
were mere hostages in order to apply pressure on my
Government. For there were no military targets within
these cities. Is it conceivable that the lives of men, women
and children should be the price to be paid for the folly of
the Israeli leaders? Is it tolerable that the indiscriminate
destruction of buildings, whether homes, mosques,
churches or hospitals, should be the toll collected for the
insatiable desire of Israel to achieve its expansionist
designs?
40. Innocent civilians should not be the target of any
fighting. This rule we believe in and strictly adhere to. I just
hope Israel would act in the same way. However, its
perseverence with an aggressive and inhuman policy has
caused heavy losses in civilian life and massive destruction
of civilian buildings. I should like, with your permission,
Mr. President, to cite a tragic result of this vicious policy of
Israel. Its indiscriminate shelling of densely populated cities
of the canal area has resulted in the following: 134 killed
and 329 injured in Suez and Ismailia on 14 and 15 July
1967; 50 killed and 70 injured in Suez on 4 September
1967; 2 killed and 15 injured in Kantara on 12 September
1967; 86 killed and 216 injured in Suez, Ismailia and
Kantara on 27 September 1967; 3 killed and 50 injured in
Suez on 24 October 1967; 50 killed and 67 injured, in Suez
on 3 July 1968-a total of 325 killed and 747 injured, all
innocent civilians.

36. Israel seldom resorts to the Security Council and has
always preferred to rely on naked force to achieve its ends.
If today Israel has opted for a different course, it is not
without misgivings that we should view its decision, for it is
customary for Israel to use the language of peace when it
intends to embark imminently on acts of war.
37. Should we then assume that in bringing to the Council
a groundless accusation under the pretence that it is seeking
justice, Israel may in fact be creating a pretext to start a
full-scale military operation against my country, against
Jordan, or both? Should we also assume that Israel is
seeking the assistance of the Security Council to justify the
perpetuation of its illegal occupation of Arab territories?
These are in fact a few considerations that the Council may
dwell upon, as their continuation is likely to endanger the
peace and security of the world.

41. This policy of terror and intimidation is, nevertheless,
bound to fail, for neither the will of our people nor the
determination of our Government has been daunted,
42. Israel’s attempt to hold every Arab Government
responsible for the acts of patriotism on the part of their
segregated population in the occupied territories should not
even be taken seriously. Israel may be tempted to demand
that the Arab Governments call on their tenacious people
to lay down their arms, quit resisting and live meekly in
slavery.

38. It is in itself ironic to have the aggressorcomplain
against his victim; yet what makes the irony grotesque is
that this fabricated complaint has been brought before the
Council because General Dayan is dissatisfied. To satisfy
General Dayan is really a problem. As an example of
Mr. Dayan’s designs I shall at this juncture only refer to a
recent declaration published by the Israeli newspaper
HaOlam Hazeh on 8 July 1968, and I quote:

43. My Government has steadfastly supported all the
movkments of liberation in Africa and Asia. It is a matter of
record that the United Arab Republic has always been one
of the forerunners of those countries which oppose the
abhorrent practices of apartheid, colonialism and oppression.

“Our fathers have reached the frontiers which were
recognized by the United Nations partition plan. Our
generation was able to reach Suez, Jordan, and the Golan
heights. This is not the end, for after the present
cease-fire lines, there will be new lines, but they will
extend beyond Jordan, maybe to Lebanon, and perhaps
to central Syria as well.”

44. It is therefore ironic that we are now asked by Israel
to negate the policy line laid down by the Charter, forsake
one of the most cherished principles, and help in suppressing a genuine and rightful liberation move. What is even
more ironic is that the move we are told to stifle sprangup
spontaneously in various parts of our homeland which
4

Israel occupies in contravention to all the norms of
international law and the injunctions of this important
body.
45. I have had occasion earlier to refer to the Israeli
attitude towards the United Nations; the least that can be
said of it is that it is one of defiance and arrogance. Could it
easily be forgotten that despite the unanimous decision of
the Council requesting Israel to refrain from holding the
military parade in Jerusalem, it nevertheless defied world
opinion and proceeded with the original plans? Could
anybody disregard the fact that time and again Israel has
been condemned by this very Council on account of its
aggressive military policy, and that despite those condemnations and regardless of the wrath of world public opinion
Israel still continues to carry out large-scale military
operations deep within the territories of Arab countries?
Could we close our eyes to the adamant Israeli position
with regard to Jerusalem, on which both the General
Assembly and the Security Council have pronounced
themselves to be against all the measures adopted by the
military occupation authorities of Israel? Last, but not
least, is it admissible that ten months after the unanimous
adoption by this Council of resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967, which was promptly accepted by the
-United Arab Republic, Israel is still dallying with the
collective will of the international community and has
never declared its acceptance of the resolution, let alone its
readiness to implement it? Such a state of affairs cannot
continue and should not be allowed to continue.
46. Israel should not be allowed to succeed in diverting
the attention of the Security Council from the real issues.
The Council should concentrate more fully on the daily
crimes committed by Israel against the population of the
occupied areas. The Council should devote its attention to
the defiant attitude of the Israelis towards the resolutions
of the Council and their SyStenldiC
flouting of the
principles of the Charter. The Council should be concerned
about the danger posed not only to the Arab world but also
to the cause of international peace and security by the
expansionist policy of Israel, of which the statement of
General Dayan quoted by me earlier is a flagrant example.
47. These then are the burning issues which deserve the
attention of the Council, and certainly not the imaginary
case of the abduction of an imaginary soldier.
48. The Council, entrusted by the provisions of the
Charter with the primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and security in the world, will, I am sure, act with its
usual wisdom and dispose of the matter at hand in
accordance with the Charter and the norms of justice.
49. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel
in exercise of his right of reply.
50. Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): The’statement we have just
heard from the Egyptian representative could not have been
more disappointing, more negative, more unhelpful, more
irresponsible in playing with obvious and undeniable facts.
We are discussing a simple though extremely grave matter
which requires a simple response. In accordance with its
obligations under the cease-fire, Egypt is responsible for the

prevention of any incursions or attacks from its side against
Israeli forces or Israeli civilians, and for the observance of
the arrangements prohibiting movement of boats and all
military activity on the canal. Is Egypt ready to take all the
necessary measures to prevent, in the future, attacks of this
nature? Is Egypt prepared to free the Israeli soldier
abducted in the course of the attack that occurred on 26
August?
51. Instead of answering these questions, the Egyptian
representative has meandered from professions of love for
the Charter through love of United Nations resolutions and
other sundry matters, until he has lost himself completely
in a labyrinth of verbosity, I shall not indulge now in an
exposition of how the United Arab Republic loves the
Charter by flouting it; of how it honours United Nations
resolutions by distorting and defying them; of how it has
shown
acceptance of Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which called for a just
and lasting peace with Israel, by basing its policies on the
infamous Khartoum decision: no peace, no negotiation, no
recognition of Israel.
52. However, these questions belong to the framework of
the mission pursued by Mr. Jarring, the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative. The only way for Cairo to prove its
goodwill is to abandon the Khartoum decision, and to
co-operate with Mr. Jarring rather than to accompany his
efforts with intransigence, bellicose pronouncements and
endless reports that his mission of peace is doomed to
failure.
53. The representative of Egypt has also voiced the usual
Arab complaint. Israel refuses to acquiesce in Arab aggression, they say; Israel does not agree to the killing of its
soldiers and civilians; Israel defends itself-how does Israel
dare to do this? -against attacks from the military positions established inside the cities along the west bank of the
canal. There is one way, and only one way, to put an end to
this, to avert the damage and the suffering on the west
bank, and that is by stopping aggression from the west
bank.
54. Here in the Council we are concerned with a different
matter. Will Egypt ensure the maintenance of the ceasefire? Will it undertake to prevent military attacks, or will it
persist in the attitude with which it confronted General
Bull during his talks in Cairo, an attitude which amounted
in fact to General Bull’s being told, “Do not bother US. This
is none of our business”?
55. The stand we have now heard the Egyptian representative express is an ominous one. It bodes little good for the
future of the cease-fire. It is a reiteration of aggressive
designs and a reaffirmation of the intention to pursue
warfare against Israel. It is a signal of impending danger. It
cannot be left unchallenged. It requires immediate and
effective action by the Security Council. We trust that the
Security Council will take such action.
56. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on my
list. Unless any member wishes to address the Council at
this time, I suggest that we adjourn in order to give the

members of the Council an opportunity to consult one
another. As a result of informal consultation, I understand
that there is general agreement that the Council should
resume consideration of the item on the agenda of today’s

meeting at 3 p.m. tomorrow, 5 September. As I hear no
objection, I shall take it that it is so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35657-October

1972-2,050
