United Nations

S/PV.5225

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5225

th meeting
Tuesday, 12 July 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Molyviatis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Greece)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Osmane
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Baja
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Denisov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mrs. Patterson

Agenda
The role of the Security Council in humanitarian crises: challenges, lessons learned
and the way ahead
Letter dated 6 July 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2005/434)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-41609 (E)

*0541609*

S/PV.5225

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The role of the Security Council in humanitarian
crises: challenges, lessons learned and the way ahead
Letter dated 6 July 2005 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2005/434)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Fiji, India, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Norway, Peru, the Republic of Korea and
Venezuela in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/434, which contains the text of a
letter dated 6 July 2005 from the Permanent

2

Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
It is my particular pleasure to acknowledge the
presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
who, as we all know, attaches great importance to the
subject of today’s debate.
Allow me to open the debate by making a
statement in my national capacity.
Since the early 1990s, of all the challenges that
can affect peace and stability in today’s globalized
world, humanitarian crises have been those that have
captured most of our minds and souls. We cannot forget
Somalia, Rwanda or the Balkans, to cite just three.
Those crises, beyond being a threat to stability and
peace, are the source of a lot of despair and suffering to
human beings around the globe and thus a direct and
powerful challenge to our collective consciousness — a
challenge to the set of values and principles the United
Nations is based upon. They are also a challenge to our
ability to act in a coherent and effective manner, first to
prevent, secondly to settle, and thirdly to heal the
wounds in the post-conflict phase.
Today’s discussion takes place in the midst of the
reform of the United Nations, in which efforts are
being made towards more effective international
action. I hope that it will be a substantial contribution
in that direction.
The Security Council has witnessed the
expansion of issues brought before it as threats to
international peace and security. In some of those
cases, the Security Council has taken action to avert a
major humanitarian crisis; in some others, it has not.
The early prevention of humanitarian crises has
become a political and moral imperative for the
Security Council. The United Nations should
strengthen its capacity to move from reaction to
prevention of crises before they reach critical mass.
The duty and responsibility for the protection of
civilian populations rests, of course, primarily with the
States concerned. However, in cases of extreme
violations and atrocities against human beings, the
international community has an obligation to the
victims of such violence. The United Nations, and
particularly the Security Council, must take effective
action to alleviate the suffering of civilians and to avert
the occurrence of a humanitarian disaster.

S/PV.5225

In recent years, the Council has tried hard to meet
that challenge, guided by the new comprehensive
concept of human security. That concept engulfs issues
such as human rights, the protection of civilians —
particularly women and children — in armed conflicts,
internally displaced persons and refugees, and
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.
The Secretary-General, in his report “In larger
freedom”, has pointed out that
“A war-weary population infused with new hope
after the signing of a peace agreement quickly
reverts to despair when, instead of seeing tangible
progress towards a Government under the rule of
law, it sees war lords and gang leaders take power
and become laws unto themselves.” (A/59/2005,
para. 130)
We fully share that view, and we note with satisfaction
that recent United Nations peace operations integrate,
among other things, elements of good governance, the
rule of law, election monitoring, and respect for human
rights.
To prevent the re-emergence of humanitarian
suffering itself and the potential recurrence of the
conflict, in our view the following three key fields of
post-conflict security have to be adequately addressed:
the promotion of the rule of law; the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants; and
security sector reform.
The planning and incorporation of rule of law
components in peace operations are an extremely
sensitive and complex task. They require the
involvement of various actors, both international and
national. Of great importance in that respect is
legislative and justice system reform incorporating
international human rights and criminal law standards,
the enforcement of domestic law, the monitoring of
elections, and so on. The transition to a just, human
and democratic order cannot be achieved unless
impunity comes to an end. The role of the International
Criminal Court in advancing the principles of
international justice and national reconciliation is of
vital importance, as recently reaffirmed by the decision
of the Security Council to recognize its jurisdiction in
the Darfur crisis.
The importance of the disarmament and
demobilization process in peacebuilding has been

rightly emphasized in previous discussions before the
Security Council. The reintegration of ex-combatants
into civilian life should be given special attention,
since, without it, lasting peace cannot be achieved.
Security sector reform is the third important area
in achieving long-term stability, complementing the
previous two areas of action. Security sector reform,
despite its importance, seems to have gained little
attention in Security Council resolutions. It is
important, I think, that our future actions focus on that
key area, as well as on its operational complementarity
to the other two areas.
Last but not least, let us remember that, to ensure
the success of any measure adopted, the maximum
consent of local societies to the international
community’s efforts is of paramount importance, even
if not always easy to acquire.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that effective
post-conflict
peacebuilding
requires
the
full
incorporation and support of humanitarian components
in peace agreements and peace operations. Those three
areas are critical to ensuring and enhancing both
conflict prevention and conflict resolution, as well as
for the implementation of any peace agreement and its
sustainability.
We believe that the prevention of future
humanitarian crises requires the timely consideration
of the aforementioned issues and the concerted action
of the Security Council, other United Nations agencies,
and regional bodies, as well as the cooperation of the
Member States.
The effective and timely response of the Security
Council to the challenges posed by humanitarian crises
is of critical importance. I think that our peoples and
international public opinion will settle for nothing less
than success.
I once again welcome the presence of SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan at this meeting and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: It is very good to see
you here in New York, Mr. Minister, as we discuss this
important topic. Let me thank you for convening this
thematic debate. The topic you have chosen is
particularly timely, since in these days we are marking
the tenth anniversary of a dark moment in the history
of the United Nations.

3

S/PV.5225

On 11 July 1995, Srebrenica, a place that the
Security Council had proclaimed a safe area and that
was manned by United Nations peacekeeping forces,
fell to the attacking Serb forces. On 13 July, the
systematic killing of Muslim men and boys began. As
we reflect on those shameful events, we are reminded
that,
whenever
the
Security
Council
takes
responsibility for protecting civilians, it must craft an
unambiguous mandate and provide adequate resources
to do the job properly, and that everyone involved —
from the Council itself, the broader membership of the
Organization and the Secretariat here in New York to
our personnel on the ground — must fully understand
the expectations they have aroused among people
desperate for protection in the face of grave danger.
But the truth is that this theme could be taken as
encompassing almost the whole of the Council’s
current agenda, since almost every crisis that the
Council has to deal with includes a humanitarian
dimension. Indeed, it is often the sheer scale of human
suffering, more than anything else, that impels the
international community to intervene. Our task should
be to prevent such suffering. All too often we fail to do
so because we do not recognize the gravity of the
threat until too late. That is why I believe that Member
States should recognize that whenever a particular
State is unable or unwilling to protect its citizens
against extreme violence, there is a collective
responsibility for all States to do so, a responsibility
that must be assumed by the Council.
Debate tends to focus on the extreme cases where
only forceful intervention can halt the bloodshed. Yet
the earlier we tackle a crisis by other means, the better
our chances of preventing it from reaching that point. I
therefore join the President in stressing the importance
of helping to prevent future conflicts by addressing
their root causes.
The Council has already adopted important
resolutions on this subject, and I have devoted several
reports to it. In a few days’ time, a major civil-society
conference on prevention will be held here at United
Nations Headquarters. In the light of that conference’s
deliberations, I hope the Council will return to it in the
near future, focusing especially on practical modalities.
Meanwhile, the Council has a heavy caseload of
countries already affected by conflict or tentatively
emerging from it. The most frustrating cases are
countries that relapse into conflict only a few years

4

after the international community has helped them
emerge from it. We have learned from bitter experience
that peacebuilding, in order to be successful, needs to
be sustained over a period of years and to include a
broad range of tasks. Those include reintegrating and
rehabilitating
demobilized
combatants,
helping
societies and markets to recover their vitality and, most
crucially of all, strengthening the capacity of State and
social institutions to provide security and justice based
on the rule of law.
In a moment, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guéhenno, will speak in
more detail about the problems of providing genuine
security in post-conflict situations. For my part, I wish
briefly to stress the importance of the rule of law. That
is something that cannot be imposed from outside.
Local actors must genuinely understand that only
confidence in the rule of law will ensure lasting
security, by enabling people of different factions or
communities to rely on the forces of the State, rather
than on factional militias, for protection. For that to
happen, courts and other institutions must be based not
on an imported model, but on the culture and traditions
of the local society.
The role of the international community is to
galvanize and provide technical assistance to that
process while making sure that all national actors are
included in it. It must do so in a coordinated manner.
Different parts of the United Nations system, including
the international financial institutions, need to
cooperate closely with each other and with bilateral
donors and troop contributors. Ensuring that
coordination is one of the roles I hope to see filled by
the new Peacebuilding Commission, which I hope
Member States will agree to create at the world summit
to be held in September. That Commission should help
to sustain the international focus on peacebuilding
tasks in countries that, thanks to the cessation of active
hostilities, are no longer intensively covered in the
news media. By bringing together the different
international and regional actors involved in such
countries, the Commission would, and should,
harmonize peacebuilding activities across the
multilateral system.
As an advisory body, the Commission would
neither encroach upon the authority nor dilute the
responsibility of the Council. No matter how effective
the Commission may be, the members of the Council
will continue to bear the responsibility for devising and

S/PV.5225

adopting the mandates under which the United Nations
operates in war-torn countries. The Council will
therefore still have the responsibility of ensuring that
those mandates are both broad and long enough to give
affected countries a real chance of developing the
institutions and attitudes needed to sustain the rule of
law. Only when that is achieved can a country hope to
break decisively with the cycle of violence.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Guéhenno: Please allow me to begin with a
word of thanks to the Greek presidency for convening
this thematic debate and for inviting me to contribute
to one aspect of it, namely, the challenges currently
faced by United Nations peacekeeping operations in
promoting
the
rule
of
law,
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and securitysector reform in post-conflict situations. I would like to
take this opportunity to focus in particular on the
interlinkages among those three issues and on the need
for more focused discussion of security-sector reform,
which has received little attention in such forums in the
past. The challenges in this area are indeed formidable.
But, before delving into the details, I would like to
make three general observations.
First, the good news: the total number of active
armed conflicts in the world is actually in steady
decline. In fact, the 28 or so countries of the world
currently affected by some form of active armed
conflict represent a 30-year low. The Security Council
lies at the heart of that decline, particularly since the
end of the cold war. The members of this body have
seized opportunities to broker agreements to end civil
wars and to send multidimensional peacekeeping
operations to assist with their implementation. In
several of those cases — Namibia, El Salvador,
Mozambique and Cambodia, for example — peace
prevails, albeit amid other serious challenges facing
those countries more than a decade after United
Nations peacekeepers departed.
One hopes that 10 years from now the same will
be said about Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone. The
Peacebuilding Commission proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, if created, could certainly help increase that
likelihood by ensuring sustained and coordinated
international attention in the post-peacekeeping phase.

Second, while there are enough examples to
demonstrate that this is not mission impossible, there
should be no illusions about how difficult and
precarious the undertaking is. The tragedy of
Srebrenica, to which the Secretary-General just
referred, still serves as a constant reminder ten years
later of how an already dire situation can descend into
conscience-shocking acts of savagery in a matter of
days or hours. When we think that the worst is over, it
is important to remember precisely at that point that
the threat of mass killings, new waves of ethnic
cleansing and/or the resumption of full-scale hostilities
is likely still present in many peacekeeping contexts.
Small missteps and the misreading of events can spell
disaster, and they have.
Moreover, the jobs are getting increasingly
difficult. Although no one associated with the
operations in Mozambique or Cambodia would ever
say that those were easy cases, they now appear to be
so, relative to the scale, scope and complexity of the
challenges United Nations peace operations currently
face in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan, for example.
In order to be better prepared for the unexpected,
the High-level Panel and the Secretary-General have
recommended the creation of a strategic reserve
capacity, ready to be called upon on short notice to
reinforce a mission facing an unforeseen crisis. One of
the highest priorities of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in the coming year is to work
with Member States to define the concept of operations
of the strategic reserve.
Third,
however
robust
United
Nations
peacekeeping operations military capabilities might be,
they alone cannot ensure security in post-conflict
environments absent the right political strategy and the
political will of the relevant national and international
actors. As a result of either international or internal
pressure — or both — the main protagonists to the
conflict must be ready to make the painful political and
personal compromises necessary to maintain peace.
They must transform themselves into leaders or give
way to others able and willing to do the things required
in order to engender the trust of former enemies, bring
a war-torn society together around a common agenda
and steer the delicate balance between promoting
national reconciliation and unity, on the one hand, and
accountability for war crimes and grave abuses of
human rights on the other.

5

S/PV.5225

Those exceptionally trying demands require
exceptional individuals to step forward. No amount of
international assistance in the areas of the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform can substitute for effective
national leadership. If the basis for political
compromise at the national and international level is
wanting, in all likelihood a United Nations peacekeeping
operation will be fighting an uphill battle, to put it
mildly, to maintain a secure environment.
I have offered those three observations up front to
stress that the right political context is often a
necessary precondition for achieving a secure
environment in a post-conflict setting. But while it may
be a necessary condition, it is not a sufficient
condition. Much more work is actually required in the
field of national institution-building. Indeed, a country
emerging from conflict cannot hope to consolidate
peace, develop sustainable institutions or achieve
economic prosperity if its citizens are too fearful to
walk freely in the streets or lack access to social and
legal services or political processes. Nor can a State
rebuild itself and avoid a relapse into conflict if its
population is threatened by police, armed forces or
intelligence units that are not held accountable and are
unprofessional,
poorly
resourced
and
poorly
disciplined, untrained in international standards or
lacking in effective management and oversight
structures. And although stabilization in the immediate
aftermath of conflict is a critical aspect of security,
longer-term efforts addressing the entire range of
security actors and judicial and law enforcement
institutions are just as critical, if not more so.
In short, if peace is to be lasting, the short-,
medium- and long-term security and justice needs of
both the State and its population must be addressed
equally. On those fronts, there are several areas that
deserve further study and potential improvement.
First, our efforts in the security and justice
sectors have tended to be driven by peace agreements,
which address those issues in the context of ending a
conflict. As during the conflict, parties to the
agreement are often driven by their own personal
agendas, and those do not always reflect all the
elements that are crucial for sustainable peace. Peace
agreements articulate in some detail the incorporation
of militia forces into a new police force or army, the
apportionment of senior-level appointments among
warring factions and the harmonization of ranks.

6

However, those elements, while important, do not
lay a strong basis for the consolidation of State and
human security in the post-conflict setting. Insufficient
attention is accorded to a comprehensive national
security review process to identify the threats, whether
internal or external, to State and human security and
the development of a security architecture that is
responsive to identified threats. As a result, both the
international community and the host countries are ill
prepared to tackle critical challenges such as
corruption, cross-border narcotics and arms and human
trafficking. Peace-agreement-driven approaches have
in some instances even led the international community
to support the reform of State institutions that had lost
their legitimacy in the eyes of the population. It is
therefore not surprising that those same countries have
had a high propensity for relapsing into conflict.
Secondly, as in many other areas of
peacebuilding, international efforts related to the
security and the justice sectors are often disjointed.
First, the United Nations bilateral donors and other
actors at times pursue their own objectives without
buying into a single agreed-upon framework or
approach, and, due to competition for donor funds, the
various actors are often not forthcoming about the
projects that they are planning, which leads to uneven
or duplicative assistance.
Thirdly, within the United Nations there is no
agreement on a single system-wide approach on these
issues. In some cases, we have specific operational
capacities in one part of the system, whereas the
corresponding capacity to support management,
oversight and accountability mechanisms may be nonexistent or lie in a different part of the United Nations
system. In other key areas, such as defence reform or
some aspects of the justice sector, capacity is
altogether lacking. That has led to an absence of
strategic coherence among the various links in the
chain of activities.
Fourthly, international approaches in support of
security sector reform in post-conflict countries often
apply foreign models and standards, which may be
politically unpalatable or, practically speaking, unsuitable
or unrealistic in the light of the realities on the ground.
And finally, existing approaches tend to be more
applicable to developing countries than to post-conflict
countries, as those approaches involve lengthy
processes that are not tailored to situations where the

S/PV.5225

road map for political and institutional change is often
set out in a negotiated and time-limited peace
agreement.
In seeking to address those challenges, the
international community might reconsider whether it is
always realistic to seek to rebuild, reform or restructure
a country’s defence, police, courts and penal system
while simultaneously seeking to re-establish security,
keep the political process on track, facilitate the return
of displaced populations, conduct elections and restore
basic services.
In some cases, it may be appropriate to start early
on complex tasks such as rebuilding courts and training
police so that we do not miss the window of
opportunity for action. Otherwise, violent, corrupt and
inept approaches may become entrenched, and we may
later have little or no opportunity to have a significant
impact. In other cases, however, we may need to reexamine the sequence of activities so that the
peacekeeping operation focuses on stabilization while
a proper assessment of threats and needs is conducted
and appropriate international, regional and local
partners are identified to rebuild the security
infrastructure and institutions in a sustainable fashion.
We need to think these questions through carefully so
as to ensure that we spend our efforts and resources on
viable processes and institutions that can be sustained
beyond the brief lifespan of a peacekeeping operation.
For the United Nations system, another key to
better delivery is to continue to strive to carry out our
mandates in as integrated a manner as possible. We
have recognized that strong synergies and links exist
between the development and security agendas, but we
must make greater strides in integrating our
development partners at the initial stages of planning
for peacekeeping operations. That would ensure that
our joint efforts are guided by a coherent, long-term
strategy, and would allow smooth handovers to
national and development partners once the
peacekeeping mandate is over. We must ensure that we
involve not only technical experts, but also civilians
and others with a big-picture perspective, in our
strategic and operational planning and activities.
At the same time, we must seek the greater
integration of capacities within the United Nations
system, which would require the assignment of clear
responsibility for specific activities; the development
of repositories of best practices, including diverse

models of reforming the security sector; and effective
coordination that brings together United Nations,
bilateral and other efforts, including with respect to
resource mobilization.
Equally, we must differentiate between areas
where the United Nations system has, or should further
develop, the capacity to carry out operational tasks and
deliver programmes, and other areas where we could
most usefully engage knowledgeably with host
countries and bilateral and multilateral partners that
have the requisite experience or capacity. As such, our
role would be to advocate for assistance from those
with something to offer and to ensure that what is
promised and delivered responds to the actual needs of
the host country. One key area that deserves
examination is defence reform, where the United
Nations currently has limited capacity.
As we reflect on how the United Nations might
better contribute to the justice and security sectors in
post-conflict environments, we might build on our
recent experience in the area of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), which also
involves multi-actor, multidimensional activities that
stretch beyond the lifespan of a peacekeeping mission.
In April 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations initiated an inter-agency process that
brought together 14 United Nations departments,
agencies, funds and programmes to jointly develop a
set of policies, guidelines and procedures called the
integrated DDR standards. Although that is a United
Nations process, we also tapped into the rich
experience of the beneficiaries of DDR programmes,
Member States, non-governmental organizations and
the World Bank. In one year, the inter-agency working
group has developed a comprehensive set of 30 DDR
models that cover the full spectrum from strategic to
tactical-level issues. We have consulted the drafts
widely, tested them in an inter-agency simulation
exercise, piloted them in our Haiti and Sudan
peacekeeping
missions
and
made
significant
improvements in the way that DDR programmes are
funded. We expect to publish the first edition of the
standards, which will lay out the agreed United Nations
approach for DDR, this fall.
That substantive guidance on DDR will be
available to all those who need it in the international
community. In addition, the inter-agency working
group on DDR is developing a Web-based United

7

S/PV.5225

Nations resource centre and a joint training strategy for
DDR practitioners.
On the basis of this agreed United Nations approach
to DDR, we are now well placed to streamline our
activities, maximize our effectiveness and minimize
unnecessary duplication at Headquarters and in the
field. It may be worth exploring whether United
Nations efforts in the justice and security sectors might
benefit from a similar comprehensive approach. Of
course, that would require expertise and resources
which the United Nations does not currently have.
We are fortunate that our multidimensional
peacekeeping operations generally have solid mandates
to support justice- and security-related programmes on
the ground, even if we often experience shortfalls in
staffing and funding. A greater focus by the Security
Council on the specific DDR, rule-of-law and securityrelated needs in particular settings would provide us
with even stronger and more precise mandates that
would better address the needs of post-conflict
countries. In the meantime, the United Nations system
must continue to work on rationalizing its approaches,
integrating its resources and capacities and delivering a
single and comprehensive United Nations response for
the Governments and populations that we are called
upon to assist. That would also enable the United
Nations system to maintain the level of political
attention that is needed and to draw upon donor
funding in a coordinated manner. The reform or
formation of national security and justice sectors
requires long-term commitment. A single United
Nations approach is surely the best way to ensure the
coherence and sustainability of these efforts well after
the peacekeepers have left the country.
The President: I thank Mr. Guéhenno for his
statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I shall give the floor to three
Council members, followed by two non-Council
members. I shall follow that alternating arrangement
until the list of speakers is exhausted.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

8

As a measure to optimize the use of our time in
order to allow as many delegations as possible to take
the floor, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table or to resume their seats at the side of
the Chamber. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table.
I thank participants for their understanding and
cooperation.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to express
the special satisfaction of the delegation of Brazil at
seeing you, Mr. Minister, presiding over the work of
the Security Council on this timely and important item.
I am also grateful to the delegation of Greece for the
very useful background paper that it has provided as a
basis for our discussions today.
This meeting of the Security Council provides
clear evidence of the growing international awareness
of the need to strengthen our capacity to respond to
international humanitarian crises. Brazil is pleased to see
notions such as conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
which arose some 10 years ago, being firmly
incorporated into the United Nations agenda. The
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
must adapt to contemporary realities and be better
equipped, at both the institutional and the conceptual
levels, in order adequately to address fast-increasing
contemporary challenges and threats. Such ideas are
likely to be reflected in the important decisions that our
Governments are to take in the coming months through
the end of 2005. Brazil is firmly committed to this
opportunity to improve, in a comprehensive manner,
the collective security mechanism, rendering it more
effective and more efficient.
Efforts by the Security Council to break conflict
cycles and to prevent relapses in the context of
humanitarian crises have had mixed results in recent
years. It is therefore important to look at the lessons
learned so as to identify winning strategies, as well as
shortcomings, in our approach, as your delegation,
Mr. President, has proposed. First — this can never be
overstated — we must resist the temptation of onesize-fits-all policies.
Every situation is characterized by cultural,
political, social, economic and sometimes religious
diversities. Information is a key requirement, and the
Council can certainly benefit from views on various
situations, not only from the Secretariat, as we do, but

S/PV.5225

also from individual Members, especially those from
the regions affected, and from the regional and
subregional organizations directly involved.
A second aspect is to recognize the complexity of
the tasks to be undertaken. Recent issues under
consideration by the Council tend to demonstrate that, in
parallel with security-oriented efforts, growing attention
should necessarily be given to promoting democratic
institutions, dialogue and national reconciliation and to
addressing the social and economic roots of conflict.
That is why Brazil and other States have, throughout
the years, advocated greater and more systematic
coordination between the Council and other United
Nations organs as well as other international actors.
Ultimately, we believe, peace is contingent not
only on political and security factors, but also on
economic development with justice and on the
provision of equal opportunity for all. An effective
collective system should therefore be based on a
comprehensive vision that can be sustainable in the
long term. The proposed creation of a Peacebuilding
Commission — by including the Economic and Social
Council and the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as
other stakeholders — can help to bridge the
institutional gaps we face in the social and economic
fields. We certainly favour the ongoing debate on
issues related to transition and on the need to address
the funding and strategic planning gap between relief
and development, particularly in post-conflict settings.
Prevalence of the rule of law, the strengthening of
national security sectors and programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
can be catalysts for the promotion of economic
development and justice.
National ownership of the transition process from
the end of a conflict to the attainment of lasting peace
and sustainable development is crucial. My country is
committed to the establishment of a democracy fund at
the United Nations.
In post-conflict situations, it is essential that
national pacts be forged, fostering inclusiveness and
participation. Such arrangements should be freely
discussed and should aim at long-term stability. The
institutions to be established should be based on
compromise and common interest.
The rule of law must be absolutely consistent
with international human rights norms and standards,

and the rights of victims and vulnerable groups must be
fully upheld. In fragile post-conflict settings, an
independent, impartial, accountable and effective
judiciary system is, we believe, indispensable.
Tangible results can be achieved only with the
necessary financial resources and highly qualified
personnel for a solid investment in justice and the rule
of law. In addition, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights should be given
more resources to work with countries in order to
strengthen the institutions that uphold the rule of law.
Over the years, the Council has applied various
modalities in promoting justice and addressing abuses
in order to achieve reconciliation. Those modalities
include the strengthening of local courts, support for
truth commissions, the establishment of international
tribunals, support for the establishment of mixed
tribunals and referral to the International Criminal
Court. Yet the dynamics are different in every
experience. Local ownership and local consultation are
crucial, as the Secretary-General stressed this morning.
True reconciliation may require a delicate balance
between the values of justice and those of peace,
however difficult that may be to achieve.
Reform of the security sector through the
restructuring and training of military and civilian
police forces is also essential. Foreign assistance —
financial, technical or both — can prove to be useful
and positive. But our attempts should also seek to
ensure that security forces, like governmental
institutions at any other level, are sensitive to the views
of society at large. Most important, they should be
clearly subordinate to civilian oversight.
DDR activities and their variants, including
resettlement and repatriation, are a matter of the
highest importance. The core components of DDR
programmes should be funded from the assessed
budget for peacekeeping operations in order to
guarantee predictable funding. As a matter of fact,
DDR programmes remain continuously underresourced, especially in the reintegration phase.
Experience shows that effective alternatives for
subsistence should be provided to ex-combatants. In
that connection, we stress the importance of quickimpact projects on the ground that can provide
affordable housing for them. Providing affordable
housing is a key element of peacebuilding.
Reintegration into civilian life will be effective only if

9

S/PV.5225

conditions are provided that enable ex-combatants to
live in safety, to participate in the political process and
to pursue economic activities that yield social benefits.
As I stated at the outset, the Council has a mixed
record in undertaking these activities. I would add that
that is not necessarily the fault of the Council itself,
but rather is a symptom of the deficiencies of an
inadequate structure that Member States are now
willing to correct. Considering the current needs in this
field, we also believe that States that are in a position
to assist should seek to formulate new policies and
create or revamp their domestic institutions for that
purpose. Enhanced participation by as many States as
possible in that process would have beneficial effects,
including that of providing options for the countries to
be assisted. This is a potential area for international
cooperation with the participation of the Secretariat,
including the appropriate United Nations programmes
and agencies.
My delegation is thankful for this opportunity to
address, in wider terms, the challenges that the
Security Council has to address in its daily work. This
is a task that the Council must undertake in order to
comply with its mandate, and we must be adequately
prepared and equipped in order to perform effectively.
Mr. Osmane (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to welcome you among us, Mr. Minister,
and to congratulate your country and your delegation
on having organized a debate on an extremely sensitive
issue that the Security Council has been compelled by
circumstances to address: humanitarian crises
generated by armed conflict. I also thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for his
very interesting briefing.
Over the past 15 years, the world has experienced
very serious conflicts that have shattered the lives of
tens of millions of individuals, causing mass
population movements, exposing millions of women
and children to every kind of danger and generating
often unbearable humanitarian crises. Given that
situation, the United Nations, including the Security
Council, has a responsibility to shoulder and a role to
play, together with the agencies and institutions that
are competent in this area.
Therefore, the Security Council’s addressing the
humanitarian dimension of crises and conflicts through
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is a development that
we must welcome. We are also pleased that

10

coordination among the political, humanitarian,
military and socio-economic sectors is recognized as
essential in the prevention of conflict and the
establishment of lasting peace.
The crises of the past 15 years have shown that
the transition between the phase of intervention by the
international community and that of rehabilitation,
recovery and reconstruction can be fragile and
sometimes inadequate. Although there are situations
that provide reasons for satisfaction regarding the
progress made in transitional processes, we must note
that there are others in which efforts have not been
fully successful, particularly in the three key areas that
we are discussing in today’s debate: the rule of law,
security
sector
reform
and
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
In that regard, it is important that our overall
action with respect to managing post-conflict situations
be shaped by holistic strategies; as it devises the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, the Security
Council can and must play a leading role. Such
strategies should incorporate broad support for social
and economic intervention aimed at avoiding the
recurrence of conflict as well as reform of the security
and transitional justice sectors, reductions in small
arms and light weapons, the disarmament and
demobilization of former combatants and the
protection of civilians, in particular vulnerable groups.
The restoration and strengthening of the rule of
law, good governance, the promotion and protection of
human rights, the fight against impunity, respect for
international humanitarian law and the promotion of a
culture of peace and tolerance all continue to be of
fundamental importance. Strengthening the justice and
security sectors in crisis situations or in areas emerging
from conflict is also crucial. Further, it is important to
stress the development dimension in peacebuilding in
countries in crisis or emerging from conflict, as well as
to build the relationship between development and
peacebuilding; that is a task for the entire United
Nations system.
Here, we stress once again the need for in-depth
study of the root causes of the conflicts and
humanitarian crises that are shaking the planet, in
particular the African continent, and to work to contain
them. In that connection, I want to emphasize again the
key role of regional and subregional organizations both
in conflict prevention and in peacebuilding.

S/PV.5225

Implementing a comprehensive approach to
conflict prevention remains the most effective — and
unquestionably the most economical — way to avoid
the humanitarian tragedies brought about by conflict.
To do this, the international community must be
vigilant and must stand ready to provide support to
vulnerable countries. Such support must be coordinated
and multidimensional. It must also be timely and must
continue until the threat is dispelled once and for all.
But although the Security Council has a role to
play, it cannot, by virtue of its mandate, always try to do
everything, everywhere. In our view, the Peacebuilding
Commission — whose role, mandate and place within
the United Nations are now under discussion within the
Organization — could be the appropriate body for
crafting and implementing strategies for addressing
pre-conflict and post-conflict situations, including in
their humanitarian aspects, in a consistent and
integrated manner. My delegation is ready to contribute
to that discussion in an open and constructive way.
Finally, we thank the Greek delegation for
preparing the draft presidential statement before us
today; we support it fully.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Mr. Minister, my delegation thanks you for
convening this debate on the challenges, lessons
learned and the way ahead of the Security Council in
tackling humanitarian crises. We are of the view that
the Security Council has the responsibility to learn
from past experience in order to contribute to the
maintenance of peace.
In recent years, there has unfortunately been a
sudden surge in peacekeeping operations and an
increase in the complexity of their mandates, in which
there is now an attempt to incorporate innovative
elements as a way to help create safer and more stable
environments. Such new elements are part of a new
generation of peace operations aimed at averting the
return of violence through a preventive strategy
intended to deter ex-combatants and to convince them
that it is right that they should be integrated into a
democratic society.
Such an approach requires that all participants in
the process be able to agree on a concrete plan that
provides them with ways to cooperate. Inevitably, there
are many and varied actors involved in the process of
peacebuilding; this adds yet another element of
complexity that we must not neglect.

Undoubtedly, national societies bear primary
responsibility in the search for peace. Nonetheless, for
States marked by the extreme poverty of their
population and by a lack of sufficient institutional
capacity to break out of the vicious circle of violence,
international assistance proves not only necessary but
also decisive. In such contexts, we consider that the
Security Council has a key role to play in the design
and development of a peace process. In our view, the
Council has an important function in coordinating the
efforts of the various actors and in avoiding
unnecessary duplication, all with a view to optimizing
the efficiency of the peace initiatives.
The international community’s interest in
addressing the root causes of conflict is reflected in
current field activities of the United Nations, in
numerous peacekeeping operations, on issues related to
the rule of law, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
We consider that the strengthening of the
institutions of the rule of law is an outstanding way to
bring justice to societies in which impunity prevailed.
We consider that reform of police institutions and of
the structures responsible for law and order is essential
to ensure that the fight against illegality and
arbitrariness is conducted strictly within the framework
of international standards and with full respect for
human rights. We believe also that a comprehensive
process of DDR in societies characterized by
intolerance helps build trust and promotes the creation
of mechanisms that help restore the social fabric.
All those concepts are aimed at broadening the
traditional approach to peacebuilding. It is no longer
simply a matter of responding to the outbreak of armed
conflict, but rather of improving a society’s own
capacity to reconcile and of strengthening its ability to
deal with its conflicts without violence. The joint and
coordinated implementation of programmes in all these
areas reduces — and can further reduce — the
incidence of scattered and parallel efforts and can
contribute to laying the foundations of stability.
We believe that the Secretariat could assemble a
compendium of best practices to facilitate the future
work of the Security Council. Along those lines, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, at its
session held in January and February, encouraged the
Secretariat to develop coherent strategies and early
integrated mission planning based on lessons learned.

11

S/PV.5225

Lessons from missions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Liberia, Timor-Leste, Kosovo, Sierra
Leone, Côte d’Ivoire and Haiti could be of the utmost
importance. The analyses submitted by technical
missions to organize the launching of a peace operation
could include early assessments of the status of the
local judicial, correctional and police systems, so as to
provide troop-contributing countries with a more
comprehensive picture regarding the issues that require
urgent attention.
From this perspective, the potential of the
regional training centres for Blue Helmets should be
better used both to spread new ideas and concepts on
multidimensional operations and to integrate the
specific views and knowledge of different cultural and
geographical areas.
We believe that the unified standards on DDR
now being developed will be extremely useful in
preparing activities in this regard. We also believe that
the inclusion in DDR of all women and children
associated with armed forces and groups, taking into
account their specific needs, should be part of those
unified guidelines. We should provide for the early and
foreseeable funding of all the components of the
process as a means of ensuring a horizon of certainty
for all the actors involved.
As we have indicated on other occasions, our
delegation firmly supports the Secretary-General’s
proposal to create a Peacebuilding Commission that
would be charge of analysing in detail all these
sensitive and important issues.
In conclusion, may I point out that it is the
responsibility of States to be coherent and determined
when adopting peacebuilding measures. Therefore,
Security Council decisions on this issue must be
supported and facilitated both within the United
Nations — for example, in the respective committees
of the General Assembly — and in the agencies that
are part of the system. In this last regard, we believe
that the contribution of international financial
institutions must be encouraged, since that could be
crucial to the success of the peace processes —
although in many cases the strict conditions that they
impose cause reconstruction and development efforts
to fail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.

12

Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Greece, Mr. Petros Molyviatis, and his delegation for
having proposed an open debate on the timely and
important problem of humanitarian crises.
There is no doubt that the humanitarian crises
confronting the Security Council are largely due to the
proliferation of civil conflicts following the cold war.
In fact, since the cold war, more than 33 internal civil
conflicts have erupted or have been re-activated and
have cost over 5 million lives and have left almost 17
million people as refugees or displaced persons.
We believe that the Council has three main
functions when facing humanitarian crises. The first is
to prevent a humanitarian crisis, and that means
preventing the conflict. The second is to respond to a
crisis. That response includes diplomatic measures,
enforcement action, sanctions and, in extreme cases,
military intervention. The third function is to direct
reconciliation and the reconstruction of the collapsed
country. That means modernization of the economy and
building or rebuilding democracy.
One lesson that we must learn from humanitarian
crises is that, as we have said, they are the result of
civil conflicts caused mainly by social exclusion.
Therefore it is no coincidence that most humanitarian
crises now under consideration in the Security Council
occur in countries where personal income has not
grown more that 2 per cent over the last thirty years.
Those countries — which in addition have an explosive
population growth, especially the urban population,
and export only primary products and are
technologically very backward — have been left out of
the global flows of trade, investment and technological
innovation. Therefore they have become indebted in
order to buy the progress that they are not able to
produce. In other words, they are becoming almost
unviable national economies.
We must understand that behind the conflicts that
cause humanitarian crises are those unviable national
economies, which produce a great deal of social
exclusion, which in turn exacerbates political
instability and ethnic and religious conflict to the point
of turning the country into a failed State. In the face of
this reality, it is thus necessary to introduce in the
Security Council measures that strengthen its
preventive capacities so that it can identify, in
coordination with the Economic and Social Council

S/PV.5225

and the Bretton Woods organizations, which countries
are at risk of becoming failed States. The Council should
be a kind of early-warning mechanism so that countries
experiencing political instability can immediately be
given economic and financial intensive care by the
international community so that humanitarian crises
can be averted. That intensive care would focus above
all on debt forgiveness and on a massive increase in
assistance in order to meet the most urgent social
demands and thus provide political stability.
To improve the Security Council’s response to
humanitarian crises, we believe that its five permanent
members could arrive at a gentlemen’s agreement not
to use the veto when it is a question of crises involving
crimes against humanity such as massive violations of
human rights, ethnic cleansing and genocide. That
gentlemen’s agreement would function in cases
presented by the Secretary-General and supported by
reports from the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Secretariat’s Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. The idea is that the permanent
members of the Council would cooperate in the face of
a request from the international community by not
using the veto against Council operations that could
save thousands of lives.
Nonetheless, such a gentlemen’s agreement will
serve no point if the Security Council’s peacekeeping
or peace enforcement capacity is weakened because of
a lack of recruitment or because of shortcomings on the
part of recruited troops and if the United Nations
forces are not deployed quickly.
For all those reasons the Security Council, in
order to improve its response capacity, should endorse
the recommendations of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change that ask those
countries that have greater military capacity to make
available to the United Nations autonomous reserve
battalions with a high level of preparation and selfsufficiency. They might be as large as a brigade in size.
As for reconciliation and the reconstruction of
failed States, the Security Council should ensure that
reconstruction does not simply rebuild an unviable
economy based on the export of primary commodities
and with low technological capacity. If it does, the
State concerned will not be able to count on sufficient
resources for a growing population and social
exclusion will continue to recreate instability, civil
conflict and humanitarian crises.

The most important aspect of the Council’s role
in reconstruction and reconciliation, however, is the
establishment of democratic institutionality, which
should begin at the local level. The first essential task
is the establishment of local democratic Governments.
Democracy must rise from the local to the regional
level and from the regional to the national. Thus, it will
emanate from the people to the local and State
authorities.
It can be said today that humanitarian work has
virtually become the principal activity of the United
Nations. That may seem quite normal to us here, but it
is seen very differently by analysts of international
relations. In fact, as they see it, the expansion of the
United Nations humanitarian activity is very clear
evidence that the Security Council is failing to fulfil its
primary mandate to maintain international peace and
security because it is unable to prevent and to resolve
conflicts. They believe that the United Nations is
expanding its humanitarian work for want of a better
alternative.
That does not mean, of course, that we ought not
address humanitarian crises, but the magnitude and
recurrence of tragic humanitarian situations cannot and
must not cause us to forget that the principal work of
the United Nations and the Security Council is
effectively to prevent and adequately to respond to
civil conflicts in order to avoid humanitarian crises.
In conclusion, I cannot fail to note that, if we do
not adopt measures to strengthen the functions of the
Security Council in preventing and responding to
conflicts and humanitarian crises, and if we merely
convene open debates, we run the risk of repeating the
events of 1453, when, in Byzantium, the doctors of the
faith were debating the issue of whether angels have a
gender at the very moment when the enemy army was
at the gates of Constantinople. Our discussions here must
be neither an impediment to action nor unproductive
exercises or dialogues; rather, they must constitute a brief
reflection, since we have a great deal to do in Darfur.
Mr. Sen (India): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July 2005. The agenda of the Council for the month is
indicative of the important issues that the Council is
called upon to deal with. I have no doubt that those
issues will receive the most careful consideration under
your stellar leadership.

13

S/PV.5225

As we are taking the floor for the first time this
month, I would like to convey, on my own behalf and
on behalf of the Government and people of India, our
deep condolences and sympathy to the Government
and people of the United Kingdom for the tragedy that
has resulted from the terrorist attacks in London. Those
reprehensible acts are a crime not just against the
United Kingdom, but against all humanity. The horror
perpetrated in London will remain etched on the
collective consciousness of the world as a signal that
terrorism has become one of the greatest threats of our
times. It is not constrained by distance and resources,
nor restricted by boundaries, nor bound by any
civilized norms in wreaking devastation. The world
community must rise as one to respond decisively to
that collective challenge to the peace, security and
progress of all mankind.
I wish to thank you, Sir, for scheduling this open
meeting of the Security Council today. The regular
participation of the general membership in Council
debates on important issues under its consideration is a
step towards the desired goal of achieving greater
transparency and inclusiveness in the work of the
Council.
The theme of the debate today is one that has
been discussed on a number of occasions by the
Council under different nomenclatures. My delegation
has participated in several open debates on related
issues and our position on those is well-known. In
recent months, the consideration of this and related
issues under the rubric of reform of the United Nations,
based particularly on the report of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change and the SecretaryGeneral’s “In larger freedom” report, has enabled a
fresh airing of views on the subject.
We believe that the topic of this debate belongs
more to the General Assembly, as it revolves around
more than one issue, such as the implementation of
humanitarian law, the rule of law in conflict situations,
and capacity-building of States in conflict or those
emerging from conflict. I believe, however, that you
have more than redressed the balance, Sir, through the
idealism and reason that you have brought to bear on
the consideration of those issues, which is a
characteristic of Hellenic civilization, and the method
of conducting the work that you have adopted. If you
will permit a Christian metaphor, this, I hope, will
remain as a rock on which the future working practices

14

of the Security Council will be built and will remain a
model for the future.
India has on several occasions expressed its
reservations on intrusive monitoring and fingerpointing while dealing with specific human rights
situations in individual countries. That principle
applies equally in cases of violation of humanitarian
law. We remain convinced of the essential validity of
an approach that is based on dialogue, consultation and
cooperation leading to genuine improvements in a
situation where violations of human rights law and
humanitarian law are addressed without any external
interference.
We have on earlier occasions also made it clear
that any discussion which is used as a cover for
conferring legitimacy on the so-called right of
humanitarian intervention or for making it the ideology
of some kind of military humanism is unacceptable.
We believe that, in the case of humanitarian crises
manifested in the form of genocide and gross
violations of human rights and humanitarian law, no
amount of sophistry can substitute for the lack of
political will among major Powers.
There is, in fact, a very troubling pattern usually
ignored or not acknowledged. In several countries,
because of the suspicion now engendered that
humanitarian assistance is driven by political motives
and that those who take humanitarian action also take
sides, parties to a conflict have either targeted
humanitarian workers or those they work for, or
refused them access. Those fears can only be allayed if
humanitarian assistance returns to its roots and
humanitarian action is seen as apolitical, neutral and
offered at request, in accordance with the guiding
principles so clearly enunciated by the General
Assembly in its resolution 46/182.
We are not certain if an investigation of the
reasons behind countries’ relapsing into conflict would
serve much useful purpose. There may be a variety of
reasons that drag countries into a state of armed
conflict. It is well-known that transitional situations are
complex and country-specific. However, the single
most effective instrument for helping countries not to
relapse into conflict, to our mind, would be
development. It is widely acknowledged that
development assistance to post-conflict countries can
help to stabilize the situation and provide the time
needed for building national institutions.

S/PV.5225

General Assembly resolution 59/250 on the
triennial comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system urged the United Nations agencies and the
donor community, in coordination with national
authorities, to begin planning the transition to
development and taking measures supportive of that
transition, such as institutional and capacity-building,
from the beginning of the relief phase. The resolution
stresses the need for transitional activities to be
undertaken under national ownership through the
development of national capacities at all levels to
manage the transition process. We feel that the United
Nations system as a whole must look at the issue of
national development as a priority in post-conflict
situations. The effort should be to develop national
capacity and promote national ownership.
Countries in post-conflict situations would also
benefit from sharing experiences and expertise from
other developing countries. South-South cooperation
modalities, including triangular cooperation modalities,
should form an important component of the
development of post-conflict countries. The use of
information technologies and knowledge-management
systems, as well as the exchange of expertise, should
be facilitated to enable post-conflict countries that have
emerged from conflict to take advantage of the
experience of other developing countries.
There is a general understanding among the
membership today that the international community
can no longer remain silent in the event of gross and
egregious violations of human rights or of genocide. A
humanitarian crisis can also be the result of famine,
drought, natural calamity, infectious disease and a host
of other factors. Under the provisions of Chapter VII of
the Charter, the Council has the authority to intervene
where it deems necessary. Yet there continue to be
doubts about the political objectivity of decisions that
empower States to act against others in the light of
humanitarian crises.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you to the
President’s chair, Mr. Minister.
The theme of today’s discussion is relevant in the
context of the activities of the Security Council.
Experience has shown us that the attainment of lasting
peace and the resolution of regional conflicts are possible
only on the basis of a comprehensive approach.

United Nations peacekeeping activities are
becoming increasingly complex and multidimensional.
The Organization has made considerable progress in
resolving a number of complex conflicts. In every case,
success was due in large part to the effective
combination of the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tools of the United Nations and the close coordination
of the military, political, civilian, reconstruction and
humanitarian components of operations.
Each crisis situation is unique in its own way;
there is no one-size-fits-all model of peacekeeping that
can be applied to all conflicts. Each case requires
selecting
the
optimal
set
of
peacekeeping
instruments — be they United Nations, coalition or
regional operations. Such an effort must be structured
in strict accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, which clearly sets out the political role of the
Security Council in all stages of a peacekeeping
operation, from drafting the mandate to the transition
to peacebuilding. The Charter and international legal
standards give the Council the ability to act on behalf
of the international community and to take appropriate
measures to prevent or end genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and other massive abuses of
human rights that pose a threat to international peace
and security.
Russia is prepared to cooperate closely with all
interested international partners to strengthen the
leading role of the United Nations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and humanitarian crises, as
well as to enhance the effectiveness of the activities of
the United Nations in the interest of building lasting
global security and stability.
The Russian delegation supports the draft
presidential statement that has been prepared by the
Greek delegation and which has been agreed by all
members of the Council.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): My delegation wishes to
thank the Greek presidency for organizing this debate.
We would also like to thank you, Mr. Minister, for
presiding over our meeting today. This debate is a
useful follow-up to those held by the Security Council
in May and June of this year on the subjects of postconflict peacebuilding and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Denmark aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

15

S/PV.5225

Many of the Security Council’s actions are in
response to humanitarian crisis caused by conflict. In
maintaining international peace and security, the
Council’s main objective is to save human lives and
spare people from further suffering. That objective was
fully met in two success stories of United Nations
intervention, namely, the cases of Timor-Leste and
Bougainville. Unfortunately, other interventions have
not yet had the same positive outcome, and human
suffering continues in places like Haiti, Sudan and
Côte d’Ivoire.
We must aim to improve our efforts to prevent
countries from relapsing into conflict. If we are not
able to act swiftly in the immediate post-conflict phase,
we may miss the window of opportunity and more
human lives will be lost.
Even if there is no standard formula by which
every conflict can be resolved, there certainly is a
checklist based on lessons learned that can help us get
off to a good start. The three pillars mentioned in the
presidency’s discussion paper for this debate are all on
the checklist. The rule of law, security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes are vital parts of every peacebuilding
strategy, as they address the fundamental causes of
most conflicts.
To improve our work, we must develop individual
peacebuilding strategies for every conflict. In the
mandates for United Nations operations, the Security
Council must address overall needs and ensure that the
main elements of the checklist are included. As a
supervisor of its own decisions, the Council must
always stand ready to re-examine a conflict situation
on the basis of relevant advice and adjust its mandate
accordingly.
The proposal to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission addresses many of those concerns. By
bringing together local and regional partners, donors
and providers of security, we can create a unique
environment for developing strategy and for setting
priorities in a way that is both implementable and
sustainable. Allow me to give a few examples to
illustrate the complementary and useful nature of a
Peacebuilding Commission in relation to our
discussion today.
While the Security Council can only appeal to
donors to fund certain activities, the Peacebuilding
Commission can address specific gaps and, hopefully,

16

fill them. While the Security-Council would normally
condemn trafficking of soldiers across borders, the
Peacebuilding Commission can discuss useful
measures to stop it with regional partners. While the
Security Council can encourage quick-win projects, the
Peacebuilding Commission can make them part of the
priorities.
It is important to develop comprehensive
strategies if we wish to preserve peace and find
solutions to humanitarian crises. The root causes of
conflict do not disappear with peacekeeping alone, and
development will not happen without security. That
interconnection demands the inclusion of many actors
and instruments unique to every specific conflict. The
complexity and the many interests and concerns
involved call for the United Nations to be in charge of
coordination.
There is responsibility to be borne at every level.
The Security Council is the highest global level of
political and strategic decision-making. It bears the
responsibility to adopt mandates that allow the
necessary steps to be taken to attain sustainable peace.
As another strategic body, a Peacebuilding
Commission — being one step closer to actual
implementation in the field, due to its composition —
can more effectively coordinate specific issues and
ensure that every necessary task is accounted for in a
peacebuilding strategy.
In the end, the work done in the field by United
Nations peacekeepers, United Nations agencies, local
and regional partners, bilateral donors and other
contributors remains the centre of gravity. All we do,
and all the decisions we take, must aim at improving
the situation on the ground. The only way to measure
the success of our common efforts is by improvements
in the situation for the human lives to which we are all
accountable.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are honoured that
you, Mr. Foreign Minister, are presiding over this
important meeting, and we congratulate the Greek
delegation for convening an open debate of the
Security Council on the Council’s role in humanitarian
crises. We were enriched on this issue by your concept
paper and your statement, as well as by the statements
of the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno.
Recent developments have shown that the
Council is increasingly involved in humanitarian issues

S/PV.5225

in the context of its mandate to protect and enhance
international peace. Our meeting today is therefore
timely and relevant.
We agree that the promotion of the rule of law,
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process and security sector reform are key
pillars to be addressed during the post-conflict
peacebuilding stage in order to arrest humanitarian
crises and prevent the resumption of conflict. To
appreciate and understand the importance of addressing
those three pillars, it is best to look at the historical
experience of the conflict situations that the Council
has been asked to consider. There are multiple realities
and lessons learned from past and current
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
First, as stated by the Russian Federation
delegation, there are no quick fixes or one-size-fits-all
formulas for addressing the issue. Responses vary
among conflict situations. The Under-SecretaryGeneral referred to best practices and best models; it
would be helpful to share those experiences and that
expertise.
Secondly, the response to and the assistance in
conscience-shocking humanitarian crises are more
immediate than is the case in other crises. As a
corollary, the response to and the assistance in those
crises become effective when humanitarian and
strategic interests coincide. Selective responses could,
and did, occur in the past.
Third, it is best that the mechanisms and the
processes for responding to humanitarian crises
accompany an internal process with roots in the
specific experiences of the society concerned. The
complex reality of socio-economic circumstances on
the ground cannot be ignored. In that connection, the
participation of local players is indispensable in the
planning and the implementation of strategic and
critical objectives related to those three pillars. Local
ownership greatly increases the chance of success of
those initiatives.
Fourth, flexible, adequate and timely funding that
enables rapid reaction and sustained support for
programmes is necessary to ensure that early
challenges are addressed immediately and that
medium- to longer-term concerns are properly covered.
Lastly, local capacity-building must be an integral
part of all responses. Attention to local capacity-

building has positive implications for financing,
particularly for relations with donors and aid agencies.
Prioritization in the strengthening of local institutions
encourages local actors to become involved in the
design and the implementation of programmes. The net
effect is shared decision-making and accountability.
The role ahead for the Security Council in
humanitarian crises is fraught with challenges and
opportunities.
First, institutional innovation, along the lines of
what the Secretary-General referred to, is needed with
regard to how crises are handled. That will involve
strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
agencies in such areas as logistics and communications
in order to ensure predictable, efficient and effective
assistance.
Secondly, the Security Council should continue
and enhance its support for regional organizations,
because they contribute to the strengthening of the
three pillars of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Thirdly, the Security Council could embark on
targeted assistance for vulnerable groups such as
refugees, internally displaced persons, child soldiers,
ex-combatants and unemployed youths. Broad policy
frameworks should be applied to specific projects such
as infrastructure development.
Fourthly, the Security Council has an important
part to play in making sure that the rule of law, the
DDR process and security sector reform are tackled in
an integrated manner in order to establish and enhance
their relevance to each other and to the overall goal.
Fifthly, in drawing up the mandates of
peacekeeping missions, the Council should, in its
resolutions, carefully provide very clear objectives and
tasks for achieving goals in those three areas,
individually and in relation to one another.
The Security Council has recognized the link
between security and human rights. The peacekeeping
mandates for El Salvador, Cambodia, Angola, Liberia
and Georgia included a human rights component, and
the protection of civilians has been enshrined in
resolution 1296 (2000), among others.
The challenge for the Security Council and the
international community as a whole is to free some
current responses and assistance to humanitarian crises
that arise out of armed conflicts from what one author

17

S/PV.5225

calls “political evangelism”. There is a more ideal role
for the Council, to which the Secretary-General
referred: to prevent the onset of humanitarian crises.
That will require attention to the root causes of
conflict. The proposed Peacebuilding Commission
could very well strengthen the Council’s ability to
approach humanitarian crises within the larger
framework of peacebuilding efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Savua (Fiji): Allow me to congratulate your
delegation, Mr. Minister, on its assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. We also thank your delegation for the document
distributed to guide today’s debate.
The leadership and monitoring role of the
Security Council in all humanitarian crises cannot be
overemphasized. In order to assist it in administering
and controlling operations, the Council must be
supported by accurate, up-to-the-minute information
and an intelligence unit and allied network.
Good intelligence and information and a broadbased information database should provide the Council
with contingency plans to cover all manner of scenarios,
ease the decision-making process and provide a forecast
of likely global conflagration points. They should enable
the Council to prepare plans including estimated
budgetary requirements and to estimate when the
exercise of the right to protect is justified.
The training of the police and the military of the
emerging State should be expedited as a matter of
priority, but not at the expense of the impoverished
majority by training the very same domineering
security personnel who had hounded them previously.
Proper selection, combined with a good understanding
of the background of the problems, is essential in
conducting a good training programme.
While best practices and lessons learned ought to
provide a decent basis for preparing training
syllabuses, local demands and practices must also be
factored in to ensure ownership and avoid creating an
institution that reflects another nation’s doctrinal
teachings. The credibility of the United Nations has to
be resurrected, and troop-contributing countries must
deploy highly disciplined and well-trained troops so
that best practices of the recent past in that regard can
be corrected and improved.

18

Fiji agrees that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process should be nationally
owned. Nations must decide on the extent of
reconciliation, the time limit for prosecuting crimes
and who should be reintegrated. Where possible, there
should be a parallel, two-pronged approach giving
equal priority to the DDR process and the handling of
refugees. National ownership of the process should be
underlined, and when national ownership is instituted it
must be respected. Outside interventions must be
accompanied by an understanding of the rationale that
led to the decision. Nations, however, must accept all
the strengths and the shortcomings of their decisions.
We strongly support the involvement of regional
organizations and neighbouring countries in the peace
process. Support by international and local actors and
consistency in the flow of donor aid must be insisted
upon at the outset. We have such operations in the
South Pacific: the United Nations-sponsored
peacekeeping operation in Bougainville, which has
been successfully concluded, and the Regional
Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands (RAMSI).
While full United Nations support is still forthcoming
for RAMSI, we ask that modalities be found to allow
donor aid to arrive within a consistent and sustainable
manner.
RAMSI is continuing to play a role in the
peacebuilding process in the Solomon Islands. Its
mission now is to build long-lasting peace and to
prevent further outbreaks or the escalation of violence.
We would like to know how long a mandate a mission
would require for long-lasting peace to be achieved and
guaranteed. We cannot provide an answer for the
moment. Perhaps when the United Nations and the
South Pacific finally come to work together, we will
find that RAMSI, although small, may contain the
prescription that can provide the answers.
The President: I
representative of Norway.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway shares the views
expressed in the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and others. I would like to take
this opportunity to draw the attention of the Council to
one of the important issues referred to in that statement
concerning the Security Council’s role in humanitarian
crises, namely humanitarian space in integrated missions.
In his report to the Economic and Social Council
last year, the Secretary-General referred to the

S/PV.5225

shrinking space of humanitarian action and pointed out
the need to review and establish clearer guidance on
civil-military cooperation and coordination. Since that
has a particular bearing on United Nations integrated
missions, Norway decided to co-finance a study by
independent experts, which was followed by a wellattended conference on integrated missions that took
place in Oslo at the end of May. We have great
expectations that the United Nations will benefit from
the existing momentum and develop practical solutions
to the opportunities and dilemmas that integrated
missions present. The Security Council should be
active in this respect.
On the humanitarian side, there is still some
reluctance with regard to integrated missions because
of humanitarian space concerns and a feeling that
integration has too often been synonymous with
subordination. This perception is particularly strong in
non-United Nations humanitarian organizations, but it
is present in United Nations humanitarian bodies as
well. The role of the humanitarian coordination
structures in relation to the mission is a major issue.
While strong integration may increase cohesion within
the United Nations, it risks undermining the United
Nations position on wider humanitarian coordination,
as has been the case in Liberia. There seems to be
growing awareness that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs should be located outside the
mission structure in situations of high tension or active
conflict.
One should not aim for a blueprint model for all
missions. The concept of integration gives a sense of
direction, but no clear organizational solutions. As
each field operation must meet different challenges,
mission mandates, planning and design must also be
flexible. As the integrated missions study found, form
should follow function. Key factors for success are
continuity and complementarity between different parts
of a United Nations operation and relevant external
actors. This must be built in from the early stages of
planning and be reflected in the mandates of the
missions. In particular, transition and development
issues should also be included from the very beginning
of the planning process.
Thus, the planning processes of an integrated
mission should be as inclusive as possible from the
start, and the field level should be involved. The needs
and expectations of the local population must be taken
into account in all phases. Moreover, coherent planning

requires coherent financing. It is crucial that funding
be made available for all mission components at the
same time. From our point of view, it is logical that all
activities included in the mission’s mandate should be
financed by assessed contributions. The urgent need for
better financing of humanitarian action is evident.
In closing, I would like to add my voice to those,
like the EU, that have welcomed the introduction of
regular briefings to the Security Council by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator. The humanitarian
dimension is essential if the Council is to ensure a
coherent and effective United Nations crisis response
that takes fully into account the impact of its action or
inaction on individual human beings in conflict areas.
Humanitarian issues must therefore continue to be an
integral part of the Security Council’s agenda.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is pleased to welcome you, Sir,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece, to the
Council to preside over today’s debate. We would like
to express appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, for his statement, as well as to the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Guéhenno, for his briefing.
The concept of humanitarian crises is a broad
one. The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations bearing the primary responsibility for
international peace and security, should, as a matter of
course, play a lead role in conflict prevention and
management. Effective conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as post-conflict reconstruction, are
the primary functions of the Security Council in
response to humanitarian crises. In its future
undertakings, the Council should attach greater
importance to the question of how to help conflict
areas maintain stability and how to get them back on
track towards sustained development so as to prevent
relapses into conflict.
In this context, I would like to raise a number of
issues.
First, the rule of law and justice in law
enforcement are necessary prerequisites for a peaceful
transition. They are also a fundamental guarantee for
the consolidation of lasting peace. In areas emerging
from conflict, ensuring the rule of law and justice
should become an integral part of the overall effort to
achieve peace and stability, protecting the fundamental
interests of local populations and serving the overall
interests of social stability. All the participants in post-

19

S/PV.5225

conflict reconstruction efforts should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter and universally
recognized norms of international law, and should
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
countries concerned. Only in that way can the relevant
efforts be considered justified, win the credibility and
trust of the recipient countries and genuinely promote
post-conflict peacebuilding.
Secondly, most humanitarian crises take place in
less-developed areas and are closely linked with
poverty and underdevelopment. In such areas, the end
of a conflict does not necessarily mean the arrival of
peace. Usually we are faced with grave challenges in
terms of finance, technology and lack of human
resources. The United Nations should mobilize timely
international resources and provide technical
assistance, playing a greater role in that respect, in
order to help the countries concerned to implement
their disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and intensify their efforts to strengthen
the justice sector.
In providing assistance to the countries
concerned, the international community, in particular
the donor community, should fully respect local
history, cultural traditions and legal structures, respect
the ownership and decision-making capacity of local
populations and avoid becoming involved in internal
conflicts. Instead of issuing orders, it should provide
guidance in keeping with the realities and needs on the
ground. The focus should be on building the capacity
of local areas and populations rather than on imposing
a predetermined model of governance.
Thirdly, in responding to humanitarian crises, the
Security Council should strengthen coordination and
cooperation with the affected regions and subregions to
help enhance their capacity to deal with such crises.
The African continent should not only be the focus of
United Nations conflict prevention activities; it should
also be the focus of the Organization’s post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts.
The Security Council should not only help the
African countries concerned with post-conflict
peacebuilding; in keeping with the realities and
specific needs on the ground, it should also strengthen
the continent’s regional and subregional organizations
by providing them with logistical, financial and
technological assistance in order to improve their
overall capacity for post-conflict peacebuilding.

20

China supports the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission, which we hope will
become functional as soon as possible. We hope that
that initiative will promote post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts and foster lasting peace and stability. It should
also have a direct impact on United Nations efforts to
coordinate post-conflict peacebuilding activities. We
hope that the parties concerned will reach agreement
on the details of the initiative as soon as possible.
China endorses the presidential statement drafted
by the Greek delegation. We are grateful to that
delegation for its efforts.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in expressing our gratitude to you, Mr. Minister,
for chairing this important meeting, which seeks to
enhance the manner in which the Security Council
responds to humanitarian crises in the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
an area of particular interest to my country and to
Africa. We are therefore greatly indebted to the Greek
presidency for this focused initiative. A better
understanding of humanitarian crises is an important
element in preventing, responding to and resolving
such crises.
The major challenge we have before us in
preventing conflict and reducing the escalation of
humanitarian crises is dealing with threats to peace and
security. We need to acknowledge that such threats
include not only international war and conflict, but also
civil violence, organized crime, terrorism and weapons
of mass destruction, poverty, deadly infectious diseases
and environmental degradation. Although we
acknowledge that Member States have the primary
responsibility for maintaining peace and security —
including the obligation to address the root causes of
violent conflict — the support of the entire
international community and of the Security Council is
very important.
The role of the Security Council in humanitarian
crises should be based on the impact of such crises on
international peace and security. It should be seen in
three interrelated phases — the evolution of such
crises, the response to them and their resolution — as
part of the Council’s moral and political responsibility.
However, humanitarian action alone should not be a
substitute for needed political action.
The Security Council should be knowledgeable
about and concerned by early signs of the multiple root

S/PV.5225

causes of humanitarian crises, both man-made and
caused by natural disasters. Such knowledge would
enable the Council to initiate early action to prevent or
contain the outbreak of full-scale conflict. Poverty and
hunger, combined with deteriorating environmental
factors, can cause or exacerbate conflict. Among the
range of options that should be available to the
Security Council and to the international community as
a whole are timely humanitarian action such as the
provision of food and HIV/AIDS assistance to help
concerned Governments help and protect their citizens.
Poverty and hunger can lead to desperate acts such as
violent crime and facilitate the recruitment of child
soldiers.
Systematic patterns of gross human rights
violations are indications of impending humanitarian
and political crisis, leading to crimes against humanity,
violations of international humanitarian law and
genocide. The Security Council, in collaboration with
the relevant United Nations bodies and civil society
organizations, ought to respond in a timely manner to
human rights violations and take appropriate collective
action in accordance with its mandate set out in
Chapters VI and VII of the Charter.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security is very relevant in that
regard. The role of civil society and national and
regional institutions in preventing and resolving
conflicts is critical. Those groups have information
obtained on the ground and can be good advisers with
regard to action, since they are familiar with the
territories and situations concerned. Their involvement
promotes ownership of the peace process for the
attainment of lasting peace and sustainable
development in the affected countries and regions.
It has now become standard practice, following
the onset of crises and the establishment of peace, to
set up integrated peacekeeping missions whose duties
include providing humanitarian assistance and
protecting civilians. It should be remembered that,
before the implementation of peace operations, victims
of displacement such as internally displaced persons
and refugees not only need humanitarian assistance,
but can also be victims and sources of destabilization
in countries experiencing such stressful situations.
Moreover, they can complicate peaceful negotiations
and relations between and among neighbouring States.
Providing international protection and assistance to
such groups should be a shared responsibility, and

solutions to such problems should be built into
subsequent peace agreements. The Security Council
should remain seized of such problems, as they have
direct relevance to regional and international peace and
security.
As a State in the Great Lakes region of Africa,
Tanzania knows only too well how humanitarian crises
triggered by conflicts in other countries can affect a
country’s development. The refugee burden we bear is
one whose solution lies only in peace and security in
the region. That pursuit is at the heart of the Dar es
Salaam Declaration of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, which focuses on peace and
security, democracy and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and social and
economic issues. Progress and success on all those
fronts will require not only the resolve of our own
countries, but also the support of the international
community and of the Security Council in the context
of its mandate in collaboration with regional
organizations. However, regional capacities will need
to be evaluated and, where necessary, bolstered.
The immediate post-conflict phase and the
transition from peacekeeping and relief to development
can have destabilizing tendencies if they are not
properly addressed and managed. The return and
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the disarmament and demobilization of
combatants and the issues of transitional justice,
governance, reconciliation and development should be
comprehensively integrated into the transition.
The peacebuilding commission will have to deal
precisely with those issues, which have not been
addressed holistically before. The Security Council has
a crucial role to play, in collaboration with other organs
of the United Nations, such as the Economic and Social
Council, funds and programmes, including the
humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and the
international community. During that period,
humanitarian needs may actually be larger while food
production and coping mechanisms are rebuilt and
social services restored as part of the recovery effort.
There has to be a seamless transfer of
responsibilities from the Security Council to other
actors and stakeholders in shoring up a country
emerging from conflict into sustainable peace and
development. We need to ensure that there is adequate
coordination within United Nations entities, as well as

21

S/PV.5225

with civil society, national Governments and regional
organizations, as well as bilateral and multilateral
agencies, in that partnership.
Last but not least, the protection of humanitarian
personnel is an enduring challenge. Those persons often
go into conflict situations way ahead of the peacekeepers.
Without adequate protection, humanitarian personnel
become victims of rebels and, in some cases, rebels
target them for food, funds and vehicles. Their security
should also be the concern of this Council.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): My delegation appreciates
your presence, Sir, in the Security Council today to
preside over this important debate. Your initiative to
consider the Security Council’s role in humanitarian
crises, with a focus on security sector issues, is
welcome. It is well-timed and thought-provoking.
In your note for this debate, you suggested three
major issues — the rule of law, security sector reform,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) — as requiring special attention in achieving
sustainable peace in a post-conflict situation. We agree
with your view. When a conflict triggers a serious
humanitarian crisis, such as refugee flows and internal
displacement, the first response called for from
national and international actors is to provide
protection and emergency humanitarian relief to the
people affected. In a situation in which law and order
have broken down, which is often the case in war
situations, that becomes a difficult and often risky
undertaking. We are aware and we salute the fact that
many humanitarians do that job with extraordinary
dedication and courage.
In the continuum from conflict to post-conflict
situations, once a crisis is contained and peace
achieved, the next response called for is taking the
right measures to help consolidate the peace and, in so
doing, preventing a return to conflict. If the rule of law
is quickly re-established in a post-conflict society in
the reconstruction phase, the risk of a return to conflict
will be much reduced. Therefore, where United
Nations peace operations are deployed, it is important
to ensure that the rule of law and other security-related
perspectives be adequately incorporated into the
mission’s mandate.
In establishing the rule of law under United
Nations peace operations, security sector reform,
encompassing a wide range of State and local public
security institutions and organizations, becomes an

22

important task. Those agencies may include the
military, the police, the judiciary, the penal system and
other public administrative bodies in charge of
security. Often, such reform becomes a highly sensitive
undertaking in terms of traditions, values and
objectives. In such circumstances, the role which a
United Nations peace operation is capable of playing
and should play in security sector reform must be most
carefully considered in the formulation of its mandate.
We believe that the United Nations role in
security sector reform should be tailored to a given
specific situation and discussed on a case-by-case basis.
For example, the United Nations has been reluctant to get
involved in the area of military assistance, and in our
view rightly so, leaving that aspect to bilateral
arrangements. Some have argued, however, that the
United Nations should play a certain role in military
reform, in view of security sector reform’s relation to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the
important role played by national armies in the security
sector. That issue requires further discussion.
In considering security sector reform, it is also
important to recognize the fact that significant
contributions are often made through bilateral
assistance and by the United Nations and other
international organizations, such as the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank. In those
situations, the role of the Secretary-General’s special
representative should be enhanced to ensure the overall
effective coordination of efforts in a manner that
respects those contributions as well.
The rule of law and security sector reform are
closely related to DDR. One of the challenges for DDR
is to disarm illegal armed groups and to eliminate the
security threats posed by them. From our own
experience of playing a leading role in DDR in
Afghanistan, we believe that the critical part in the
process lies in convincing military commanders that
the peace process is irreversible and that there is no
other way than to participate in the political process
through elections. At the same time, combatants need
to be assured that they will be protected by law from
unlawful or unfair retribution. In their reintegration
into civilian life, former combatants should be legally
protected against unfair treatment.
It is clear that those three aspects — the rule of law,
security sector reform and DDR — are closely interlinked
and pose major challenges to United Nations peace

S/PV.5225

operations. In the planning of a United Nations peace
operation, therefore, adequate consideration must be
given to the United Nations role in providing
appropriate assistance in those three areas and their
relationship to other components, such as post-conflict
reconstruction and development. When the proposed
peacebuilding commission is established, it is expected
that those issues, among others, will be fully and
productively discussed.
The successful implementation of security
assistance for the rule of law, security sector reform
and DDR requires the deployment of a broad range of
civilian experts, including judges, prosecutors and
lawyers, as well as civilian police and military
advisers. For civilian police and military advisers, the
United Nations has been developing a system for quick
deployment, largely following recommendations in the
Brahimi report. That is to be commended.
On the other hand, the timely deployment of legal
and other civilian experts remains somewhat
problematic, due in part to difficulties in finding
qualified experts and in part to the time-consuming
recruitment process now in place. We understand that,
in order to improve the process, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has been promoting a roster
system, and we urge that it be fully developed. At the
same time, we wish to request the Secretariat to further
improve the recruitment process so as to facilitate the
timely appointment and deployment of qualified
individuals. We suggest that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations consider, among other
options, the possibility of recruiting and dispatching
civilian experts, who would work closely with civilian
police and the military, following the same formula as
applied to the latter.
Finally, we wish to highlight one important piece of
practical advice that you, Sir, have noted in the discussion
paper, and that is the need to establish best practices.
Security concerns people’s daily lives. In any
consideration of security sector assistance, one must
bear in mind the need to ensure that the local people do
not feel that alien laws and systems are being imposed
upon them. The United Nations should offer local
leaders and people several options and allow them to
select the most suitable. It is from that point of view
that the United Nations should develop best practices,
based on lessons learned through the various activities
it has conducted to date.

In concluding, let me assure the Council that
Japan will continue its active cooperation in the three
key pillar areas, including assistance in training and the
dispatching of qualified experts.
The President: I call on the representative of
Malaysia.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
you and your Government, Mr. Minister, on Greece’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to thank your
delegation for taking the initiative to consider the role
of the Security Council in humanitarian crises, which is
indeed an important issue of concern to all. We
appreciate the fact that that is being done in an open
debate of the Council and with the participation of the
larger membership of the United Nations. We also wish
to pay tribute to last month’s French presidency of the
Council.
My delegation is fully cognizant of the efforts
made by the United Nations to improve its system and
to respond effectively to the challenges posed by
violent humanitarian crises. While there have been
many successes, there have also been a number of
failures, when peace agreements collapsed before they
could be fully implemented and States relapsed into
conflict soon after. In many instances, conflict and
violence create humanitarian crises. How the United
Nations, including the Security Council, responds to
such crises remains a major concern. That merits
further discussion and investigation, to better
understand the issues before the Council today.
The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council, acting on behalf of Member
States, the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. That includes
actions by the Council with regard to issues relating to
humanitarian crises where clear violations of
international law, international humanitarian law or
human rights have occurred in conflict situations that
threaten regional or international peace and security.
My delegation views any action that is aimed at
humanitarian intervention per se as having no basis in
the Charter and international law. It should therefore be
clear that while the Security Council has a role to play,
its response should be based on a distinction between
crises arising out of conflict situations and those that
result from other causes, including natural disasters.
While action to deal with conflict is laudable, it also

23

S/PV.5225

remains the Council’s responsibility to ensure that
conflict is avoided. There is therefore definitely a need
to learn from past experience and to continue to find
ways and means to avert conflict. Today’s debate
points us in the right direction.
We recognize that the Council has the
responsibility to address humanitarian issues relating to
situations of conflict, and that it has taken appropriate
action to deal with such situations. The Council’s
consideration of those issues has laid the groundwork
for actions in the areas of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and in preventing a return to conflict.
We agree that a return to conflict often hinges upon the
extent to which three key issues in post-conflict
situations are, or are not, adequately addressed,
namely, the promotion of the rule of law, securitysector reform and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants. My delegation
supports the view that those pillars for post-conflict
security should be further strengthened in order to
achieve long-lasting peace.
In fact, during its Council presidency in July
1999, Malaysia initiated an open debate on the
question of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (see S/PV.4020). We continue to believe
that DDR remains an important aspect of peacebuilding
as well as of overall efforts to avoid relapsing into
conflict. It will be necessary to further develop that
aspect, together with the promotion of the rule of law
and security-sector reform, to ensure that some
common or unified standards are established and to
make certain that they are implementable. We welcome
the adoption of best practices arising from past
experiences in United Nations missions mandated by
the Security Council.
Malaysia has been supportive of actions taken by
the Security Council in averting humanitarian disasters
arising from conflict situations. We also support efforts
to deal with the culture of impunity so prevalent in
conflict situations. We recognize that it is important for
the Council to act in certain instances to ensure safe
and unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance, as
well as the safety, security and freedom of movement
of United Nations and other humanitarian workers.
Early action could be required in some cases. However,
the Council must act upon credible, reliable and
verifiable information to ensure that the right decisions
are made and that the right action is taken in
conformity with the Charter and international law and

24

are guided by the principle of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States.
It goes without saying that there is a need for the
Secretariat to enhance its early-warning capability. The
Secretariat should have adequate means to gather
credible, reliable and verifiable information and to
make appropriate assessments for the benefit of the
Security Council and all Member States. To a certain
extent, Member States with the capability to do so can
assist the Secretariat through the regular sharing of
vital information pertaining to threats to peace and
security. The Secretariat should also continue to
maintain and update a compendium of information on
all aspects related to this question for the use of
Council members and Member States at large.
The role played by the Security Council can
certainly be augmented by debate, dialogue and
discussion in the other principal organs of the United
Nations, namely, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. That is all the more
pertinent with the recognition of the interconnectedness
of threats and challenges faced by the international
community and the need to face them in an integrated
fashion, taking into account the linkages among
development, peace and security and human rights. We
look forward to further discussion on that and other
issues in all United Nations bodies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Toro Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela would like to invoke the
preamble of the Charter of the United Nations. Its
authors spoke not just of States and nations, but of “We
the peoples of the United Nations”. Let us therefore
heed the voice of the socio-political actor who, after
centuries of colonial oppression, is the main
protagonist of modern history, having founded the
United Nations. It should therefore be underscored that
the States of the United Nations are simply mandated
representatives vested with a renewable power granted
by their respective sovereign peoples. Our primary
duty is to respect that mandate and to exercise it
faithfully while also respecting its most basic aspect:
respect for self-determination, which is the foundation
of this intergovernmental Organization.
Let us consider the actions of the Security Council
in so-called humanitarian crises, dealt with initially

S/PV.5225

through peacekeeping operations which then — often
without any resolution of the issue of continuity — are
as if by magic transformed into peacebuilding
operations. Let us begin by making a conceptual
distinction between peacekeeping operations and the
most recent peacebuilding operations. The former have
the specific and limited objective of ending an internal
conflict in a given State. Based on the premise that a
civil war has ended, the latter have the objective of
rebuilding a country devastated by war once peace had
been re-established in order to prevent further conflict
and to lay the foundations for a country’s future
development. To allow or encourage any confusion
between those two types of operations produces
irreconcilable
contradictions
between
different
objectives that cannot be resolved through either a
single mandate or through successive or renewed
mandates entrusted to the same persons. That can also
have serious consequences for the affected States.
Peacekeeping operations imply the use of
repression by the United Nations once peaceful means
to end a conflict have been exhausted. That is the
responsibility of the Security Council and, on a
subsidiary basis, of the General Assembly.
Peacebuilding operations, however, are exclusively the
responsibility of the people of the country afflicted by
conflict. The United Nations is obliged to respect the
self-determination of peoples; its sole task is to support
the process through international cooperation and on
the basis of the parameters, norms and principles freely
established by the people concerned. Doing otherwise
would be to disregard the right of peoples to decide
upon their own destiny. In contrast, in its peacebuilding
operations, the Security Council has repeatedly
disregarded the principle of the self-determination of
peoples as well as the specific powers of the General
Assembly with regard to international cooperation in
this regard. Through that recurring practice, an attempt
is being made to twist the interpretation of the Charter
to legitimize the Council’s usurpation of powers, thus
securing its interference in the internal affairs of a
State for unspeakable ends, taking advantage of the
weakness and the helplessness of its people afflicted by
war. In addition, it is an attempt to have the General
Assembly’s recognition of that practice form a key part
of the proposed reform of the United Nations.
Attempts to justify that unjustifiable interference
by the Security Council employ two different
scenarios. The first is that of a State considered to have

collapsed or failed as a result of a destructive, violent
conflict, or a State that, although it has not suffered a
civil war, is considered to be an unfeasible model of
government for its people. The other scenario relates to
a State whose Government, in the exercise of its
legally established authority, is nevertheless judged to
have committed massive violations of human rights
against its population or significant sectors of that
population.
The two scenarios share an deliberate absence of
an historical perspective and implicitly condemn the
population as the cause of its own degradation,
conflict, poverty and neglect while discounting the
factors that led to the outbreak of the armed conflict. If
we examine the historical causes of the internal crises
of African countries, we shall see that the internal
conflicts that led to peacekeeping operations are
entirely due to the persistence of a regime of
oppression and plunder established by an imperialist
power omnipresent in the country.
With respect to Haiti, the people’s situation of
extreme poverty and distress does not reflect the most
incredible feat and revolutionary model of 1804, when
the country made a qualitative political leap as a
republic of slaves in a hegemonic world of monarchies
claiming divine right. After suffering the opprobrium
of colonial exploitation by France for centuries, Haiti
fell prey to the United States from 1916 to 1934,
masked as a protectorate. That was replaced by a
similar regime, which is still in place, masked by a
peacebuilding operation.
States that are free of all internal conflict can be
chosen as recipients of peacebuilding operations,
having been labelled as failed States. It should simply
be noted that a plan is being prepared to destabilize
selected Member States of the United Nations by
provoking an internal crisis so great that it requires the
multilateral cloak of a peacebuilding operation, a crisis
with
characteristics
resembling
the
recent
transformations in certain former Soviet Republics.
There is an imperialist project under way, which
intends to hijack sovereignty and self-determination. It
is supported by an office in the United States State
Department that possesses a list of 25 States not yet
destabilized that can be targeted for immediate or
future restructuring operations, with the agreement of
the patrons of messianic fundamentalism in the
Administration of President Bush.

25

S/PV.5225

The second scenario involves the predetermination
that a massive violation of human rights has taken place
in a country as a result of the Government’s alleged
systematic negligence or direct repression of the
population. In that case, the peacekeeping operation is
justified on the basis of the doctrine of the
responsibility to protect, which is rooted in the belief
that the international community — a euphemism by
which the great Powers define themselves — has the
fundamental right to intervene in any Member State of
the United Nations, by decision of the Security
Council, in a false rescue operation on behalf of the
people supposedly afflicted by State repression, and to
impose sanctions on the State and Government if they
fail to assume their obligation to do so themselves. In
the inventory of States threatened by this intervention
mechanism are all the States of the South, which are an
annoyance for the empire.
It is clear that no such fundamental right exists; it
has no basis in the Charter of the United Nations or
international law. Nor does the so-called implied
representation that the international community
attributes to the Security Council exist. That blatant
manipulation directly jeopardizes the very foundations
of international society and peoples’ right to freedom
and to take their leading role as the founders of the
United Nations.
Mr. Dumitru (Romania): Mr. Minister, my
delegation feels honoured by your presence at the helm
of the Security Council. I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on arranging a discussion on a theme that will
allow for the productive consideration of ways to
improve the role of the Security Council in
humanitarian crises. It is very timely.
Romania associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones Parry,
on behalf of the European Union. Consequently, I will
speak more briefly.
Over the past two years, the Security Council has
reflected on various dimensions of conflict
management and post-conflict peacebuilding; those
reflections have made an effective contribution to our
collective thinking on developing a coherent and
effective response to those challenges. Today’s
discussion complements that ongoing process, and the
non-paper recently circulated by Ambassador
Vassilakis (S/2005/434, annex) has greatly helped to

26

guide the Council in that direction. Romania fully
endorses the main thrust of the concept paper proposed
by the presidency, namely, the need for a holistic vision
and approach.
Indeed, in the discharge of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council is frequently
called upon to intervene in complex crisis situations.
Those situations are often characterized by interlinked
military and security dimensions, as well as by
political, economic, social and humanitarian aspects.
The wide range of issues involved requires a
comprehensive, multidimensional approach based on
increased system-wide coordination.
Against that backdrop, the time has come for the
Security Council to approach the host of tasks,
including the rule of law and security-sector reform,
that condition the success of peacebuilding, not as
separate dimensions with individual merits but as
congruent and closely integrated elements. In this
sphere, the synergetic approach is not an end in itself
but a way to make a practical impact on one of the
major components of the work of the United Nations:
the effort to protect human life.
In that context, we should acknowledge and give
due consideration to all ways in which the Security
Council can contribute to better, more effective action
by the international community in the face of
humanitarian crises provoked by conflicts. The
Council’s role is decisive and wide in scope.
In that context, I would like to share shed some
light on four aspects of this issue. First, Romania
considers that the logic of prevention should be given
the highest priority, particularly in situations where
there is a threat of a breakdown in peace and security,
which could have disastrous consequences for
civilians. In that regard, it is our view that all conflict
situations, irrespective of their type or stage, must be
closely monitored by various United Nations bodies, in
particular the Security Council, and that the system
should be maintained at an appropriate level of
readiness to act whenever a dispute appears to escalate,
threatening to cause a humanitarian disaster.
In that framework, Romania believes that due
attention should be also given to forgotten crises and
so-called frozen conflicts, which have the greatest
potential to evolve towards violent forms of
confrontation. Most frozen conflicts tend to generate

S/PV.5225

lawless zones characterized by massive and systematic
human rights abuses and therefore a breeding ground
for humanitarian crises.

capabilities, which, if taken in isolation, will always
seem scarce but, if considered jointly, may prove to be
more than adequate.

The United Nations should not refrain from
deploying the whole range of its tools to address that
type of situation as well, keeping in mind that, in the
event that a Government is unable to provide for the
security of its own people, the international community
has the legitimate right to intervene and protect the
victims.

Romania remains committed to transforming this
particular challenge into a solid lesson learned on the
way towards strengthening the role of the Security
Council in humanitarian crises.

Secondly, before taking action, there is a need to
collect, organize and analyse properly all the necessary
information about the potential sources of
humanitarian crises. United Nations agencies can and
must play a crucial role in this respect. We appreciate
very much the work done by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and we are
especially pleased that the Council has been able to
learn, on a regular basis from the Secretariat’s
briefings, about developments on the ground. However,
information provided by specific monitoring and
reporting mechanisms at the disposal of the Security
Council, such as that proposed for situations in which
children are affected by armed conflict, is, in our view,
indispensable when the time comes to decide on the
right course of action to prevent or stop a humanitarian
crisis.
Thirdly, the Security Council must bring to bear
its political weight to make sure that those responsible
for humanitarian crises are brought to justice. Support
for the International Criminal Court as an effective
instrument in the efforts of the international
community to put an end to impunity in cases of war
crimes or massive and systematic human rights abuse
is essential.
Finally, with regard to coherent thinking and
action, we should keep in mind the interlinkage
between the Security Council and other major actors.
In this regard, in the Council and elsewhere, Romania
has constantly promoted cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Enhanced
cooperation and, where appropriate, coordination and
consultation with
regional
organizations,
are
particularly important, including for an increased and
more effective role for the Security Council in
humanitarian crises. That should be accomplished on
the basis of a more integrated approach, with the aim
of maximizing the use of available resources and

Mr. Fendrick (United States of America): We
would like to thank you, Sir, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece, for having organized this important
debate. We would also like to congratulate Mr. JeanMarie
Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his contributions to this
discussion.
This is a timely discussion. It is especially
relevant to the wide-ranging discussions that are taking
place in these halls concerning United Nations reform.
Today’s subject really involves the United Nations
institutional gap identified by the Secretary-General’s
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change.
As the Panel noted in paragraph 261 of its report
(A/59/565),
“there is no place in the United Nations system
explicitly designed to avoid State collapse and the
slide to war or to assist countries in their
transition from war to peace.”
The High-level Panel wanted to help the international
community to address the spectrum of problems that
many States confront today, from pre-conflict, through
conflict itself to post-conflict or recovery.
The international community has often had to
play a role across that continuum, and properly so. For
most of the history of the United Nations, conflicts
have almost invariably wound up threatening regional,
if not global, peace and security, whatever their causes.
Whether conflict begins as internal strife or as a
localized cross-border affair, the wider international
community frequently becomes engaged. It is therefore
entirely appropriate for the Security Council to
consider lessons learned from helping societies emerge
from conflict.
In the light of that history, the High-level Panel’s
recommendation that the Security Council establish a
Peacebuilding Commission makes eminent sense. The
Council should act on that recommendation promptly.
No one foresees the day when the international
community will be out of the business of helping post-

27

S/PV.5225

conflict societies. Therefore, we owe it to ourselves to
try to learn from experience and apply the lessons to
conflict prevention.
In our view, a stable society with a successful
economy is necessarily rooted in the rule of law and
has representative institutions that operate predictably,
according to law. The economy is also framed and
governed by law. As a society heads over the cliff into
conflict, the rule of law breaks or is weakened. In
recent cases, hostilities often have eroded respect for
the most basic norms, including those set forth in
international humanitarian law. Afterwards, confidence
in the rule of law must be rebuilt if a society is to avoid
slipping backwards.
Almost all of us have experience with these
issues. As a community, we have struggled with the
full array of problems in trying to help societies
emerge from armed conflict and stay away from it in
the future. We know that security is a sine qua non for
peace, justice and prosperity. To build or rebuild
security takes great effort, and security institutions
must be tied into the overall programme of social
reconstruction. Thus, training is indispensable — but
training not only in conflict management or control,
but also in support of the rule of law. No one wants the
effort to result in the formation of a praetorian guard.
Therefore, creating appropriate security structures must
be part of a larger whole: it involves training police
and reforming criminal justice institutions — courts,
prosecutorial offices and prisons.
Where the United Nations as an institution is
concerned, the work on security must be coordinated
with all the other efforts being undertaken in
connection with a particular society; and all the other
efforts must be coordinated with each other. That is a
great lesson that the United Nations as an institution
should take from its recent experience with complex
peacekeeping operations in Europe, Asia, Africa and
Latin America. The United States believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission under discussion can and
should make a significant contribution in that area.
Better coordination among United Nations family
entities and with donors, international financial
institutions and regional partners, as well as taking on
board the lessons from the complex United Nations
peacekeeping and peace support missions of the last 15
years, can help us all do a better job of conflict
prevention. In the event that conflict cannot be avoided,

28

such coordination and application of lessons learned
can improve our collective efforts to assist States to
recover from conflict. These activities are central to the
successful discharge of the Security Council’s primary
responsibility for peace and security.
Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): I
would like join with all those speakers who have
thanked you personally, Mr. Minister, and your
delegation, for having taken the initiative to hold this
debate.
There has been encouraging progress in the
search for solutions to humanitarian problems, with
renewed interest in such matters in recent years in the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council. We
welcome the innovations introduced into the mandates
of peacekeeping operations following the publication
of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809).
While welcoming such progress, we are all aware
of the challenges that remain. In this regard, I would
like to elaborate on four basic points. The first relates
to strengthening the authority of international
humanitarian law. The second relates to ensuring safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance for
victims and affected populations. The third relates to
the need to deal with humanitarian crises in a timely
manner. The fourth relates to the need to promote
political solutions to the conflicts that lead to
humanitarian crises.
On the first point, Benin would like to point out
that respect in all circumstances for international
humanitarian law is indispensable for the prevention of
humanitarian crises. The Security Council should at all
times reaffirm that key principle and use all its
authority and the instruments available to it to prevent
the massive violations of humanitarian law that affect
civilian populations, in particular, children, women and
the elderly, and to put an immediate stop to them
whenever they occur.
It goes without saying that children in armed
conflict are also affected by the consequences of
humanitarian crises. Benin hopes that the Council will
very soon be able to take a decision regarding a draft
resolution on this issue. Its adoption would
undoubtedly help to promote respect for existing
international norms in this area, to put an end to the
inhumane treatment inflicted on children in armed
conflict.

S/PV.5225

It is particularly important that violations of
humanitarian law not go unpunished. The principle of
rejecting amnesty for grave crimes should become an
essential standard for Council action. The SecretaryGeneral’s proposal concerning the sending of factfinding missions to countries where such violations
occur remains important here. The issue of
strengthening national judicial systems is also of
primary importance in that regard. In fact, the adoption
of a preventive approach to humanitarian crises
requires that high priority be given to re-establishing
the rule of law and to national reconciliation in
countries at risk or emerging from armed conflict,
because the rule of law offers a favourable context for
the effective protection of civilian populations.
It is the duty of the Security Council to do
everything in its power to guarantee respect for the
principle of ensuring that victims and all affected
populations have safe and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance. Administrative impediments
and the harassment of humanitarian personnel must be
prohibited, because they are entirely unjustifiable. The
parties involved must cooperate constructively in
humanitarian action and must shoulder their
responsibility to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of humanitarian personnel. Humanitarian
action must be conducted with strict respect for the
principles of neutrality and impartiality.
Problems of access due to difficult terrain are a
real challenge for the international community. It must
mobilize all the appropriate logistical means it requires
to reach populations in distress, wherever they are.
With regard to my third point — the need to
address humanitarian crises in a timely manner — we
must emphasize that the differences of views within the
Security Council on assessing situations and on
choosing means of action undermine the Council’s
credibility, because they promote the worsening of
critical humanitarian situations and are often exploited
by the parties to continue and even increase the
suffering they inflict on populations.
That said, there are some examples in which the
Council has shown remarkable effectiveness. Among
those successes, I would mention the dispatch of
Operation Artemis to Ituri, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the deployment of a multinational
force to Haiti in February 2004. The most important
lesson to be drawn from those two cases is that

effective Security Council action was possible because
of the Council’s ability to promptly take a unanimous
decision, guided by its concern to fully shoulder its
responsibility towards the threatened populations.
Finally, the fourth point — very important in the
view of my delegation — relates to the need to
promote the political settlement of the conflicts from
which humanitarian crises result. Benin wishes to point
out that the Council has a major responsibility in that
area. It must equip itself with the means to closely
follow and promote negotiations among the parties.
Furthermore, it is important to continue and
conclude, as soon as possible, the discussions now
under way on providing the Security Council with an
early-warning mechanism that would operate in close
cooperation with regional organizations. The Council
would thus have information and proposals for
concrete action enabling it to take swift, timely and
useful decisions on situations that could compromise
international peace and security and gravely affect the
situation of civilian populations.
Cooperation with regional organizations is a tool
that the Council should use to the utmost to increase its
capacity to act preventively or to react promptly in the
face of humanitarian crises. Providing sufficient
support to regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen their capacities for rapid intervention is of
paramount importance for such cooperation, without
prejudice to the Council’s prerogatives and primary
responsibility in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mobilizing adequate financing and taking into
account the regional dimension related to the crossborder mobility of ex-combatants will greatly help to
stem the resurgence of armed conflicts and the
disastrous humanitarian situations resulting from them.
That is the prerequisite for ensuring the success of
recovery plans in countries emerging from conflict.
Here, the inherent link between security and
development is clear. Strengthening local capacities to
maintain public order and safety — not only with
resources, but also with properly trained personnel —
must be an essential aspect of strategies for the
withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping operations
from the countries where they are deployed.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Indonesia.

29

S/PV.5225

Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your country’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and by
thanking you for convening this special debate on the
role of the Security Council in humanitarian crises. In
that respect, my delegation would also like to
acknowledge the concept paper prepared for this
discussion by the Permanent Mission of Greece
(S/2005/434, annex).
My delegation would like to state that beyond the
Security Council and its immediate purview of the
maintenance of peace and security is the wider
challenge of confronting the roots of conflict, which
often lie in the area of development, or the lack of it. It
is now common knowledge that development and
security must be pursued together if any progress is to
be made in the multilateral context of the United
Nations. Therefore, the lessons that the Security
Council has learned in managing the post-conflict
environment ought to include the need for the Council
to work coherently with other United Nations organs
and to utilize channels of development to discourage
conflicts.
Having said that, let me also state that issues
related to conflicts, humanitarian crises and postconflict situations have been a focus of the Security
Council’s attention for many years. The Council has
sometimes responded to such situations by establishing
peacekeeping missions. The variety and complexity of
United Nations peacekeeping responsibilities in the
1990s provided ample opportunities for reflection and
reassessment with regard to various aspects of the
Organization’s humanitarian work.
Therefore, it is proper that the Council has
decided at this time to undertake a review of its role
concerning this important issue. My delegation shares
the view that, in addition to development, conflict
prevention depends on the extent to which the issues of
the rule of law, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
are adequately and properly addressed.
Democracy means nothing if it is not well
grounded on the rule of law. In the post-conflict phase,
it is thus of the utmost importance that promoting the
rule of law be made a matter of priority. That principle
should apply to promoting respect for and establishing
law and order in all its aspects. The lessons learned in

30

many post-conflict situations in recent times may be
put to good use here.
It is also important, in the rebuilding of justice
and the rule of law in a society in transition, that
adequate recognition be given to differences in national
contexts. In this case, strategic planning should be
based on national or local realities and not impose
foreign models, as was clearly pointed out today by the
Secretary-General in his opening statement.
In security sector reform, particularly in
developing the capability of a national police force,
international efforts must follow the important
underlying fact that a police service supported by the
national or local community is more capable of
upholding law and order, as well as addressing
insecurity that can have a far-reaching impact on
economic, social and political developments. It is in
that context that efforts to sustain peace in postconflict situations should be based on a deep sense of
ownership and focus on building the capacity of local
actors. Indeed, it is only investment in local
participation, ideas and energy that can imbue postconflict efforts with the capacity to sustain peace not
only through legitimacy, but through the deployment of
“building tools” as well.
With reference to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes, my delegation is
of the view that such programmes may well be placed
in the broader context of the development agenda.
Failure to curb the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons will contribute to sustaining criminal
economic networks in post-conflict environments,
thereby significantly minimizing and undermining the
strategies and efforts to sustain peace.
DDR programmes, therefore, should always be a
key component of peace processes. In view of the fact
that former combatants cannot simply be dismissed and
asked to return to normal life, since there is no normal
life for them to return to, a well-structured programme
based on lessons learned should be put into play, with
adjustments for particular situations. In that regard, we
must stress the need for timely, sustained and welltargeted resources at each stage of the peace process,
including DDR programmes, the rule of law, and
security sector reform. Although high levels of aid do
not guarantee success, if they are inadequate, the effort
might not be worthwhile in the first place.

S/PV.5225

Let me conclude by saying that Indonesia
believes that, in providing support for the rebuilding of
justice and the rule of law in a transitional society, the
international community has a critical role to play in
supporting conflict prevention as well as in postconflict peacebuilding processes. However, such a role
must be pursued in a supportive and facilitating
manner, and not as a substitute for local efforts. Hence,
we must be careful to avoid importing foreign models
that may not be of any help to local situations.
The President: I
representative of Canada.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Rock (Canada): Canada wishes to
congratulate Greece on assuming the presidency and to
express our thanks for this opportunity to take part in
an open discussion on this important issue.
Canada firmly believes that the Security Council
has a dual role in regard to humanitarian crises. It must
not only respond quickly to such crises, but also, in the
first instance, seek actively to prevent them.
Five years ago, the Secretary-General called for
an urgent discussion of how we might reconcile the
humanitarian imperatives of situations such as that in
Rwanda with traditional definitions of sovereignty — a
dilemma that continues to impede robust Security
Council reactions in man-made humanitarian crises.
Today, as we mark the tenth anniversary of the
massacres at Srebrenica, we should reaffirm our
collective will to move forward in improving the
Council’s ability to identify and to respond quickly to
humanitarian crises.
In northern Uganda, civilians continue to bear the
brunt of a brutal armed conflict — a conflict which the
Council has yet to address. We believe that situations
such as that cannot but benefit from the Council’s
sustained attention, and we again urge the Security
Council to put the situation in northern Uganda on its
agenda.
In our consideration of the Council’s response to
crises, it is also important to acknowledge that
humanitarian crises are not solely the result of armed
conflict. There are also those prompted by the
misguided and malevolent policies of Governments
towards their own populations. We call on the Council
to take note of the latest humanitarian crisis being
generated now in Zimbabwe. After inflicting hunger
and economic ruin on its population, the policies of the

Government of Zimbabwe are now creating a
significant number of homeless. Canada believes that
this situation deserves the full attention of the Council.
(spoke in French)
The necessary tools and powers for the
international community to exercise its responsibility
to protect civilian populations do not need to be
reinvented — they are in the United Nations Charter.
What is needed, however, is a framework to guide that
immense responsibility.
The responsibility to protect provides such a
framework. The Secretary-General endorsed that
approach in his March report, calling on leaders to
embrace the responsibility of States to protect their
people and the subsidiary responsibility of the
international community to act in extreme cases when a
State is unable or unwilling to provide that protection.
(spoke in English)
A firm declaration of support for that emerging
norm, made by leaders in September, will lay the
normative groundwork for more effective responses by
the Security Council. To ensure its effective
implementation of that norm, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Council adopt a
resolution that includes guidelines for the use of force.
Hand in hand with the need to respond to conflict
comes the obligation to bring an end to the culture of
impunity that continues to dominate the majority of
such situations. We cannot speak of human security or
of protecting women and children when their abusers
are allowed to go free.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) offers us
the best hope for ending impunity, and we call on this
Council to continue to exercise its authority under the
Rome Statute to refer appropriate situations to the
International Criminal Court as they arise. The
Council’s referral of the Darfur crisis to the ICC was
an important and welcome step, but it must not remain
the exception. Through cooperation between the
Security Council and the parties to the Rome Statute,
we can build a reliable and responsible system to bring
the world’s worst criminals to justice and to protect
their victims.
The needs and challenges in rebuilding shattered
societies in transition from war to peace are numerous
and daunting. They include disarming, demobilizing

31

S/PV.5225

and reintegrating former combatants; ensuring a
framework for transitional justice; providing security,
including rebuilding the rule of law in all its aspects;
re-constituting democratic governing structures and
their legal foundations; rejuvenating a functioning
economy; and guaranteeing the right of refugees and
internally displaced persons to safely return to their
homes. A coordinated response is essential.

the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro, the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Liechtenstein, members of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
have all aligned themselves with this statement.

In most cases, it is the United Nations that is
called on to oversee that reconstruction process. The
proposed peacebuilding commission will be critically
important to enhance the capabilities of the United
Nations, donor countries and regional organizations to
meet the challenges posed by failed and fragile States.
The situation in Haiti would be an excellent first case
for such a commission to examine. The work of the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council and the recent joint mission of the
Group and the Security Council to Haiti effectively
illustrated the need to integrate development, security
and institution-building in a mutually reinforcing way.
The peacebuilding commission could carry that work
further and we therefore fully support its establishment
and implementation.

The good news for my colleagues is that I shall
now summarize my prepared text, which will be
circulated separately.

Canada’s own approach to dealing with the
conflict cycle is likewise evolving. We are working to
establish a more coherent, whole-of-Government
approach
through
a
new
Stabilization
and
Reconstruction Task Force. It will address challenges
across the conflict spectrum, from conflict prevention
through to peace support and post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding.
I conclude by expressing the belief that much
progress is being made in improving our ability to react
to crises. The real challenge that remains today is not
how we, the international community, can best deal
with humanitarian crises once they have occurred, but
how we can move more quickly and effectively to
prevent them in the first place. We urge the Council to
consider how best to enshrine that as a guiding
principle in its actions.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Your
presence with us today, Mr. President, is very welcome,
and it reflects the importance of the subject that we are
debating.
I have the honour to speak in this debate on
behalf of the European Union. The acceding countries
Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate country Croatia,

32

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to discuss this important subject, and the
Secretary-General
and
Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for their very pertinent remarks.
The Security Council is of course only one actor
in the international response to humanitarian crises, so
I would like to begin with some reflections on what
contribution it can make.
First, the Council should have an important
political role in conflict prevention and in dealing with
the early stages of an emerging humanitarian crisis.
The United Nations as a whole, and the Security
Council in particular, should therefore be alert to signs
of an imminent breakdown in international peace and
security, in particular those situations that threaten
widespread humanitarian consequences. The Council
should be prepared from the earliest stage to make a
leading contribution to international efforts to avert a
descent into conflict and humanitarian suffering.
That means being prepared to give attention to
new and neglected crises without waiting for the level
of humanitarian suffering to rise to unacceptable
levels. It means reminding Governments of their
primary responsibility to assure the security, safety and
humanitarian needs of their own people, and reminding
them too that the international community has a
legitimate interest if they are unable or unwilling to do
that. In that regard, the European Union welcomes the
debate on the important concept of the responsibility to
protect.
Prevention is obviously better than having to pick
up the pieces of broken lives and humanitarian
suffering after conflict has broken out. We need to
ensure that the Security Council is properly informed
of possible threats, including through early warnings
by the Secretary-General. One positive development in

S/PV.5225

that regard has been the introduction of regular
briefings of the Council by Jan Egeland, the
Humanitarian Coordinator. We should continue and
extend that practice, including with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The second key role for the Council is its primary
responsibility to take action where international peace
and security have broken down, where we must take
full account of the humanitarian requirements of a
crisis. It is not, of course, the Council’s role to
coordinate or direct humanitarian action, but it can do
more to galvanize international humanitarian efforts
and to lend political weight to them.
In considering our political response to a crisis,
we should always give due priority to humanitarian
considerations. The Council and its individual
members should lend weight to efforts to ensure that
political leaders on both sides of a conflict ensure
access by humanitarian agencies to affected
populations.
A major Security Council responsibility will be to
establish multidimensional United Nations peace
support operations that ensure that humanitarian
considerations and activities are fully taken into
account. In accordance with relevant Council
resolutions, we also need to promote the role that
peacekeepers play in protecting civilians, particularly
with regard to vulnerable groups such as internally
displaced persons, women and children.
The Council also has a role in ensuring that
where humanitarian suffering is a result of deliberate
human rights abuses or war crimes, those responsible
are brought to justice. The European Union therefore
strongly supports efforts to end impunity for such
crimes, in particular through the effective functioning
of the International Criminal Court.

Secretary-General’s excellent report on the subject last
August (S/2004/616) and the subsequent Security
Council discussion in October showed consensus on
the need to treat the justice sector as a key element in
building sustainable peace. An independent judiciary,
humane and secure prisons and an effective and
accountable police force are necessities. Without them,
we risk anarchy and impunity; we undermine not only
stability and security, but also democracy, the return of
refugees and economic recovery.
But we have not yet done enough. The United
Nations is still a long way from being able to
effectively promote the rule of law and an end to
impunity in the post-conflict situations in which it is
engaged. For that reason, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision contained in his report entitled “In
larger freedom” (A/59/2005) to create a Rule of Law
Assistance Unit to deal specifically with post-conflict
situations.
The second important area of peacebuilding that
we need to improve is our approach to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration — DDR. We need to
draw together past experience, both good and bad, and
ensure that we understand what works and why it
works. We therefore welcome the United Nations interagency process to develop guidelines on DDR. The
challenge will be to implement those guidelines in a
practical way that lifts our collective performance.
The third priority area, which is closely linked to
the other two, is security-sector reform. Democratically
controlled security services can be developed only in
the context of establishing effective governance
structures and the rule of law. DDR programmes can
succeed only as part of a broader reform effort to
deliver security services that guarantee, rather than
threaten, the people they are meant to serve.

I would like to summarize three key areas of
peacebuilding, namely, the rule of law, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and securitysector reform.

In all the three areas that I have described, the
Security Council and the missions that it mandates are
usually only one of a number of international players.
Within the United Nations system, we must make sure
that even as we create new capacities, we do not create
new divisions. We must therefore ensure that we
develop a coherent, overarching vision in the wider
justice and security field, and that that is matched
organizationally both at Headquarters and in the field.

First, strengthening the rule of law and good
governance is essential to building societies that
protect and improve the lives of all their citizens. The

That is why the European Union strongly
supports the proposed establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission that would oversee the provisions of

But equally important is a third area of the
Council’s activity, namely, building the conditions for
lasting peace and stability in order to prevent the
recurrence of conflict and humanitarian suffering.

33

S/PV.5225

coherent security, political, economic and other assistance
to countries emerging from conflict, and advise on and
promote comprehensive strategies for peacebuilding.
In closing, Mr. President, I would like to thank
you once again for organizing a debate on this
important topic. We very much look forward to a future
productive discussion in the Council on these issues,
including as they pertain to specific country
circumstances. And we warmly welcome the proposed
presidential statement.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
Today’s debate — which we are pleased to be holding
under your presidency, Mr. Minister — provides us
with an opportunity to take a useful snapshot of the
situation and to consider the Security Council’s actions
in humanitarian crises. I would like to thank JeanMarie Guéhenno for the insight he provided us at the
beginning of the meeting.
First, I would like to provide some historical
background. What seems legitimate today has not
always seemed so. The principle of Security Council
intervention in humanitarian crises is a recent one,
taking us back to the implementation of resolution 688
(1991) of 5 April 1991, by which the Council
addressed the tragedy then under way in Iraqi
Kurdistan. But we have come a long way since then.
Today, the Council can no longer stand aside
from
humanitarian
tragedies
affecting
entire
populations, who are direct or indirect victims of
deadly conflicts. I shall not list the many such Security
Council interventions in recent years. In our view, this
development represents progress not only for the
Council but for the entire Organization.
The means for intervention too have become
more diverse. To be sure, much remains to be done to
further enhance international community action. The
avenues identified by the Greek presidency for
preventing humanitarian tragedy and the recurrence of
conflict, as set out in the draft presidential statement
that we shall adopt at the end of today’s meeting,
appear to us to be the right ones.
Let me touch briefly on the question of Security
Council action at the very time that a crisis erupts.
Further debate has been sparked on the political need
to intervene in humanitarian crises and in the conflicts
to which they give rise, and a consensus is now
emerging on the concept of a “responsibility to

34

protect”. That principle, which has arisen in the context
of the General Assembly’s preparations for the
September summit, is in no way synonymous with
interference. It reaffirms the primary responsibility of
States and Governments to protect civilian populations
in their territories. But when the State in question fails
to meet its responsibility in the face of a very serious
situation resulting from crimes against humanity,
serious human rights violations or ethnic cleansing, the
international community is duty-bound to act. That is
not so different from the current practice of the
Security Council. France earnestly hopes that will be
possible to reach agreement on this principle at
September’s summit of heads of State or Government.
That said, we should bear in mind that each crisis
situation is, by definition, unique: different from the
others. The correct response to the Darfur tragedy is
not the same as the one needed in any other grave
humanitarian crisis situation.
The range of action available to the international
community in humanitarian tragedies is broad. The
choice depends on the circumstances: as I noted,
humanitarian crises are dissimilar. Very specific
problems arise. I am thinking in particular about
ensuring that peacekeeping operations have secure
access to vulnerable populations. The Council should
constantly adapt its response to the problem before it.
To do this, the Security Council’s practice is to
diversify its sources of information; we see that as a
good thing. To mention only a few very recent
examples, last month the Council welcomed to the
Chamber Mr. Jan Egeland, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his six-monthly briefing on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (see
S/PV.5209) and Mr. James Morris, Executive Director
of the World Food Programme (see S/PV.5220). Their
briefings provided valuable insights that supplemented
those provided through statements by Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is
another valuable source of information for the Council.
I will conclude with a general comment on the
responsibility borne by the entire international
community. The Security Council is indeed at the centre
of the action in crisis situations. Yet the Council is far
from the only United Nations actor that must respond to
humanitarian crises. The agencies of the United Nations
system, States, non-governmental organizations and
society civil all have a central role to play.

S/PV.5225

Mr. Fendrick (United States of America): Given
the lateness of the hour, I apologize to colleagues for
imposing upon them, and I will be very brief.
The United States regrets the unfortunate and
inaccurate comments of the representative of
Venezuela that mischaracterized the role of the United
States Government and its efforts to support global
peace and security. We believe they have only
detracted from this important debate.
The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.
“The Security Council reaffirms the
purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter and bears in mind its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
“The Security Council remains deeply
concerned by the devastating humanitarian,
political and economic consequences of armed
conflicts, and stresses the overriding political and
moral imperatives to prevent the outbreak and
escalation of armed conflicts and humanitarian
crises, and the benefits therein for peace and
development and friendly relations among all
States.
“The Security Council acknowledges the
importance of helping to prevent future conflicts
through addressing their root causes in a
legitimate and fair manner.
“The Security Council reiterates the
importance it attaches to the promotion and
urgent restoration of justice and the rule of law in
post-conflict societies and in promoting national
reconciliation, democratic development and
human rights. The Council recognizes that ending
impunity is important in peace agreements and
can contribute to efforts to come to terms with
past abuses and to achieve national reconciliation
to prevent future conflict. The Security Council
recalls that it has repeatedly emphasized the
responsibility of States to end impunity and bring
to justice those responsible for genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

“The Security Council further recognizes
the increasing importance of civilian aspects of
conflict management in addressing complex crisis
situations and in preventing the recurrence of
conflict and acknowledges the importance of
civilian-military
cooperation
in
crisis
management. When approving a United Nations
operation, the Council should take into account
the essential role of military and civilian police in
assisting the stabilization of crisis situations and
the maintenance of security. At the same time, the
Council
acknowledges
that
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, assisted
by civilian advisers, could play a key
coordination role in the provision of humanitarian
assistance, the re-establishment of public order,
the functioning of public institutions, as well as
rehabilitation, reconstruction and peacebuilding,
which lead to long-term sustainable development.
“The Security Council stresses the need to
ensure adequate and timely financing for
peacebuilding priorities at all stages of the peace
process, and stresses the need for sustained
financial investment in peacebuilding over the
medium to longer-term period of recovery. It
recognizes the importance of rapid initiation of
peacebuilding activities to meet immediate needs
and encourages the building of capabilities that
can be incorporated rapidly.
“The Security Council takes note with
interest of the important proposal by the
Secretary-General to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission and shares the objective of
improving United Nations capacity to coordinate
with donors and troop contributors and to
perform peacebuilding activities, in particular
from the start of peacekeeping operations through
stabilization, reconstruction and development.
The Security Council recognizes the important
role that this body could play to bridge the gap
between maintenance of international peace and
security and the work of humanitarian and
economic development assistance.
“The Security Council acknowledges that in
post-conflict societies successful peacebuilding
rests on the premise that protection of civilians,
the promotion of the rule of law and transitional
justice,
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and rehabilitation of

35

S/PV.5225

former
combatants,
security
sector
and
democratic, economic and social reform are
integrated elements and that national ownership
plays an important role which should be
supported by the international community,
including the regional organizations.
“The Security Council emphasizes that
security sector reform is an essential element of
any stabilization process in post-conflict
environments, underlines that it is inextricably
linked with promotion of the rule of law,
transitional justice, DDR and the protection of
civilians, among others, and acknowledges the
need for more adequate preparation, including
mobilization of necessary planning resources, and
more coherent approaches by the United Nations
and the international community in addressing
these issues.

“The Security Council acknowledges the
need to give adequate attention to security sector
reform in the future, drawing on best practices
that have been developed in this area. The
Security Council stresses also the need seriously
to consider the promotion of the rule of law and
transitional justice, the DDR process and security
sector reform, their interlinkage and the
availability of adequate resources, when
approving the necessary mandates for United
Nations operations.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2005/30.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

36
