UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1248
14 December 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 DECEMBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
10 December 1999 (see annex), which I have received from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

00-20237
99-39038 (E)

151299

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1248
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 10 December 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1264 (1999) of
15 September 1999, I attach the fifth periodic report on the operations of the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) (see appendix). I would appreciate
your making the report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Penny WENSLEY
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

/...

S/1999/1248
English
Page 3

Appendix
Fifth periodic report to the United Nations on the
operations of the International Force, East Timor
11 November to 9 December 1999

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The operations of the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) in East
Timor have continued to be highly successful. The INTERFET Commander is very
confident that in the near future he will be able to announce the complete
fulfilment of his mandate under Security Council resolution 1264 (1999) of
15 September 1999.
2.
In the 12 weeks since 20 September 1999, when the first INTERFET forces
were deployed to East Timor, INTERFET has played a significant role in helping:
(a) To establish peace and security through the provision of a credible
and deterrent security presence in all parts of the territory, including the
Ambeno enclave and Atauro Island;
(b) To prevent armed violence by any group in East Timor, including
militia groups;
(c) To develop, in cooperation with Indonesia, agreed procedures for
border management along the East Timor-West Timor border;
(d) To create conditions and provide escort support for large numbers of
displaced persons to return to their homes in East Timor;
(e) To facilitate the transition from the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) to the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET);
(f) To facilitate the conduct of humanitarian operations of increasing
size and effectiveness across East Timor.
3.
The success of INTERFET can be attributed to the performance by INTERFET
commanders and national contingents, the continuing resolve and commitment shown
by the United Nations and the international community, the cooperation of the
Government of Indonesia and the courage and resilience of the East Timorese
people.
4.
INTERFET has therefore created a solid foundation that has prepared the
territory for UNTAET and its military component – a United Nations peacekeeping
operation – to operate in pursuit of the mandate of resolution 1272 (1999) of
25 October 1999. With good progress now being made in planning for the
transition to a peacekeeping operation, the preconditions are now in place that
will allow the transition from INTERFET to the peacekeeping operation to take

/...

S/1999/1248
English
Page 4

place. Australia will submit a comprehensive transition plan in the near future
to the Secretary-General.

II.

SECURITY SITUATION

5.
With the reduction of the offensive activities of the militia, there are no
significant threats to peace and security in East Timor. Discussions on
pursuing objectives through political avenues and clear signals with respect to
reconciliation from the National Council for East Timorese Resistance (CNRT)
have increased the feeling of a reduced significant militia threat in the
future. As noted in the previous report (S/1999/1169), outside the border
regions the bulk of INTERFET forces are undertaking policing functions.
6.
Some militia groups may continue to be a potential irritant, but mainly at
a low level. Their greatest presence remains close to the West Timorese border
with East Timor and near the Oecusse enclave. They have continued to harass and
intimidate displaced persons in those areas. Estimates of the number of militia
fluctuate for a variety of reasons: some minor leaders and some of the rank and
file are returning to East Timor; militia are often collocated with local West
Timorese and displaced persons, making it difficult to distinguish between the
two; with some militia involved in criminal activity, their identity as a
pro-integration group is becoming blurred; and significant elements of the
militia leadership appear to be reviewing their plans for the future.
7.
These factors make it harder to provide a reliable estimate of the number
of militia. The Commander of INTERFET estimates that there could be as few as
1,000 to 2,000 militia of any military viability; indeed, any militia remaining
in West Timor would likely be focusing on surviving and avoiding capture.
Militia in East Timor probably number less than 100. It is extremely difficult
for militia to operate in East Timor, beyond criminal activity.

III.

BORDER ARRANGEMENTS

8.
Throughout the reporting period, the dealings of INTERFET with Indonesian
authorities, including the Indonesian armed forces (TNI), have continued to be
cordial and cooperative. On 22 November the Commander of INTERFET, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello, and the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations, Richard Holbrooke, met with Major General Damiri, the TNI
regional commander.
9.
The outcome of this meeting was the signing of a memorandum of technical
understanding on border management. The agreement represents a major step
forward in managing the border regions: it satisfies a recommendation arising
from the report of the joint INTERFET/TNI investigation into the incident that
took place at Motaain (Mato Ain) near the border of West and East Timor on
10 October 1999 (S/1999/1146, annex) and signals a new level of cooperation
between INTERFET, UNTAET and TNI. The memorandum calls for regular coordination
between parties to the agreement and the establishment of secure checkpoints for
border crossings. The Commander of INTERFET will meet with the responsible TNI
/...

S/1999/1248
English
Page 5

officer, Major General Syahnakri (Major General Damiri’s replacement), on a
weekly basis to discuss border management issues.
10. The memorandum also reaffirms commitments given by TNI and the Government
of Indonesia to ensure the safe and secure return of displaced persons to East
Timor. It establishes a joint border commission, which should accelerate the
pace of repatriation of displaced persons and ensure that pro-integration
militia members do not harass or intimidate returning refugees. These
initiatives are welcomed.

IV.

HUMANITARIAN ISSUES AND REPATRIATION OF DISPLACED PERSONS

11. INTERFET troops have continued to conduct patrols, staff checkpoints,
escort convoys and facilitate humanitarian operations. INTERFET is involved in
the repatriation of displaced persons, especially secondary transportation of
refugees to their home towns. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees estimates that the total number of returnees is now in
excess of 110,000. Significant progress is now being made in the repatriation
effort, and INTERFET looks forward to further results stemming from the recently
signed border agreement.
12. INTERFET has also established a secure environment in the Oecusse enclave
for the repatriation of refugees.

V.

DRAWDOWN OF FORCES

13. Several contingents of the multinational force, including contingents from
the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada, will begin to withdraw some of
their troops or assets from East Timor in the next few weeks. Other countries
are currently considering their drawdown arrangements. A drawdown is possible
because INTERFET has created a security environment that is more benign than
when the initial deployment took place. From an operational perspective,
INTERFET is confident that its mission will be unaffected by the planned
withdrawal of certain military elements. Where necessary, commercial
arrangements have been put in place to provide ongoing capability, notably in
the areas of communications and transport. The commencement of a withdrawal of
assets from INTERFET highlights the continued need to expedite planning for the
transition to the United Nations peacekeeping operation.

VI.

TRANSITION TO THE UNITED NATIONS TRANSITIONAL ADMINISTRATION
IN EAST TIMOR

14. The arrival of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in East
Timor has accelerated progress in the expansion of UNTAET and in planning for
the transition to a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
15. From a security perspective, the key issue in the transition to UNTAET is
planning for the introduction of a peacekeeping force. The Government of
Australia will shortly submit to the United Nations a comprehensive plan for the
/...

S/1999/1248
English
Page 6

transition from INTERFET to a peacekeeping operation. To facilitate and
expedite planning for the transition, it would be important to have the
peacekeeping operation Commander and his core staff in-country as soon as
possible. The early announcement of the Commander would be welcomed.
16. The Commander of INTERFET has also undertaken discussions in Dili with the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hedi Annabi, to discuss
the proposed drawdown of forces from INTERFET and preliminary arrangements for
the transition to a peacekeeping operation. This information has been conveyed
to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations at United Nations Headquarters,
which is closely involved in this process.
17. In a joint initiative between UNTAET and INTERFET, local Timorese have been
selected to become unarmed security officers guarding public utilities such as
the power station and the telecommunications facility. Of the 250 or so
security guards, about 55 are former members of the Armed Forces for the
Liberation of East Timor who have made a decision to reintegrate into civil life
and who will undergo training in security procedures. UNTAET will pay for the
employees’ salaries. The first group of graduates, which should be ready by
early December, will allow INTERFET troops – and subsequently the United Nations
peacekeeping troops – to focus their attention on core military tasks.

VII.

RELATIONS AMONG THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR EAST TIMORESE
RESISTANCE, THE UNITED NATIONS TRANSITIONAL
ADMINISTRATION IN EAST TIMOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL
FORCE, EAST TIMOR

18. Another strong indicator of the achievement of the INTERFET mandate has
been the progress and prominence of civil affairs in East Timor as opposed to
security concerns. Since his arrival in Dili on 16 November, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has been able to develop an effective
dialogue and sound working relationship with both CNRT and INTERFET. UNTAET has
also begun to develop consultative processes with CNRT representatives.
INTERFET and CNRT have made considerable progress in developing a working
relationship.

VIII.

OUTLOOK

19. The security outlook for East Timor is positive. The threat from the
militia has been effectively nullified. INTERFET has played an increasingly
significant role in the repatriation of displaced persons to East Timor and
other humanitarian assistance activities. As such, the INTERFET mandate has
been largely fulfilled, and there are few obstacles remaining to the transition
to a United Nations peacekeeping operation and the assumption of greater
responsibility by UNTAET.

-----
