United Nations

A/RES/64/182

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/441)]

64/182. International cooperation against the world drug problem
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its
twentieth special session, 1 the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug
Demand Reduction, 2 the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the
Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development, 3 the Action Plan
for the Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug
Demand Reduction 4 and the joint ministerial statement adopted at the ministerial
segment of the forty-sixth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 5
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 the provisions of the
2005 World Summit Outcome 7 addressing the world drug problem, the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS 8 and other relevant United Nations resolutions, including
General Assembly resolution 63/197 of 18 December 2008 and those on regional
and international cooperation to prevent the diversion and smuggling of precursors,
5F

6F

7F

Gravely concerned that, despite continuing increased efforts by States,
relevant organizations, civil society and non-governmental organizations, the world
drug problem continues to constitute a serious threat to public health and safety and
the well-being of humanity, in particular children and young people and their
families, and to the national security and sovereignty of States, and that it
undermines socio-economic and political stability and sustainable development,

_______________
1

Resolution S-20/2, annex.
Resolution S-20/3, annex.
3
Resolution S-20/4 E.
4
Resolution 54/132, annex.
5
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 8 (E/2003/28/Rev.1),
chap. I, sect. C; see also A/58/124, sect. II.A.
6
See resolution 55/2.
7
See resolution 60/1.
8
Resolution 60/262, annex.
2

09-47275

*0947275*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/182

Welcoming the outcome of the high-level segment of the fifty-second session
of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 9 and in that regard recalling resolution
63/197, in which the General Assembly decided to consider the results of the
high-level segment at a plenary meeting of the Assembly at its sixty-fourth session,
8F

Recalling resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its
fifty-second session, 10 in particular resolutions 52/2, 52/3, 52/4 and 52/10 of
20 March 2009, and noting the outcomes of all the round-table discussions of the
high-level segment of that session,9
9F

0H

Reaffirming that countering the world drug problem in all its aspects requires a
political commitment to reducing supply, as an integral component of a balanced
and comprehensive drug control strategy, in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its
twentieth special session and the measures to enhance international cooperation to
counter the drug problem, 11 including the Action Plan on International Cooperation
on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development, also
adopted at that session,
10F

Reaffirming equally that reducing illicit drug use and its consequences requires
a political commitment to efforts to reduce demand, which must be demonstrated by
sustained widespread demand reduction initiatives that integrate a comprehensive
public health approach spanning the spectrum of prevention, education, early
intervention, treatment, recovery support, rehabilitation and reintegration efforts, in
accordance with the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand
Reduction, adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session,
Recognizing that international cooperation in demand reduction and supply
reduction has shown that positive results can be achieved through sustained and
collective efforts, and expressing its appreciation for the initiatives in this regard,
Reaffirming that the world drug problem remains a common and shared
responsibility that requires effective and increased international cooperation and
demands an integrated, multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing and balanced
approach to supply and demand reduction strategies,
Adopts the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
1.
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem, as adopted at the high-level segment of the fifty-second session of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 12 and calls upon States to take the measures
necessary to fully implement the actions set out therein, with a view to attaining in a
timely manner their goals and targets;
1F

Reaffirms that countering the world drug problem is a common and
2.
shared responsibility that must be addressed in a multilateral setting, requires an
integrated and balanced approach and must be carried out in full conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other

_______________
9

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. X;
see also A/64/92-E/2009/98, sect. II.
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I,
sect. C.
11
Resolutions S-20/4 A–E.
12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I,
sect. C; see also A/64/92-E/2009/98, sect. II.A.

2

A/RES/64/182

provisions of international law, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 13 and
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 14 on human rights, and, in
particular, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, for
the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and for all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and on the basis of the principles of equal rights
and mutual respect;
12F

13F

Undertakes to promote bilateral, regional and international cooperation,
3.
including through intelligence-sharing and cross-border cooperation, aimed at
countering the world drug problem more effectively, in particular by encouraging
and supporting such cooperation by those States most directly affected by illicit crop
cultivation and the illicit production, manufacture, transit, trafficking, distribution
and abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances;
Reiterates the commitment of Member States to promoting, developing,
4.
reviewing or strengthening effective, comprehensive, integrated drug demand
reduction programmes, based on scientific evidence and covering a range of
measures, including primary prevention, early intervention, treatment, care,
rehabilitation, social reintegration and related support services, aimed at promoting
health and social well-being among individuals, families and communities and
reducing the adverse consequences of drug abuse for individuals and society as a
whole, taking into account the particular challenges posed by high-risk drug users,
in full compliance with the three international drug control conventions and in
accordance with national legislation, and commits Member States to investing
increased resources in ensuring access to those interventions on a non-discriminatory
basis, including in detention facilities, bearing in mind that those interventions
should also consider vulnerabilities that undermine human development, such as
poverty and social marginalization;
Notes with great concern the adverse consequences of drug abuse for
5.
individuals and society as a whole, reaffirms the commitment of all Member States
to tackling those problems in the context of comprehensive, complementary and
multisectoral drug demand reduction strategies, in particular such strategies
targeting youth, also notes with great concern the alarming rise in the incidence of
HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne diseases among injecting drug users, reaffirms the
commitment of all Member States to working towards the goal of universal access
to comprehensive prevention programmes and treatment, care and related support
services, in full compliance with the international drug control conventions and in
accordance with national legislation, taking into account all relevant General
Assembly resolutions and, when applicable, the WHO, UNODC, UNAIDS Technical
Guide for Countries to Set Targets for Universal Access to HIV Prevention, Treatment
and Care for Injecting Drug Users, 15 and requests the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime to carry out its mandate in this area in close cooperation with
relevant organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, such as the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Development Programme and the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS);
14F

Acknowledges the continuing efforts made and progress achieved in
6.
countering the world drug problem, notes with great concern the unprecedented
surge in the illicit production of and trafficking in opium, the continuing illicit
_______________
13

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
15
Available from www.who.int/hiv/pub/idu/targetsetting/en/index.html.
14

3

A/RES/64/182

manufacture of and trafficking in cocaine, the increasing illicit production of and
trafficking in cannabis and the increasing diversion of precursors, as well as the
related distribution and use of illicit drugs, and stresses the need to strengthen and
intensify joint efforts at the national, regional and international levels to tackle those
global challenges in a more comprehensive manner, in accordance with the principle
of common and shared responsibility, including by means of enhanced and better
coordinated technical and financial assistance;
7.

Recognizes that:

(a) Sustainable crop control strategies targeting the illicit cultivation of
crops used for the production of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances require
international cooperation based on the principle of shared responsibility and an
integrated and balanced approach, taking into account the rule of law and, where
appropriate, security concerns, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States
and all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) Such crop control strategies include, inter alia, alternative development
and, where appropriate, preventive alternative development programmes, eradication
and law enforcement measures;
(c) Such crop control strategies should be in full conformity with article 14
of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances of 1988 16 and appropriately coordinated and phased in
accordance with national policies in order to achieve the sustainable eradication of
illicit crops, noting furthermore the need for Member States to undertake to increase
long-term investment in such strategies, coordinated with other development
measures, in order to contribute to the sustainability of social and economic
development and poverty eradication in affected rural areas, taking due account of
the traditional licit uses of crops where there is historical evidence of such use and
giving due consideration to the protection of the environment;
15F

Also recognizes the significant role played by developing countries with
8.
extensive expertise in alternative development in promoting best practices and
lessons learned from such programmes, and invites them to continue sharing those
best practices with States affected by illicit crop cultivation, including those
emerging from conflict, with a view to using them, where appropriate, in accordance
with the national specificities of each State;
Stresses the urgent need to respond to the serious challenges posed by the
9.
increasing links between drug trafficking, corruption and other forms of organized
crime, including trafficking in human beings, trafficking in firearms, cybercrime
and, in some cases, terrorism and money-laundering, including money-laundering in
connection with the financing of terrorism, and to the significant challenges faced
by law enforcement and judicial authorities in responding to the ever-changing means
used by transnational criminal organizations to avoid detection and prosecution;
10. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and its regional offices in building capacity at the local level in the fight
against transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, and urges the Office to
consider regional vulnerabilities, projects and impact in the fight against drug
_______________
16

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1582, No. 27627.

A/RES/64/182

trafficking, in particular in developing countries, when deciding to close and
allocate offices, with a view to maintaining an effective level of support to national
and regional efforts in combating the world drug problem;
11. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to increase
collaboration with intergovernmental, international and relevant regional
organizations involved in combating the world drug problem, as appropriate, in
order to share best practices and to maximize the benefits from their unique
comparative advantage;
12. Recognizes the need to collect relevant data and information regarding
international cooperation for countering the world drug problem at the national,
bilateral, subregional, regional and international levels, and urges all Member States
to support dialogue through the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in order to address
this issue;
13. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, upon request, to
continue providing technical assistance to Member States so as to enhance capacity
in countering the world drug problem, including by carrying out training
programmes to develop indicators and instruments for the collection and analysis of
accurate, reliable and comparable data on all relevant aspects of the world drug
problem and, where appropriate, the enhancement or development of new national
indicators and instruments;
14. Urges all Governments to provide the fullest possible financial and
political support to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by widening its
donor base and increasing voluntary contributions, in particular general-purpose
contributions, so as to enable it to continue, expand, improve and strengthen its
operational and technical cooperation activities, within its mandates, in particular
with a view to the full implementation of the Political Declaration adopted by the
General Assembly at its twentieth special session1 and the Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem adopted at the high-level segment of
the fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as well as, where
appropriate, relevant resolutions adopted by the Commission at that session,10 and
recommends that a sufficient share of the regular budget of the United Nations
continue to be allocated to the Office to enable it to carry out its mandates in a
consistent and stable manner;
1H

2H

15. Encourages the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the principal
policymaking organ of the United Nations on matters of international drug control
and as the governing body of the drug programme of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and the International Narcotics Control Board to strengthen their
useful work on the control of precursors and other chemicals used in the illicit
manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances;
16. Urges States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to,
and States parties to implement, as a matter of priority, all the provisions of the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol, 17
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 18 the United Nations
16F

17F

_______________
17
18

Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.

5

A/RES/64/182

Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of
1988, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the Protocols thereto 19 and the United Nations Convention against Corruption; 20
18F

19F

17. Urges all Member States to implement the Action Plan for the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand
Reduction4 and to strengthen their national efforts to counter the abuse of illicit
drugs in their populations, in particular among children and young people;
3H

18. Takes note of the outcome of the high-level segment of the fifty-second
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,9 the World Drug Report 2009 of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 21 and the most recent report of the
International Narcotics Control Board, 22 and calls upon States to strengthen
international and regional cooperation to counter the threat to the international
community caused by the illicit production of and trafficking in drugs, as well as
other aspects of the world drug problem, and to continue to take concerted measures,
such as within the framework of the Paris Pact 23 and other relevant international
initiatives;
4H

20F

21F

2F

19. Notes that the International Narcotics Control Board needs sufficient
resources to carry out all its mandates, reaffirms the importance of its work,
encourages it to continue to carry out its work in accordance with its mandates,
urges Member States to commit themselves in a common effort to assigning, where
possible, adequate and sufficient budgetary resources to the Board, in accordance
with Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/20 of 23 July 1996, emphasizes
the need to maintain its capacity, inter alia, through the provision of appropriate
means by the Secretary-General and adequate technical support from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and calls for enhanced cooperation and
understanding between Member States and the Board to enable it to implement all
its mandates under the international drug control conventions;
20. Welcomes the important role played by civil society, in particular
non-governmental organizations, in addressing the world drug problem, notes with
appreciation their important contribution to the review process, and also notes that
representatives of affected populations and civil society entities, where appropriate,
should be enabled to play a participatory role in the formulation and implementation
of drug demand and supply reduction policy;
21. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council devote one of its
high-level segments to a theme related to the world drug problem, and also
recommends that the General Assembly hold a special session to address the world
drug problem;
22. Encourages the meetings of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement
Agencies and of the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in
the Near and Middle East of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to continue to
contribute to the strengthening of regional and international cooperation, and in this
regard acknowledges the discussions that took place at the nineteenth meeting of

_______________
19

Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
21
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.09.XI.12.
22
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.09.XI.1.
23
See S/2003/641, annex.
20

6

A/RES/64/182

Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Latin America and the
Caribbean, held on Isla Margarita, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, from
28 September to 2 October 2009, on how to improve cooperation among the States
of Latin America and the Caribbean and the States of West Africa in combating drug
trafficking; 24
23F

23. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen regional cooperation in
combating illicit trafficking in drugs and the diversion of precursor chemicals
undertaken by the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money-Laundering and Financing of Terrorism and other relevant subregional and
regional organizations, including the adoption of the plan of action on combating
terrorism, illicit drug trafficking and organized crime at the special conference held
under the auspices of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in Moscow on
27 March 2009 25 and the efforts undertaken within the framework of the permanent
counter-narcotics mechanism “Channel”;
24F

24. Acknowledges other ongoing regional efforts to combat illicit trafficking
in drugs, such as those of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Senior
Officials on Drug Matters, who adopted the Association workplan on combating
illicit drug production, trafficking and use (2009–2015) at their thirtieth meeting,
held in Phnom Penh from 29 September to 20 October 2009, with the aim of
achieving a drug-free South-East Asia by 2015;
25. Calls upon the relevant United Nations agencies and entities and other
international organizations, and invites international financial institutions, including
regional development banks, to mainstream drug control issues into their
programmes, and calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
maintain its leading role by providing relevant information and technical assistance;
26. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 26 and requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution.
25F

65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

_______________
24

See UNODC/HONLAC/19/5.
See A/63/805-S/2009/177, annex I.
26
A/64/120.
25

7
