..

--'

-SECURITY COUNCIL
/

.OFFICIAL RECORDS
~.

~ECOND YEAR

. .

\

CONSEIL DE SECURITE, \
PROCES-VERBAUX, OFFICIELS
, DEUXIEME ANNEE

No.42 .'
136th and
137th ,meetings

'136eme et
. 137eme' ~ces

22· May 1947

22 mal 1947

..

Lake Success
( 64 p.)
,

.

New York .

•

$

HUNDRED AND -THIRTY-SEVENTH
MEETING

CENT-TRENTE·SEPTIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake StlCCess, New York,
on Thursday, 22 May 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue Lake Success, New-York,
le jeudi 22 mai 1947, a15 heures.

President: Mr. A. LOPEZ (Colombia).

President: M. A. LOPEZ (Colombie).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie,Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

157. Continuation of the discussion on
the Greek questRon

157. Suite de la discussion sur la questian
grecque

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kahreman Ylli, representative of Albania; Mr. Athanassov, representative of Bulgaria; Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greece; and Mr.
Krasovec,representative of Yugoslavia, took
their seats at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Kahreman
Ylli, representant de l'Albanie, M. Athanassov,
representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis, representant de la Grece, et M. Krasovec, representant de la Y ougoslavie, prennent place ala table
d1f, Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Syria.

do~e la parole au representant de la Syrie.

a

Le

PRESIDENT

(traduit de l'anglais): Je

Mr. EL-KHoURI (Syria): The Security Council created a commission of investigation, stipulating four basic conditions: first, that the number of members on the Commission should be
"tixed~t eleve!J; secondly, that the eleven Mem. berStates represented on the Sec~ty Council
should nominate those eleven representatives to
the Commission' of Investigation; thirdly, that
the competence or the mandate of the Commission should be defined by establishing its terms
of reference; and fourthly, that the area in which
the Commission was to make its investigation
should be fixed.
Th~ Security .Council left open t..lte period
during which the Commission of Investigation
concerning Gteek Frontier IncidentS was to exert:ise its functions. It did not fix any time-limit
for "the Conm :'3Sion, either one month, two
months, or three months. Under the resolution
of the Security Council of 19 December 1946/
the Commission was to continue its investigation, and the fulfilment of its duties Wltil its report had been prepared, brought before and
examined, by the Security Council, and until
another resolution w,as adopted by the Council
resolving 'that the mission of the Commission
had expired and that the Commission should
therefore be dissolved, or that the Commission
should be asked to remedy certain deficiencies
which might' appear in its report or to continue
its work for another period under the same or
'other terms of reference.
I consider that the Security Council, by virtue
of its functions under the Charter; is obliged to
ensure the maintenance of international, peace
'and security in any way which it deems proper
and ·appropriate. Therefore, there would be no
limit to the capacity of the Security Council in
exercising such a duty.
'

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Le ConseiI de securite, en instituant une Commission d'enquete, a pose les quatre conditions
fondamentales '6Uivantes: premierement, la ComInission, lSerait composee de onze membres;
deuxiemement, les onze Etats' Membres representes au ConseiI de securite designeraient ces
onze representants aupres de la Commission
d'enquete; troisiemement, la competence ou les
attributions de la COlIL"TIission seraient fixees dans
son mandat; quatriemement, on deIimiterait la
region clans laquelle la Commission procederait
a '>on enquete.
Le Conseil, de securite ne s'est pas prononce
s,rt la duree du mandat de la ColllIIlission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere
grecque et ne lui a fixe aucune limite de temps.
Il n'etait question ni d'un mois, ni de deux, ni
de trois. Enl vertu de la :resolution adoptee le 19
decembre 1L946 par le Conseil de securite\ la
Commission contii:luerait a mener son enquete et
a remplir SI[:S obligations jusqu'a ce que son rapport £Ut pre;pare et soumis au Conseil de securite,
et jusqu'a ce que ce dernier eut, par une autre
.resolution, decide, soit de considerer la mission
de' la Commission comme terminee et, en consequence, ,de la dissoudre, soit de prier la Comniission, en I'in.J.estissant-du merne mandat ou
d'un znandat different, de combler ,certaines
lacunes qui auraient pu appara1tre danS son rap.port' ou de continuer, ses travaux, pour une nouvelle periode de temps.
J'estime que le ConseiI de secunte, en vertu
des fonctions que la Charte lui a imparties,a le
devoir de maintenir la paix et la securite int~r­
nationales par tous lea. moyens qui lui semblent
convenables et appropries. Pourremplir' cette
tache, leConseiI de securite dispose clone d'une
competence, illimitee.

1 See OffiCial Records of ~he Security Council" First
Year, Second Series, No. 28, 87th, meeting, pages 700
and 701.

1 Voir les ,Proces-verbaux oificieis du Conseil' de ,secU7ite, Premiere Annee,Seconde Serie, No 28,' .87eme
seance, pages 700 et 701.

-

Si la Commission n'avait pas decide ou n'avait ,
pas re~u instructions de se rendre .de la region
des Balkans a Gt'neve pour remger ~on rapport,
iI n'aurait pas ete necessaire de creer le Groupe
subsidiaire; car, aussi longtemps que la Commission demeurait sur place, elIe etait censee continuer a rcmplir sa mission; etant donne qu'e11e
ne s'en est pas encore' completement acquittee,
e1le doit poursuivre ses travaux comme par le
passe. Puisque la Commission s'est rendue a
Geneve, il est necessaire 0<1 juste qu,eIle soit
representee dans les Balkans.
Le 18 avril 1947, le Conseil de securite a decide qu'un Groupe subsidiaire, representant
pleinement la Commission de par sa composition, devrait rester dans les Balkans et continuer
sa lliche1 •
Je ne crois pas qu'il eut ete necessaire que la
Commission donnat au Groupe subsidiaire un
nouveau mandat ou qu'elle modifiat ses attributions. Bien que leU1'5 noms et leurs titres different,
le Groupe subsidiaire est, par nature, semblable
a la Commission. Les onze membres du Conseil
de securite y sont representes. Que les membrGl' de la ,Commission d'enquetese rendent a Geneve
ou qu'ils viennent ici, la situation n'en serait en
rien changee.

Had it not been for the removal or withdrawal of the Commission from the Balkan area
to Geneva for the di'afting of its report, there
would have been no necessity to create the Subsidiary Group, because, a2 long as the Commission remained on the spot, it would have been
expected to continue to fulfil its mission. Since '
its mission is not yet completed, it has to continue
its work as before. The removal of the Commission to Geneva made it necessary or appropriate
that the Commission shodd be represented in
the Balkans,
.
The Security Council decided on 18 April
1947 that a subsidiary group representing the
Commission in its fuII composition should remain
and continue to function in the Balkans.1
I do not think it would have been necessary
for the Commission to establish new terms, of
reference or a new form of mandate fot: the
Subsidiary Group. The compo..•;ition of the Subsidiary Group is identical with that of the Commission, although a difference exists in regard to
the names and titles in the Subsidiaxy Group as
compared with those of the 'Commission. The
eleven members of the Security Cou..,cil are represented there. Whether the members of the
Commission had gone to Geneva or had come
here, the situation would not' have changed.
Th,e :first resolution of the Security Councilthat of 19 December 1946~d not stipulate
the exact number of representatives for each
State. It provided that the eleven members of the
Security Council should be represented on the
Commission; they are now represented on the
Subsidiary Group.
The Security Council did not instruct the
Commission to change the mandate or to give
new terms of referent:;e to the Subsidiary Group,
but gave. it the authority to instruct the Subsidiary Group as the Commission.found necessary. In fact, the Commission has drawn up certain directives for the Subsidiary Group which
are before us, and which I consider different
from the original terms of reference given to the
Commission itself. F.or instance, the Commission
has limited. the Group's headquarters to Salonika, while the Commission itself was,' not
bound to establish its residence or headquarters
in Salonika or· at any other. place.. The Commission was free' to. establish its headquarters
anywhere it liked and to go anyWhere it liked.
This capacity should also be kft to the SubsidiaryGroup, without· any diStinction•
.'fhose terms or' reference gave birth to all.the
controversies. which we have had here today and
in previous meetings..I:Iad' the Oommission not
impo~d those restrictions, but given the Group
all the authority which it should have had to
continue its examination and investigation under
the same mandate which. Was assigned to the
90mmission, we should not have had to indulge
ID such lengthy discussions.
.'

1

Se~ Official Records of the Security Cou~cil. Second

Year, No. 37.

.

. . . .1IIIlli-._ _~ ~

La premiere resolution du Conseil de securite,
celle dll. 19 decembre194:6, n"a pasEx~Ienom"

bre de representants dont disposerait chaque
Etat. Elle a prevuque les onze Etats Membres
du Gonseil de securite seraient representesaupres
de la Commission; ils sont maintenant representes aupres du Groupe subsidiaire.
Le Conseil de securite n'a pas &t a la Commission de modifier le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire ou de lui conferer de nouveIles attributions; i11'a:, par co~tr~, habilitee a donnera ce
Groupe toutes les instructions· qu'eIle jugerait
utiles. En fait, la Commission a trace au Groupe
subsidiaire un certain' nombre de directives qui
nous sont maintenant soumises et qui, a mon
avis, different. du mandat initial re~u par la
Commission eIle-meme. Ainsi, la. Commission a
le siege du Groupe .a Salonique,alors que
rien n'obIigeait la Co~ion d'etablir sa resi..
dence ou sori siege a SaloniqJ1e ou ailIeurs. La
Commission etait libre' dechoisir le siege quiJ\!i .
plairait et de se rendre oil eIIevouc&ait. U
viendrait de laisserau Groupe subsidiaire la
meme latitude, sans difference aucune.
.

fixe.

con:'

La question du mandat adonne naissance.a .
toutes les controverses. qui se' sont eIevees. aujourd'hui et au cours des reunions precedentes.
Si laCommissioI].,. au lieu. d'apporter des restrictionsa ce mandat,avait investi le Groupe subsidiaire de la competence dont eIle disposaitelltt-:
meme et lui avaitcoIlfer~ AA rn~~datidentiquea
celpi dontelle avaitbeneficie, afin de lui permettredecontinuer ses travaux et ses enquetes;
nous n'aurlons pas eu besoin dediscuter si longuement de la question.
~

...,----

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de slcurite, Deuxieme Annee, No 37.

,

For that reason, I believe it is now appropriate for the Security Council to. adopt a new
resolution on this matter, to the effect that in
the first place, the directives limiting the scope
of the Subsidiary Group's capaC:ty are unnecessary, and that "the Group is to continue exercising the same functions as those assigned to the
Commission by the Security Coullcil in its resolution of 19 December: In other words, we
should consider this draft of directives unnecessary and permit the Subsidiary Group to do
whatevedt deems proper for the continuation of
its investigation and for the fulfilment of the
duties assigned to the Commission by the first
resolution of the Security Council; and, secondly,
we should ·instruct the four Balkan· States concerned to co-operate with the Subsidiary Group
in accordance with the terms of the resolution
of the Security Council of 19 December 1946,
without any further discussion.
Further, we understand that the report which
should have been here by now is still not forthcomi,g. At the meeting of the Security Cou:<lcil
on 12 May 1947, ten days ago, the Commission
was irultructed to submit its report here as soon
as possible.1 I think it should have been here
by now. If the report were here, we could examine it, and the Security Council would. be in
a position to adopt a final resolution on the subject, either for the continuation or the dissolution
o!.~e .CommlsC\ion and subsequently the SubSIdiary Group, or to pass a new resolution dealing with the future activities of the Subsidiary
Group. If the report had arrived that would not
. have. required much time.
I should like to ask the Secretary-General
whether the report is here or on its way, or
whetherit is still in Geneva. What has happened
to it? That is something we shouIdJmow.

For those" reasons," I propose that these two
recommendations should be made: First, the
abolition of the directives given by the Commis,sion; and secondly, instructions to the four Balkan States concerned to collaborate "with ,the
SubSidiary Group in the same. way as they were
collaborating with the Commission itself.. I sub~
mita proposal· to that effect.
'
.

Dans ces conditions, j'estime qu'il appartient
maintenant au Conseil de securite d'adopter en
la matiere une nouvelle resolution qui deciderait:
tout d'abord, que les directives limitant la competence du Groupe subsidiaire sont iIlutiles, et
que le Groupe doit continuer a remplir les
mernes fonctions que celles que le Conseil de securite, dans sa resolution du 19 decembre,a
assignees a la Commission - en d'autres termes,
nous devrions considcSrer ce projet de directives
comme inutile, et permettre au Groupe subsidiaire de faire tout ce qu'il juge necessaire pOUf
continuer a mener son enquete et a remplir les
taches assignees a la Commission par la premiere
resolution du Conseil de securite; deuxiemement,
nous devrions prescrire aux quatre Etats ba!kaniques" interesses de cooperer avec le Groupe
subsidiaire, sans autres discussions, dans le cadre
des termes de la resolution adoptee le 19 decemhre 1946 par le Conseil
, de securite.
En outre, nous croyons comprendre que le
rapport, qui aurait dO. etre entre nos mains al'heure actuelle, n'est toujours pas pres d'arriver.
Il y a dix joUl'S} au cOUrs de sa seance du 12
mai 1947, le Conseil de securite a charge la Com··
mission de lui faire rapport aussitot que' possibIe1 • J'estime que ce. rapport aurait dO. deja
nous parvenir. Nous aurions pu alors l'examiner,
et le Conseil de securite aurait ete a ,meme de
prendre une decision definitive:soit qu'il charge
la Commission et, par voie de consequence, .le
Groupe subsidiaire, de continuer ou de cesser
ses travaux,soit qu'il adopte une nouvelle resolution renvoyant I'etude de cette question. Si le
rapport etaitarrive, cela ne nous demanderait
pas beaucoup de temps.
Je voudrais demander au Secretaire general
si le rapport est id, s'il est sur le poillt de nous
parvenir,.'ous'il est toujours, a Geneve. Qu'en
est-il advenu? On devrait nous eclairer sur ce
point.
,
Je repete done qu~ le Conseil devrait adopter
les deux recommandations suivantes:· premierement, ,supprimer les· directives doIinees par la
Commission; deuxieroemerit, prescrire aux q~a­
tre Etats balkaniques iIlteresses de collaborer
avec le Groupe subsidiaire comme ils ont collabureaveclaCommission elle-meme. Je presente .une proposition formelle a cet effet. .

GolonelHoDQsON (Australia) : .I ask th~t the
proposal of the representative of· Syria should
be .circulated in written form.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je demande que la proposition du
representant de la Syrie nous soit communiquee
par ecrit.

Mr•. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. (translated from Russian): I seJit"a letter to the~§~QuritYeCeuncJaSKillgitto·examine
th~ question of the decision taken by the Commission on 29 Aprillast,2because ill the views
of. the delegation of the· Soviet Union this decision was not in order and was inconsistent with
the Security Council's previous decisions; Moreover, the Commission had no right to take such
a decision.

M. GROMYKQ(Union des Republiques sodalistessoVi€nques)' (traduit du russe); J'ai
aelresseune lettre au Coriseil de seclidte pour le
prier .d'examiner la question de la decision prise
par la Commission le 29 avril dernier2 ) la dele':
gation sovietique estime en dIet quecette decision n'est pas reguliere, car elle ne decoule' pas
des resolutions.anterieures du Conseil et la: .commission n'etait pas en droit de prendre 'une
pareille decision.

See Official Records of the. Security Council, ,Second
Year, No. 39.
.
:lIbid.,Supplement No. 11, Annex 26.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, 'Deuxieme Annee, No 39. !
:lIbid., Supplement No 11, Annexe 26.'

1

.

..~

My aim. in bringing this matter before the
Security Council, was to rectify this situation
and to have the Commission's decision of 29
April brought into conformity both with previous
decisions of the Security Council and with the
Security Council decision which, the USSR
delegation considers, should be taken in con,nexion with the discussion of this question.
I have already drawn the Security Council's
attention to the fact that the Subsidiary Group
established under a Security Council decision
was, by the Commission's decision of 29 April,
given. terms of reference which it should not
have received from the Commission. In the first
place, as I have already pointed out, the Commission cannot automatically delegate the powers assigned to it by a decision of the Security
Council to a subsidiary group. Moreover, the
Commission has no right to delegate and assign
to a subsidiary group wider powers than those
of the Commission itself. However, that is precisely what has happened. The position is as follows: despite the fact that the Commission still
exists.,-although, for some reason or another, it
has preferred to continue its work not in 9reece
but in another country-in fact, a second commission has at the same time been established,
acting concurrently and with similar •powers.
How can we justify a situation in which, despite the Security Council's decision to set up
;:me commission, two commissions have actually
been set up and exist,. vested with the same powers. and having the same duties to discharge,
namely, to ,investigate frontier incidents on the
Greek borders?
This is a situation which can neither be justified nor accepted. I regret that this opinion is not
shared by certain members of the Security Council. Of course, this makes it difficult to rectify
the position and it aggravates the situation still
further.
It has been alleg~d here that three of the
four Balkan countries .concerned in this question, namely, Yugosh,l.via, Bulgaria and Albania,
have refused to co-operate with the Security
Council in implementing the Security Council
decision regarding the Commission and. its powers. I do not think that such conclusions are
well-founded, as the representatives .of these three
countries have never said that they ,refused to
co-operate with the Security Council or' to give
the Council and th~ Commission the necessary
assistance. No such statements have' been made
by the representatives of those c{)Untries, either
in the Commission when the terms of reference
of the Subsidiary Group were discussed, or in
the Security Council, whether at previous or at
recent meetings of the Council,' when the question raised by the USSR representative on the
Council was discussed.
On the . contrary, the representatives of these
countries' have stated that they were prepared
to help the Security Council and to co-operate
with it in elucidating the facts· as regards frontier incidents. The question is, however, how
should this co-operation be understood and how

En soulevant cette question deva,nt le <Jonseil
de securite, je visais obtenir que la situation
fUt redressee et que la decision prise par la Commission le 29 avril fUt rendue conforme tant aux
resolutions ant6rieures du Conseil, qu'a la decision que celui-ci doit prendre, de l'avis de la
delegation sovietique, a la suite de l'exameu de
cette question.
J'ai deja attire l'attention du Conseil de securite sur le fait que le Groupe subsidiaire, qui a
ete constitue conformement a une resolution du
Conseil de securite, avait re~u, en vertu de la
decision prise par la Commission le 29 avril, des
pouvoirs qu'il n'aurait pas dli recevoir d'e11e.
Tout d'abord - comme je l'ai indique - la
Commission ne peut transmettre automatiquement a un groupe subsidiaire les pouvoirs qui lui
avaient ete conferes par une resolution du Conseil de securite. La Commission a encore moins le
droit de transmettre et d'accorder a un groupe
subsidiaire des pouvoirs plus etendllsque·ceux
qu'elle avait e1le-meme. Pourtant c'est precis6ment ce qui s'est produit. Il s'est cree la situation
. suivante: la Commission existe toujours, encore
qu'e1le rot pre£ere - on ne sait pourquoi-'-poursuivre ses travaux non pas en Grece, mais sur le
territoire d'un autre pays; et cependant, on a
cree, en fait, une seconde commission, qui agit
dans le meme sens et qui a les memes droits.
Y a-t-il une justification a une situation ou,
en depit de la decision du Conseil de securite
de crler une seule c.ommission, ll.. e.'1.a~f.eet 11.···.J
en existe en fait deux, qui ont les memes moits
et qui ont toutes les deux!1ne seule et meme .
tache, celle d'enqueter sur les incid~ts qui se
sont produits aux f~ontieres grecques.
On ne saurait ni justifier ni accepter une te1le
situation. Je regrette de constater que certains
des membres du Conseil ne partagent pas mon
opinion. Loin de nous aider a redresser la situation, cette attitude la rend au contraire encore
plus difficile.
On a pretendu ici que trois sur quatre des pays
balkaniques interesses a la question: la Yougoslavie, la .Bulgarie et l'Albanie, refusaient de
cooperer avec le Conseil de securite pour donner
diet a la resolution du Conseil relative a la Con.mission et a ses pouvoirs. Je considere. que 'de
telles conclusions sont denuees de fondement,
etant donne que les representants de' ces trois
pays n'ont jamais ditqu'ils refusaient de
opereI' .avec le Conseil de securite ou de donner..•.
au Conseil et a la Commission le concours necessaire. Ces representants. n'ont rien· ditde ta, .ID
a la Commission pendant que celle-ciexamiriait
la question des pouvoirsdu Groupe subsidiaire,
ni au Conseil de securite pendant que celui-ci,
soit au cours des premieres, soit au cours des.
dernieres seances, examinai~ la question soulevee \
par la delegation sovietique.

a

eO-I

Bien au contraire, les representants de cespays
ont affirme qu'ils etaient prets a aiderle Conseil
. desecurite et a cooperer avec lui pour tirerau
clair les faits qui se rapportent aux incidents de
fronticre.. Mais - et c'est la toute-Ia question-que faut-ilcomprendre par cooperation et par

shoul9. the expression "assistance" to the Security
l'expression "aide" a accorder au Conseil de securite. '
Council be interpreted?,
From the outset, the representatives of these
Les representants de ces pays ont releve des le
States pointed out the intrinsic defect of the
debut le vice fondamenta!. qui entache la deciCommission's decision. They pointed out that
sion de la Commission. lIs ont fait observer que
cette decision avait ete prise sans leur participathis decision was taken without their participation et sans qu'on eut eutendu l'opinion des
tion and without the views of the Governments
Gouvernements de leurs trois pays;, ils ont dit
of. these three St(ites having been heard, and that
qu'en realite cette decision n'etait pas reguliere,
this decision was substantially wrong, as the
etant donne que la Commission a confere au
Commission had invested, the Subsidiary Group
with powers which belonged only. to the Com- . Groupe subsidiaire des pouvoirs qui' n'appartiennent qu'a elle-meme.
mission itself.
Par consequent, dire que ces pays refusent
Hence, the allegation that these three States
leur concours au Conseil de securite - c'est la
refused to help the Security Council is unune affirm,ation denuee de fondement. On est
founded. There is still less justification for allegencore moins fonde de pretendre que la Y ougoing that Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and .Albania are
slavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie refusent d'executer
refusing to implement the Security Council's decision and are virtually infringing the United
la resolution du Conseil de securite et qu'elles
Nations Charter.
violent, en queIque sorte, la Charte des Nations
Unies.
What constitutes an, infringement of the
En quoi la Charte a-t-elle ete violee? Est-ce
United Nations Charter? Does it consist in the
parce que ces Gouvemements ont cru pouvoir
. fact that the Governments of these countries felt
ne pas accepter la decision de la Commission et
demander auConseil d'examiner cette question?
that they were unable to agree with the ComDepuis .quand unappel adresse au Conseil de
mission's decision and asked for the matter to
securite pour qu'il eXamine' une question consbe considered by. the Security Council? Since
titue-t-il une violation de la Charte et un fefuS
when has a request for a question to beconsidd'executer les decisions du Conseil?
ered by the Security Council constituted an -infringement of the United Nations Charter or a
failure to implqrtent the Security Council's decisions?
--~- .\-~d -statentent -r!oduces- a· -certain effect.
:- Lorsqu'une affi...-manon· est yalable, elle proIf it is placed out of its context, it produces no
duit un certain effet. Lorsqu'elle est deplacee,
effect whatsoever. 'That is true of the' allegations
eUe n'en produit aucun. Cela s'applique aux
that· these three States are infringing the Uni~ed
affirmations seIon. lesqm;lles ces trois pays
Nations Charter and are refusing t9 implement
auraient viole la Charte des Nations Unies et
the Security. Council's decisions. That was not
refus~ d'executer les decisions du, Conseil. Rien
the case and is not the case.
de tel n'a eu lieu, ni n'a lieu en ce moment.
The representatives of these three ,States
Les representants de ces trois pays ont soutenu
pointec;l out that, when: the question of the funequ'il y avait lieu de les inviter a prendre part a
" tions of the Subsidiary Group was being settled,
l'examen de la question des attiibutions du
they should have been: invited· to participate in
Groupe subsidiaire. La Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie
the discussion. Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania
et l'Albanie etaient parfaitement fondeesa . deare fully entitled to say so; seeing that the Semanderce1a, puisque·le Conseil de securite avait
curity Council, in conformity with the United
decide, conformement a la Charte des Nations
Nations Charter, decided that the representaUnies, que les representants de ces Gouvernetives .of these three Governments shoUld take part
ments devaient participer d'un bout a l'autre a
in the • discussion of the whole Greek problem,
la discussion de la question grecque.Or, voici ce
,.from. beginning to end, The situation is therequi s'est produit. Ona admis les representants
fOfe' as follows: the representatives of these
de cespays a sieger au 'Conseil de securite; le
States were allowed to come before the Security
Conseil poursuit ses travauxpar l'intermediaire
COUIlcil; the Security Council, with the help of
d'une COilll-IDssion et cl'une Sous-Coilll-nission;
the .Commission and a 'Sub-commission" is con~
mais, a mi-chemin, a un stade intermediaire non
th"lub.lg its work,. but at some unspecified interprecise, on a ecarte ces representants des travaux
mediate stage the representatives of these three - de la· Commission, et on ne les. a pas laisses parStates were excluded from the Commission's
ticiper a I'examen de la question grecque.
work •a.~d haye not been enabled to participate
.in the consideration of the Greek problem.
Thus, when it is a matter of delegating the
Ainsi donc, lorsqu'il est question de transmetCommission's functions to the Subsidiary Group,
tre au Groupe' subsidiaire les fonctions de la
the ,earlier decisions of the Security Council are
Commission, onaffirme que les resolutions ansaid to apply to the Commission and the subterieures du Conseil de securite s'appliquent a la
conunission,· and to· be still in force.. When it. is
Commission et a la Sous-Commission et qu'elles
a question,however,of the Security Council's, restent en. vigueur en ce qui les concerIie. Mais
decision to invite representatives of these three
lorsqu'il s'agit de la resolution du Conseil qui
countries to take part in examining the Greek
prevoit que, a la Commission egalement, les reproblem, at. the Commission" stage, then. it .is
presentants?deces trois pays seront invites a prenapparently considered normal not· to allow' the
drepart a l'examen del'ensemble de la question
representatives' of these States to participate in
grecque, on semble trouver normal de ne pas

•• the Commission's discussion of a question in

admettre les representants de ces pays a participer a l'examen, au .sein de la Commission,
d'une question qui les interesse d'autant plus que
la decision qui sera prise a cesujet les conceme
, directement. Je parle ici du paragraphe de la
decision prise par la Commission qui prevoit que
le Groupe subsidiaire aura le droit de se rendre
la ou il le faudra, aussi bien en territoire gree
qu'en territoire yougoslave, bulgare et albanais.
n est clair qu'on ne: saurait justifier une situation
ou la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie sont
desavantagees par rapport aux autres pays se
trouvant dans un cas analogue, une situation ou
1'0n n'observe pas les diSpositions de la Charte
a cet egard..
'
Je ne puis non plus manquer de relever les
I must also refer to, the assertions of certain
declarations de certains representants au Conseil
representatives on the Security Council that the
de securite, seIon lesquelles les agissements de la
action taken by Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and AlYougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie porbania undermines the authority of the Security
teraient atteinte a I'autorite du Conseil. Dnne
, Co~cil. It is not clear how they are underminvoit pas comment ces pays pourraient porter
ing the' authority of the Security Council by apatteinte a l'autorite du Conseil de secm'ite en
pealing to that organ. I should like someone to
faisant appel a cet organe. Je voudrais que 1'0n
explain ~ mystery. Why should an appeal to
the Security Council or a request to have a par- , m'eclairat la-dessus. Pourquoi unerequete adressee au Conseil de securite, ou une demande faite
ticular problem considered, by 'the Security
au Conseil d'examiner une question, constitueCouncil mean that the Council's authority is being undermined? Views may differ on this point. , rait-elle une atteinte a l'autorite de ce derniu'? .
Les opinionspeuvent differer la-dessus. Quant a
I must say that in connexion with the Commismoi, je dois dire que certains signes, app~. au
sion's work on the Greek problem there are cercours des travaux de la Commission chargee
tain symptoms which lead one to conclude that
d'etudier la question grecque,indiquent que tous
everyone is not anxious to maintain the Security
ies niemhres sont ioind~etre egalementsoucieux
Council's authority at' the proper level. This
de rriaintenir l'autorite du Conseil de securite au
becomes particularly dear if one recalls in what
circumstances the Security Council's decision
nivea'l voulu. Cela apparait d'une fa~on particulierement nette si l' on se souvient dans quelles
creating th,e so-called Subsidiary Group was
taken.
.
circonstances le Conseil de securite a pris la decision de cre1er ce Groupe dit subsidiaire.
. Le Conseil de securite ne devrait pas toIerer
The'Security Council should not allow a situune situation ou les travaux de la Commission
ation to arise in which the work of the' Commission on the Greek question, or the work of
chargee d'etudier ~a question gyecque, ou de
n'importe quelle autre commission creee par lui,
,any other commission set up by the Security
puissentporter atteinte a son autorite.· RappeCouncil, might actually undermine the Security
Ions-nom ,I'experience du passe. On sait· qu'un
Council's authority. We should remember past
certain nombre de commissions ont existe. dans
experience. It· is common Xnowledge that ~ere
le passe, chargees de missions diverses.' Je .ne les
have been quite a number .of commissions, on
enumere pas ici: mais on sait qu'il suffit de
various problems, in the paSt. I shall not enumerate them here, but it is well knoWn that the ,nientionner ceJilaines d'entre elles pour faire
naitre ,un sourire ironique sur les levres de ceux
mere mention of some of these commissions
qui sont atf courant de leur activite.Esperons
evokes· an ironical smile from persons acquainted
que le Conseil de securite veillera it ce que l'opiwith their activities. Let us' hope the .Security
nion qu'on aura de la .Commission creee pour
Council will see to it that a different attitude
will be adopted towards this Commission set
etudier la question grecque ne soit pasJaniem.e.
Esperons egalenient que les signes qui se maniup for the investigation of the Greek question.
festent a I'h-eure actuelle resterontde simples
Let us also hope that the symptoms now apparent will remain mere symptoms and will not lead - signes, qu'ils n'entraineront pas de consequences
to more undesirable consequences not really calencore plus· indesirables, consequences qui ne
contribueraient vraiment pas a renforcer l'auculated to strengthen the Security Council's authority.
.
torite du Conseil de securite.
Certain representatives. on the Council were
Certams representants au Conseil s'etonnent
surprised that the USSR representative while,
de voir que, d'une part, le representant sovieon the one hand, objecting to giving the Comtique se soit oppose a ce qu'on reconnut a ·la
mission the right to. delegate its functions autoCommission le droit detransmettre, automatimatically to the Subsidiary Group, should, on the
quement, ses ·fonctions au Groupe'subsidiaire,
otL"er'hand, agree that the. Subsidiary Group,
mais que, d'autre part, il ait admis que tant que
since it existed, could and should inyestigate inle Groupe subsidiaire existe, ce Groupe peut et
cidents, if such incidents arose. They claim to
doit enqueter sur les incidents, s'il s'en produit.
see in this an inconsistency. Actually, the inconIls pretendent qu'il y aurait la une inconsesistency is merely ima~ary.
quence. Enrealite, cette inconsequence est purement imaginaire.
which these States are deeply interested, more
particularly as a resolution was adopted which
directly concerns them. I am referring to the
paragraph of the Commi~on's decision which
provides that the Subsidiary, Group is entitled
to travel where necessary in Greece and also in
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania. There can
obviously pe no justification, for an arrangement
by which Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania are
placed on ,an un~qual footing with other States
in similar positions, and which disregards the
relevant provisions of the United Nations
Charter.

•

•
The point is that the Commission h~ no right
to delegate its powers to the. Subsidiary Group,
as its terms of reference1 were drawn up by the
Security Council in the light of the need for
investigating past incidents to which the Council's attention had been drawn. The Commis..
sion's decision of 29 April regarding the powerS
of the Subsidiary Group refers to futureincidents, which the Security Council did not discuss
'and of which neither the Council nor the .Commission had or has any conception.

En fait, la Commission n'a pas le droit de
transmettre ses pouvoirs au Groupe subsidiaire,
etant donne que les. termes de son mandat
(terms of reference1 ) . ont e~eeIabores par le
Conseil de securite, compte tenu de la necessite
d'enqueter -sur les incidents passes qui avaient
Cte signales au Conseil. Or, la decision que la
Commission a prise le 29 avril au sujet despouvoirs du Groupe subsidiaire a trait aux incidents
futurs, qui n'ont pas fait l'objet d'un examen du
Conseil de securite et dont. ni le Conseil ni la
Commission n'ont encore aucune idee.
Since. the Subsidiary Group exists, it will, of
Puisque le Groupe subsidiaire existe, il ~t
course, investigate incidents, if they occur. The \ clair qu'il aura a enqueter sur les incidents, s'il
whole point is, what powers and rights should
s'en produit. Reste a savoir quels sont les droits
be given to this Subsidiary Group? The USSR· et pouvoirs a· donner a ce Groupe subsidiaire.
delegation; and also the representatives of States . La delegation sovietique, ainsi que les representants des pays.invites a participer aux debats du
invited to participate.in the Security .Council
discussion, namely, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and AlConseil: Yougoslavie, Bulgarie et Albanie, estimentque le Groupe subsidiaire devra s'occuper
bania, consider that the Subsidiary·Group shoUld
deal with incidents as they arise, and on the
des incidents lorsqu'ils'en produira et qu~il devra
Commission's. direct instructions.
.
le faire sur les instructions de la Commission.
This is the only. correct way of approaching
Ce n'est qu'ainsi qu'on peutresoudre d'une
a solution to the problem of the Subsidiary
fa~on correcte la question d~ pouvoirs a ac-.
corder au Groupe subsidiaire. On nous dit que
Group's powers. It is said that this is not enough,
ce1a ne suffit point et qu'il faut accorder au
that the Subsidiary Group must be given very
wide powers. The United Kingdom representa..;
Groupe subsidiaire les droits les plus etendus. Le
representant du Royaume-Uni a declare ouvertetivesaid quite bluntly that the fact that this
mentque le fait que l'on veuille transmettre auinvolved the automatic delegation of· the Comtomatiquement a la .Sous-Commission les foncmission's functions to a sub-commission did not
... "woiTYl:Um;as~this seemed tobe fully jUstified. tionsde Ia:CoIIimisSion ne i'mquietaitp6mt, ceia
etant, seIon -lui,' parfaitement. justifie. Si nous
H we follow this line of argument, we must
suivons ce raisonnement, nous devons aboutir
logically infer that· a commission with very ,"ride
logiquement a la conclusion qu'il devrait y avoir,
powers should exist· in almost every country in
dans presque tous les pays du monde, une comthe world to investigate the misunderstandings
mission dotee de pouvoirs les' plus etendus et
-or frontier incidents which arise, for, as is well
chargee d'enqueter sur les malentendus et les
known, there are often incidents between differincidents de frontiere. En efIet, on le sait,de
ent States, though they vary in character. This
telsi.'lcidents, encore que de nature variable, se
is, however, not enough to prQve the need for
produisent frequemment entre les divers pays.
the existence. of coInIllissions of,- investigation,
Toutefois, cela ne suffit nullement pour justifier
still less ior giving, these cOIlUll1ssions powers as
l'existence de commissions d'enquete, encore
wide. as those given to the Subsidiary Group by
moins pour accorder aces coIIlIDissions des droits
the. decision of' the qommission itse!:f:.
. aussi Iarges queceux qui ont ete, en vertu de la
decision de la. Conunission elle-meme, conferes
au Groupe subsidiaire.
.
.
As regards the question of the Subsidiary
En ce' qui conceme la question des' pouvoirs
Group's powers, some Council representatives
du Groupe subsidiaire, certains representants au
said that this was hardly more than a procedural
Conseil ont soutenu que c'etait la, .en· queIque
question. That . Was . how .the. representative' of -sorte, une question de procedure. Le representant· ,
Australia put it. He said that the Commission itde l'Australie l'a memeditexplicitement. n a
self hadpoweJ,' to draw up rules of procedure.
declare que la. Commissionavait le droitd'etablir
But this·, is not a matter concerned with the
elle-meme son reglement interieur. Or, ce. n'est
Commission's procedure. You cannot use the
pas du teglement inteneur de la. Commission
term. "procedural" about decisions which refer
qu'il s'agit. On ne saurait, en effet, employer
to the rights and powers of the Commission or
l'expression "question de' procedure" poUr des
to journeys made by the Commission or the Subdecisions qui ont traitaux. droits .et.P91lYoirs 'de
sidiary· Group to appropriate places in Yugola Commission et en vertu d~quelles la Comslavia, Bulgaria, Albania or Greece. That is not
missionelle-meme et le Groupe'subsidiaire pour- '
ront se rendre sur les points donnes des territoires
proceciure; these are decisions of a grave politiyougosJave, bulgare, albanaiSetgrec. Ce n'est'
cal importance. This canilot, therefore, be called
a convincing argument, and it. is no justification
pas la une question de procedure, ce sont des
at all for the Commission's decision.
decisions d'une grande importancepolitique. Par
consequent, cet argument est loind'etre .con;.
vaincaut, et il ne justifie nullement la decision
de la Commission.

.

1 In English,in the original.

1

En anglais dans le texte.

""

2

&

(

In the USSR proposals.$ubmitted for the Security Qouncil's consideration 1 it is suggested
tt'1at Athens be chosen as the headquarters of the
Subsidiary Group, instead of· Salonika. I have
already given.several reasons to prove that this
is the right proposal· to make. Other members
of the Council have disagreed with my proposals
on this point. I shall not repeat the reasons I
have alieady given; I should like to mention
only one additional consideration.
I have already drawn the Security Council's
attention to the fact that the Greek authorities
proved themselves unable to gu~d and protect
the members of the Commission when they were
in Greece. I also ·pointed out that the representatives of the Soviet Union on the Commission,
and also the representatives of certain other
States which were invited to help in the CommiSsion's work, had once found themselves in
. the very difficult position of not being allowed
to mow' about in Greek ten:itory and carry out
their duties normally. In x:eply to this"-::aft~r the'
Sectetary-General had made the necessary inquiry to the Greek Government-a letter was received from the Greek Foreign Minister; it was
distributed to members of the Security C0lJl1cil.2
In substance, this letter contained confirmation
of the fact to which I drew the Security Council's attention, but it was couched in rather arrogant teI'IIlS. Its general pUiportwas,th:at tr'le
incident mentioned by me had 'occurred, but, as
they said, there was nothing unuSual about it.
That was the sense of the Greek. Foreign Minister's letter. In Athens the Greek authorities will
possibly be ~ a better position to protect members of the Subsidiary Group and will create
normal working conditions for the subsidiary
commission. In th.eprovinces the Greek authorities have failed to' create a normal atmosohere
or normal working .~onditions for the Commission.I felt I should again draw. attention to. this
fact as a confirmation of my proposal that Athens and not Salonika'should be chosen as the
headquarters, of the Subsidiary 'Group,
I shall mention yet another important fact,
which we cannot ignore in· considering the question raised in my letter. It has been stated here
that ~~,rep;:'esentatives of the three countriesYugoslaVia, Bulgaria and Albania~agreedtoimplemelit the Security Council's decisions on the
Greek. q~estion. It is perfectly true that these
countri~ .did agree to implement the Security
Council's decisions. But we are discussing ., the
.decisi(.jns,· not ·of the Security Council, but of
the. Commission.. The representatives of these
,'countI'ies, after all, never. undertook to imple'mentthe Commission's' decisions, still less the
decisio~ of the Subsidiary Group. Such an undertaking could hardly be, expected from any
co~trY wh,ich was. not only self-respecting,. but.
whicho had more or less respect for the United
Nations Charter. H we take' 'the view that a

--_.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second .
Year, ~o. 42, 133rd meeting.
2 Ibid., ,Supplement No. 12, Annex 34.
.
'

Mrr

j

Les propositions sovietiques qui ont ete soumises a l'examen du Conseil1 . prevoient notam~·
ment l'etablissement du siege du Groupe subsidiaire a Athenes, et non a Salonique. Je vous
ai deja indique un certain nombre de raisons qui
confirment le bien-fonde .de cette proposition.
D'autres membresdu Conseil qui ont aborde
cette question u'ont pas ete d'accord avee mes
propositions. Je ne veux pas enumerer a nouyeau les raisons que j'ai donnees ,precedemment;
je veux simplement vous presenter un argument
~ui s'ajoute aux precedents.
J'ai deja eu l'occasion d'attirer l'attention du
'Conseil de securite sur le fait que les autorites
grecques se sont montrees.incapables d'assurer la
protection des. membres de la Commission pendimt qu'ils se trouvaient en territoire gree. Je
vous ai signale egalement que les representants
sovietiques a la Commission, afusi que les representants de certains pays invites a prendre part
a ses travaux, se sonttrouves 1:'n jour dans une
situation fort, diffieile, lorsqu'il leur fut interdit
de se deplacer en territoire grec, et ·d'accomplir
normalement leurs fonctions. A la suite de, cela
le Secretaire general adressa auGouvemement
grec une demande d'explications a ce sujet et
il ret;;ut du Ministre des Affaires etrangeres de
Grece une lettre dont le texte a ete distribue aux
membres du Conseil de securite. Quant au fohA,
cette lettre confirmait les faits que j'avais signalesau Conseil de securite, mais dIe etait redigee. SUi' .un ,ton ,assez pmvocan~EllecQnsistait
a dire que le fait sur lequel j'avais attir61'attention d-q Conseil s'6tait effectivement produit,
mais qu'illl'yavait la rien d'extraordinaire. Tel
etait le sens de la lettre du Ministre des Affaires
etrangeres de la Grece. Peut-etre a Athenes, les
autorites grecques seront-eUes davantage en
mesure deproteger les membres du Groupe subsidiaire et de leur assurer des conditions detra.vail normales. En province, les autoritesgrecques
n'ont pas ete ameme de creer une atmosphere
propice au', travail de la Commissi.on.
J'ai cru devoir vous le rappeler pour con. firmer le' bien-fonde .de ma proposition 'qui pre. voit l'etablissement du siege du. Groupe subsidiaire non pas a Salonique, mais a Athenes.
Je voudrais vous signaler un· autre' fait im:portant qu'on ne saurait negliger enexaminant
.la question soulevee par ma'lettre. On a affirme
id que les representants q.e trois pays.-..-la Yougoslav.ie~ la Bulgarie' et l'Albanie~s'etaient
declares pretsa executer les decisionsdri Conseil
de securite relatives a la question grecque. Hest
parfaitement exact que,ces pays' ont consenti a
appliquer les decisions du Conseil de securite.
Mais ce sont les decisions de, la Commission. que nous examinons en ce moment, et non pas i:elles
du Conseil de securite. Or~ lesrepresentants de
ces pays ne se sont jalllais engages a executer les
decisions de la Commission, et encore moins
celles, du Groupe subsidiaire. On nesaurait demander a un pays"qui se respecte -lui.meme, et·
qui respecte tant soitpeu la Charte, de prendre
sur lui un' engagement de ce genre, Si nous 'ac-

--Vou- lesProces-verbaux officielsdu Conseit de se- '
1

curiti, Deuxieme Annee, No 42, 133eme seance.
2 Ibid., SupplemeIlt No 12, AnIil?xe34.

r:~~~W~~isallowed t~ ParticiP~t~ in' ~~... C~Ptions le principe qu'un P:YS adnm, pour telle

f

.

discussion of a question in the Security Council
must implement the decisions not only of the Security Council, but also those of any subsidiary
body which m~y be created by the Security
Council to assist it, we will then arrive at the
completely absurc :onclusion that every such
country must implement not only the Security
Council's decisions, but also those of any subsidiary group or commission. Such a situation
cannot be justified either by the Charter of the
United Nations or by its purposes and principles.

on telle q~estion, a. prec.dre part aux debats du
Conseil de securite doit respecter au· meme titre
que les resolutions du Conseil, les decisions de
tout organe subsidiaire pouvant etre cree par
celui-ci, nous aboutirions a. cette conclusion absurde que· chacun de ces pays doit mettre en
application non seulement les decisions du Gonsell, mais aussi celles de tout groupe subsidiaire
ou de toute commission. Ni la Charte, ni les buts
et principes de rOrganisation des Nations Unies,
ne sauraient le justifier.

Hence, this argument is completely unfounded .
and it must be dropped. Countries must assist
the Security Council and implement its decisions, but ·not those of some group or commission, still less those of some subsidiary group
which is· an off-shoot of the original commission
or group. The farther away the sub-commission
or group is from the Security Council, the harder
it is to hold that a country is required to implement the. decisions of such a subsidiary body.
Even the decisions of the original subsidiary
body-and still less the decisions of a subsidiary
organ of that subsidiary body-·are not binding
within the meaning of Article 25 of the United
Nations Charter.

Par consequent, cet argument est denue de
tout fondement et tombe de lui-meme. C'est au
Conseil de securite que les Etats doivent accorder
leur aide, ce sont les decisions du Conseil qu'ils
doivent appliquer, et non celles cl'un group..~ ou
d'une commission quelconque, et encore moins
celles d'un groupe subsidiaire qui s'est cree par
bourgeonnement, a. partir d'un groupe ou d'une
.commission formes anterieurement. Plus ce
groupe, ou cette soUS-COmmissiOD_, est eloigne du
Conseil et plus i1 est difficile de soutenir que les
Etats dolvent se conformer aux decisions d'un
tel organe subsidiaire. Meme les decisions d'un
organe subsidiaire du premier degre - et a fortion celles. d'un organesubsidiaire du deuxieme
degre - ne sont pas obligatoires dans le sens de
1'Article 25 de la Cha.&te des Nations Unies.

I felt obliged to point this out simply because
in the·· course of this discussion certain representatives have· tried to 'prove that the Charter
has been infringed and .that a decision of the
Security Council had been disobeyed, though in
actual fact neither has occurred here~ The USSR,.
delegation still maintains tl.e view I expressed
at the "!Jeginning of the discussion of this questi,o~ .and has not changed its attitude towards
the .Commission's decision about delegating its
powers to the Subsidiary Group. These powers
are not deriv~d from either the Security Council'sdecisions or from the nature of the work to
be .done by the Commic;sion' or the Subsidiary
Group setup by the Commission.

Si j'ai juge necessaire d ..1ttirer votre attention
Ia.-dessus, c'est sewement parce que certains
representants avaient soutenu ici, au cams de nos
debats, que nous etions en presence d'une violation de la Charte et d'une insubordination a.
l'egaId du Conseil de securite. En realite, rien
de tel ne s'est produit. La delegation sovietique
s'en tient toujourS au point de vue que j'ai expose au debut de l'examen de cette question et
maintient l'attitude qu'elle a prise quant a. la
decision de la Commission au sujet du mandat
du Groupe subsidiaire. Ce mandat ne repond ni
aux .i'esolutions du Conseil de securite, ni a la
nature du travail que doit assumer la Commission ou le Groupe subsidiaire cree par celle-ci.

Fillallyo .I should like to draw your attention
to the following : wpatever. decision is taken by
the Security.Council on this Greek question, and
whenever it is .t~eIi, the .Commission and the
SubS.i.diary .Grollp should actually concern themselves only .with incidents that may arise. while
the· Commisslon or. the. Subsidiary Group exists.
No one has any right to make use of tJ:.': Commission or the Subsidiary Group in order to deal
withqriestions which in actual fact have' no directbearing onincider.ts.· TIlls is. "~e viev. -and
th(;re can be none other-taken by.·the Governmentsinterestedinthis matter,namely, those of
'Yugo~ayia,. ~ulgariaand. Alb$'ia. This. is theomy way. of .statiJ:lg thequestion.-It corresponds
also to. the· SecUrltyCouncil's-decisioDs and. to
the applications mad~ to the Security Council
regarding the' question raised· originally by the
Greek.Government. It finds its· warrant.in the·
Ul1ited Nations Charter,wh'ich should be our
guide
considering such questions.

Pour conclure, je veux attirer vOtre attention
sur le fait suivant: quelle que soit la decision
que prendra le· Cdnseil de securite sur la question
grecque qui fait l'ohjet de notre examen, et
quelle que soit la date a laquelle cette decision
sera. prise, la Commission et le Groupe subsidiaire '
ne devront s'occuper. que des incidents qui pour:raient se produire. pendant la duree de lenr
mandat. Personne n'a le droit d'utiliser la Commission. ou le Groupe subsidiaire en vue .d'eiudier
des ,q,uestions qui n'ont en .realite auctin rapport
diiect av-ec les incidents. Tel est egalement le
point de vue des Gouvemementsinteresses a cette
question -·la . Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie. n ne peutd'ailleursen ewe autrement.
La .question ne .se pose pas autrement, Cela
repond aux :resolutions du Conse~ Je securite
aussi bien qu'alatftcheque doit accomplirce
deInier pOUf Cc qui est de la question soulevee.
en son temp~ pas le Gouvemement gz-ec.Cela
est conforme a. la Charte des Nations TImes dont
nous devons nous insRirer en examinant de.s
.questions de cette. nature.

cm.

--

/

·s-III'l·Ii1---------'-------~---

Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): In order to justify the choice of At!leD.S
as the seat of the Subsidiary Group, the r irl.:··
sentative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Repub~
lics said that the Greek Government has shov.:n
itself incapable of providing for the safety ,of
. the members of the Commission of Investigation.
I should like to state ,that on his departure
from Greece the Chairman expressed the Com~
mission's gratitude to the Greek Government for
all the facilities which had been accorded the
latter in the accomplishment of its mission.
It is true that the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics made certain cnm~
plaints in a telegram addressed to the Greek Government and reproduced in document S/315.1
These complaints, however, were refuted. The
true facts are set forth in my letter to the
Seci'etary~Generai.of the United Nations and are
reproduced in document S/315, Addendum 1.2

\.1.

DENDRAMIS

(Grece): Pour justifier le

" r Athenes comme siege du Groupe sulr

~..uaire, le representant de 1'Union sovietique a
dit que le Gouvernemen'C helIenique s'est avere
ID-<:apable d'assurer la protection des membres
de la Commission d'enquete.

Pour toute reponse, je desire declarer que le
President de la Commission, au moment de son
depart de Grece, a exprime au Gouvernement
helIenique les remerciements de la Commission
pour toutes les facilites accordees a cette de-.rrllere
dans l'accompllssement de sa mission.
n est vrai que le representant de l'Union
sovietique a formule certaines plaintes, qui ont
ete communiquees au Gouvemement grec dans
un teIegramme reproduit au document S/3151 •
Ces plaintes, cependant, ont ete refutees. Les faits
exacts sont exposes dans la Iettre adressee par
moi au Secretaire general des Nations Unies, et
reproduite.au document S/315, Addenda 12 •

\

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): La delegation de l'Australie desirerait
que 1'on precisftt une ou deux des declarations
qui ontete faites aujourd'hui. Elle trouve que
1'0n a tendance·a laisser entendre que le Groupe
subsidiaire a ete cree par la Commission d'enquete. Or, il a cte constitue par le Conseil de
securii:e. Un des arguments que l'DD a avances
est que la Commission a pris une certaine deci.sion. Je n'ai pas tres bien compris de queUe decision il s'agit, mais les representants de la
Yougoslavie et' de .1'Albanie, ainsi que M. Gro~
myko. a 1'instant, ont declare que les pouvoirs
donnes au Groupe subsidiaire etaient plus etendus que ceux que le Conseil de 'securite avait
conferes a la Commission. Mais le representant
sovietique a declare ensmte que les deux organes .
.
disposaient des memes pouvoirs et attributions.
Nous desirons que cc point soit eclairci sans
equivoque.
There are three qmilifications to those powers,
n y a trois reserves essentielles a.cespouvoirs,
mais il y a, en outre, un point extremement im~
but further, there is one very important matter.
portant. Quel· a ete le pouvoir essentiel, lepouWhat was the great power, the overriding power
given by the Security Council to the 'Commission
voir capital donne par le Conseil de securite a
la Commission d'enquete, unpouvoir auquelni
of Investigation, to which no r~erence whatever
has been made by any member of this Council
les membres de ce ConseiJ. ni les orateurs que
nor by the speakers I have referred to, the Iilatj'ai meJ;ltionnes n'ont.fait lamoindre allusion,
ter,with whichwe have'~_been concerned? It
alors qu'en realite, c'est la question qui nous
preoccupe tous? C'esFle pouvoir devolu a la
is to report OIl these incidents artd to make pro':
posals and ,recommendations to -us for their soluCommission de faire rapport sur ces incidenm et
tion. That is the big issuebefox-e us.
de nous presenter des propositions et des recom"i'
mandationsen vue de lenr solution. C'est la, en
effet, la question importantequi est.devant:ll0us.
- It has been said that 'the ,Subsidiary Group
On a dit queces memes. pouvoirs ont ete ·dele..
has been given those same powers. Nothing of
goes an Groupe subsirHaire. Il-n'en est nen. a
the kind. It is clearly laid down ,that the Group 'ete clairement precise queIe Groupe n'est charge
is to investigate only certain iricidents, to hear
d'enqueter .que sur certains .incidents, d'entendre
evidence only on certaininc~dents,and to report
des. temoignages que sur certains incidents et de
on them. There is another distinction.' The . faire r~pport a leur liujet.
y aune autre' re~
Grc.mpjs:Qdt to -report tothisGounciI,~is the . serve: a la difference de la Commission pleniese,
case with the full Commission, but to the Com- . le Groiipe doit faiie rapport non paS a ceCon..
mission.o11ly. ').'hereisaverygreat diffetence:
seil, mais seuleroent,a la Commission. C'estla
The powers.,arre not the s¥1e... The Subsidiary
une tres grande difference. Les pouvom nesQnt
Group has neither right nor authority to make
pas les rn.cmes. Le Groupe subsidiaire n'a .nHle

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): My delegation
_would like to clarify one or two of the state~
ments that have been made today. It seems to
my delegation that there has be~.a tendency to
suggest that the Subsidiary Group was set up by
the ComwJssion of L"lvestigation. It was set up
by the Security Council. One of the arguments
used was that the Commission made a certain
de~on. I am not quite sure what that decision
refers to, but the representatives of, Yugoslavia
and Albania, and just now Mr. Gro'llyko, stated
. that the powers given to the Subsidiary Group
were greater than those given by the' Security
Council to' the Co:mmission. The Soviet representative went on to say that both bodies were
enjoying the same powers and functions. We
wish to make this point very clear.
'

n

n

:1§eeofficia~ Records.·of ,the Security Council. Second
Ye:r••§upplement No.• 12, Annex 34; .. ,.
. , .,Ibt·,;.8~c~ItdYear.SupplementNo. 12, Annex 35.

-tVoirlesProces-verbaux officielsdu Conseilde~e­
cu-rite.Deuxieme Annee, Supplement. No ·12. Annexe i~4•
2 Ibid.• Supplement No 12, AnneXt' 35.
.

926
any proposals or recommendations. Therefore,
the whole argument that it was given the same
powers, or even greater powers, falls completely
to the ground.
I shall not refer to the rt"mark made about
inconsistency. But if I have a statement in black
and white that the Subsidiary Group cannot
report on future incidents, and two pages later
another statement that it shall report on future
. incidents as and when they arise, surely that is
not imagination or else we do not understand
the written word. Howc:ver, that is only incidental.
I should like to refer to the resolution proposed by the representative of Syria. I agree with
the Soviet representative when he says that we
would, in fact, be recognizing -;'wo commissions if
we should pass that resolution; namely, one
Commission which is at the moment a migratory one or in the process of migrating, and the
other one which has actually been established
and is operating. Indeed, this proposed resolution states that. "the Group is to continue exercising the same functions assigned to the Commission by the Security Council in its resolution
of 19 December 1946," I have already indicated
that the Commission and the Group do not have
the same attributes. The Group has very limited
ones.
The resolution further states: " ... instruct the'
four Balkan States concerned ..." The Coinmission never instructed them; the Council. never
h"1Structed them; the Council just invited them.
In my opinion, this provision is quite unnecessary. We think it would cause a lot of confusion.

£&

droit ni le pouvoir de presenter des propositions
et recommandations. Ainsi donc s'evanouit toute
l'argumentation selon laquelle il a re~u lies pouvoirs identiques, ou meme plus etendus.
Je ne parlerai pas du reproche d'illogisme,
mais quand on a, noir sur blanc, une declaration disant que le Groupe subsidiaire ne peut
faire rapport sur de futurs incidents, et que, deux
pages plus loin,. une autre declaration affirme que
ce Groupe fera rapport sur de futurs incidents
au fur et a mesure qu'ils se produiront, a coup
sur ce n'est pas un effet de l'imagination, ou
alors nousne comprenons pas ce que nous lisons.
Mais je n'insisterai pas sur ce point.
Je voudrais m'etendre sur la resolution presentee par le representant de la Syrie. Je suis
d'accord avec le representant sovietique lorsqu'il
dit qu'en adopta..llt cette resolution, nous reconnaitrions, el.. fait, deux commissions: une commission volante appelee a se deplacer ouen voie
de deplacement, et une autre qui a ete effectivement creee et qui exerce ses activites en ce mo":
ment meme. En verite, la resolution proposee
declare que le "Groupe doit continue.r a exercer
les memes fonctions que celles assignees a la
Commission par le Conseil de securite dans sa
resolution du 19 decembre 1946". I'ai deja in,,:
dique que les attributions de la Comniission et
celles du Groupe ne sont pas les memes. Le mandat du Groupe est tres limite.
La resolution declare plus loin: " ... prescrire
aux quatre Etats balkaniques interesses ...". Ni
la Corr>.mission ni le Conseil ne leur ont jamaiS
prescrit quoi que ce soit; le Conseil s'est contente de les inviter. I'estime done que cette <Usposition est parfaitement inutile. Nous crayons
qu'elle creerait beaucoup de confusion.
Il y a, selon nous, une difference tres mitte
entre la Coinmissio!1 d'enquete et le Groupe subsidiaire er. ce qui concerne limrs pouvoirs et leurs
limitations.
Pour ce qui est du choix de Salonique comme
siege du Groupe subsidiaire, la Commission devait prendre cette decision..Le Secretariat vo~lait
savoir ouse trouverait le siege. L'experience a
montre que Saloniqueetait le meilleur endroit
d'ou 1'0n pouvaitcohduire les operations. Pour
reporidre au representant de la Pologne, je dirai
que si l'on achoisi Salonique, c'est que,pour se
rendre d'Athenes a la frontiere, i1 faut passer par
SaIonique. Si le Groupe s'installe a Salonique, il
peut gagner, la fronti~e en uneheure. S'il est
instalIe a Athenes, iI Iui faudra deux jours.

<

In our opinion, there is a very clear distinction
between the powers and limitations of the Commissionof Investigation and those of the Subsidiary Group.
As regards the selection of Salonika as head- .
quarters· for 'the Subsidiary Group, that was a
decision which the Conunission had to make.
The Secretariat wanted to know where the headquarters would be.· It found from its own practice and experience· that Salonika was the best
place from w4ich to conduct. operations. In
reply, to the representative of Poland, the whole
point of selecting Salonikawas that, in otder to
reach the frontier from Athens, it is necessary to
go through or to Salonika. If the Group is sta_
tioned at Salonika, it can reach the frontier
wi.thin an hour; if it is stationed in Athens, the
. trip takes days.
Que l'e~quete puisse etre menee rapidement,
Speedy investigation is the whole essence of
voila le point capital~Aussi estimons-nous que le
this question. For those reasons, we feel that the
Groupe subsidiaire, telqu'il est actuellement·
Subsidiary Group has now been formally con~
cree, a desormais une existence officielle. Il foncstituted. It is actually operating and conducting
tionne etenquete effectivement, suivant les
investigations under the terms of reference and
instructions given to it by the Coinmission.. It . termes de son mandat et les instructions que lui
a donnees la Commission. Si l'ons'avisaita prewould result in a completely anomalous. position
sent de modifier ce mandat,on creerait une. siang. in hopeless confusion if those terms ofreftl1ation· tout' a fait anormale ·.et il eri resulterait
erence were now altered. The Group would.· not
UIle confusion sans .issue.. Le Groupe ne saurait
know wh~.re it stood.
plus a quoi s'en tenir.
You will recall that,·. af the. meeting of .the
Vous vous rappeUerez,qu'a la seance duConCouncil OIl 18 April the French delegation, I
seil du 18 avril; la delegation fran9aj.se, si je ne~

a

1nl
believe, raised a question concerning the instructions to be given to the Subsidiary Group, and
the Commission was given a free hand within
the limits of its own terms of reference. Naturally, the Commission could not send the Subsidiary
Group to Greece without giving it some instructions, and, in issuing those directives, it acted
fully within its rights and duties, and correctly
interpreted the spirit and intention of the resolution of the Security Council of 18 April 1947.

me trompe, a souleve la question des instructions
a donner au Groupe subsidiaire, et que la Commission a re~u toute latitude d'agir dans le cadre
de son propre mandat. Bien entendu, la Commission ne pouvait envoyer le Groupe subsidiaire
en Grece sans lui donner quelques instructions,
et, en agissant ainsi, la Commission n'a fait que
rester dans les linutes de ses droits et de ses
devoirs, et a interprete comme il convenait j'esprit et le sens de la resolution adoptee le 18 avril
1947 par le Consei1 de securite.

Mr. KAHREMAN YLLl (Albania) (translated
from French ): In my first statementl, while set-

M. KAHREMAN YLLI (Albanie): Dans ma
premiere declaration\ tout en exposant le point
de vue de la delegation albanaise, je me suis
efforce de dissiper tous malentendus que pouvait faire naitre l~ probleme pose. A une seance
ulterieure2, certains representants ont interprete
notre attitude comme une opposition aux Nations Unies.
Je precise qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'une opposition ou d'un refus de cooperation. En toutecette
question, nous avons apporte notre aide a la
Commission d'enquete. Pretendre le contraire
serait injuste et incompatible avec notre desir de
paix et de collaboration.
.
Mais en tant que partie interessee au probleme, nous avons le droit, peut-etre le devoir,
de demander tous eclaircissements voulus sur des
decisions, a notre avis, non confonnes a la
Charte, ainsi que leur definition exacte.
n a ete dit id que le.ma,ndat de la Commission avait ete. transfere au Groupe subsidiaire ~
alors qu'il a ete en fait modifie - et que le
Groupe ne constituait pas un nouvel organe.

ting forth the Albatrian delegation's point of
view, I endeavoured to dispel all misunderstandings which might arise in the problem before us. At a later meetintr certain representatives interpreted our attitude as opposition to the
United Nations.
I should like to say that there was· no question of opposition or refusal to co-operate. In this
whole matter we have given our assistance to the
Commission of Investigation. Jt would be unjust
and incompatible with our desire for peace and
collabora.tion to allege the contrary.
As an interested party in this problem, however, we have· the right, perhaps the duty, to ask
for any explanations desired on decisions whiCh,
in our view, are not in conformity with the
Charter, as well as an exact definition of them.
It .has be~"1 said here that the Commission's
terms of reference had been transferred to a Subsidiary Group-while in fact alterations had
been·made in them-and that the Group was not
a new body.
These alterations are set forth in points 1, 2
and 3 of par~graph V of the instructions issued
by the Commission on 29 April. Careful study
shows that they do not constitute reservations
to the terms of reference. proper; .they may be
considered as general instructions but not as reservations. In particular, point 3 refers to a question of procedure bearing· on thewotk of the
Subsidiary Group itself, and in no way concerns
the ori~al terms ofreference.
Basically, all the instructions set forth in paragraph· V only. amount to, a· change .in date; in
oth~ words, instead of theterms of reference being dat~d 19 December 1946 there are now the
same terms of reference but taking effect from
22 March 1947. I note this date of 22 March; it
,1s.in .fact the date on. which . the Commission .of
Investigation left 'Greece, and it is from this date
that the other body started its activities. Point 3
mentioned above, apart from all the other reservations,resolves itself into a change of date.
In these circumstances, the body to<which the
terms oheference were ttansferrep automatically
becomeea· hew. body identical with the· original
Co~on;and by this fact, and from this moment, the subsidiary character Qfthe Group disappears.
'SCe Official Rt1cords of the Security Council, Second

Year. No. 41.
1lllliiit136th Jfe~ti~t_

'

, ,.

Ces modifications sont exprimees aux points
1, 2 et 3 du paragraphe V des instructions dotlnees par la Commission au Groupe subsidiaire
le 29 avril dernier. Un examen attentif montre
qu'il ne s'agit pas de reserves au mandat
proprement dit; ces modifications peuvent ctre
considerees comme des instructions generales,
mais non comme des reserves. En particulier, le
point 3 se re£ere a une question de procedure
portant sur le travail au sein du Groupe subsidiaire, et ne concerne en rien ·le mandat
original.
.
Au .fond, toutes les· instructions enoncees au
paragraphe V ne representent qu'un changement
de date; autrement dit, au lieu d'avoirun. mandat en date du 19decembre 1946,(l!2 a maintenant le llleme mandat, maisayant ptis effet a
dater du 22
1947. Je n.ote cette date du
22· mars;. en dIet, c'est.a ce. moment que la
Commission d'eIlquete aquitte la Grece,eta
partir de . cette date que l'autre prgane a tom- '
menceson activite. Le point 3r.J.entionne plus
haut mis. a part, toutes 'les •autresreserves· se reduisent done .a un changement de date•...
Dans ces l.~••Jitions, l'org:me auquel, a
transfere le mandat devient automatiquementun
nouvel· organe, identique·. a la pr~~e ..Commission;dece fait.. et desce moment, le cqr~~tere
subsidiaire du Groupe cesse d'~ter.

mars

6te

~,Voir Ies .ProceNerbau:.: officit1ls du Conseil d~ $1·
.. cu·rite;DeuxiemeAnn~e. No 4-1.
1 Voirla 136etne seance.
. ...

922
We cannot agree to such a decision. It oversteps by far the sense of the resolution of 18
April laying down the subsidiary character of the
'Group. The Commission could not give new
terms of reference in this case.
It has also been said that any attempt to limit
the activity and competence of the Subsidiary
Group would only prevent it from attaining its
objectives. For our part, we can only regard this
object as subsidiary, While it is alleged that this
is· not a new body, efforts are being made to
give the Group all the functions of the original
Commission. There is here a contradiction. '
Either the Group is a new body, ceasing thereby to be subsidiary; or it remains a subsidiary
body within the meaning of the resolution of 18
April 1947. In the latter case~ it cannot be invested with the whole of the Commission's original terms of reference, and terms of reference
should therefore be drawn up for the new body.
I have already mentioned the oFPosition displayed by the Commission of Investigation to
the participation of the Albanian representative
at meetings which particularly concerned our
country. The Australian representative on the
Security Council said that this state of affairs resulted from the resolution of 19 December 1946
which had not provided rules of procedure for
the Commission of Investigation, and that that
Commission was therefore entitled to lay down
its own rules of procedure.
Without disputing the Commission's right, we
cannot agree with the attitude actually adopted.
This attitude is not in conformity either with the
normal procedure Clr with the principles of the
Charter. Even if an omission in the resolution of
19 December 1946 was made, this does not give
the Commission the right to depart from the
spirit of the Charter.
It is our aim that every step forward should
be in harmony with the purposes of the United
Nations Charter.
. At the one hundred and thirty-fifth meeting"
speaking of the Subsidiary Group, the Greek
representative said that it' should· proceed to the
frClntier z,one in order to inquire into the new
incidents, and, in fact, that it should go there as
soon "as possible lest the traces of these incidents
should have disappeared.. '
The Greek Government is evidently preparing
acalllpaign of provocation with aims which are
f:f.'.l'~laps nClt foreign to the very. idea of the Subc:lidiary Group. To put an end to this campaign,
it would be sufficient to recotnmend· that the
Greek GOvernment give up these provocations.
The traces referred to are not'invisible; they are
very much alive; they ar~ all over Greece; they
have" all intemal origin; .they are to be found in
the,. north, the south, ,the centre, the Peloponnesus,. Crete, Wherever the Greek' people continues its ~esistanceagainst a Govemment which
is still .,afraid of traces and invisible spirits, in

i.

.

Or, nollS ne donnons pas notre accord a une
telle decision; elle depasse de loin le sens de la
resolution du 18 avril precisant le caractere subSidiaire du Groupe. La Commission ne pouvait
'pas conferer, en l'occurrence, un nouveau
mandat.
a ete egalement dit que toute tentative en
vue de limiter I'activite et la competence du
Grou~ subsidiaire aurait pour resultat d'empecher ce demier d'atteindre son but. Nous ne
voyons a ce but, quant a nous, qu'un caractere
subsidiaire. Or, tout en pretendant qu'il ne s'agit
pas ici d'un nouvel organe, on cherche a attribuer au Groupe toutes les fonctions de la Commission premiere. Il y a done ici contradiction.
, Ou le Groupe devient un nouvel organe, cessant par la meme d'etre subsidiaire, ou il dOlt
rester organe subsidiaire, au sens de la resolution du 18 avril 1947. Dans ce dernier cas, il
ne peut etre investi de la totalite de I'ancien
mandat de la Commission, et il convient done
de determiner le mandat du nouvel organe.
J'ai deja mentionne l'opposition manifestee
par la Commission d'enquete a l'egard de la
participation du representant de l'Albanie aux
seances qui int6re;;saiellt particulierement notte
pays. Le representant de l'Australie au Conseil
de securite a dit qu'un tel etat de choses decoulait
de la resolution du 19 decembre 1946, laque1le
n'a pas prevu le reglement interieur de la Commission d'enquete, et que la Commi'SSion etait
done en droit de determiner elle-meme son'reglement inteneur.
Sans contester ce droit de la Commission, nous
ne pouvons pas expx:imer notre accord quant a
I'attitude adoptee en l'occurrence. Cette attitude
ne repond ni a la procedure normale, ni aux
principes de la Uharte. Si un point quelconque
a eteomis dans la resolution du 19 decembre
1946, cela ne donne pas pour autlint a la Commission le droit de s'eloigner de l'esprit de la
Charte.
Nos efforts tendent a ce que chaque pas en
avan,t soit en harmonie avec les buts de la Charte
des Nations Unies.
A la' cent-trente-cinquieme seance du Conseil
de securit61, le represent~t de la Grece, parlant
du Groupe subsidiaire, disait que ce Groupe
devait se renclre dans .la zone frontiere afin d'enqueter sur les nouveaux incidents, et meme qu'il
devait s'Y' rendre le plus tat possible' de peur
que les traces de ces incidents' n'aient disparu.
n apparait que le Gouvemement grec' prepare
une campagne de provocations' dans des buts
qui ne sont peut-efrc pas et.-angers a l'id6ci meme
du Groupe subsidiaire. PClur faire cesser cette
eampagne, il suffirait de recommander au Gouvemement grec de. renoncer a ces provocations.
Les traces dont on parle ici ne sontpas invisibles; elles sont bien vivantes; elles se trouvent
partout.en,.,.Grece; elles ont une Clrigine interieure; onIes retrouve au Nord, au Sud, <J,U
Centre, dans le Peloponnese, en Crete; partout
ou le peuple grec continue sa resistance contre
un Gouvemement qui, malgre les offensives

n

See Official Records of the Security, Cduncil.SecQnd
1 Voir les Procds.verbaux officiels du Conseil d. ..l..c;u;;.;rj;;;te~.~D;e:UX1:·e:(m:e;".A=nn:e:e,~N::o::.:4
t~
I I I_Yiiei~i"IIli!~io•••4ii!'.·.*.. M.'.'.,.,
il:lllir:b:::i:idlb- ,
r md
,

.1

• III

_...

III

•••

-

111·

•

• •
'

.
_
.
"

_.

•

&~
_

p

923
spite of successive offensives by the Greek army
and gendarmerie. Any impartial person could
easily find out what the problem is.

As to the insecurity of the Commission during
the investigation, which has been mentioned
here, I should like to recall that the liaison officers who accompanied a sub-commission into
Greek territory were obliged to remain in their
cars because Albanian quislings and criminals
had been brought deliberately to the spot to
demonstrate against them. I should mention that,
in this case, our liaison officer made a formal
protest to the members of the sub-commission.
M. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I wish to brieflyexplain why I made this proposal, and to answer
certain views which have been expressed by the
representative of Australia. He thought that my
proposal would mean the establishment of two
commissions. On the contrary, I never meant
that there should be two commissions; indeed, I
intended to correct a technicality which existed
in the present situation~ I consider that there is
only one Commission.
It is fortunate that each Member State represented on the Commission had nore than one
represen.tative, so that it was able toconstitu'te
itself into two groups: one, a drafting group to
prepare the report on the cases alrea,dy examined, the other to continue on the spot the
same functions which were assigned to the Commission by the Security Council, as was decided.
The second group was called the Subsidiary
Group.
The fundamental function is exercised. by' the
'Subsidiary G~oup, and the oth4~r group is simply
a drafting. committee derived from the Commission itself. That does not mean that two commissions exist.
• In the present case, if we do not consider the
situation in that' manner, ther~ will be two
bodies, one of them working as the main Commission in Geneva, and the other simply a subsidiary group, derived from it,. and having
limited functions. I sliould like the same Com'mission to continue to work; when its members
finish drafting their report, they could join the
others or return to their countries if they wish, or
come' here, since they. have been invited to ap.pear here by a proposal from the Australian and
the United States delegations.· If the Commission comes here,. it will meet .here, and the representatives of all the States will be present. But
in this case, if we consider that· the-main COlllmission which is charged with· inspection and
~vestigation is still on the· spot and that this is
lUl11ply a drafting committee a<:cording to the
pr!nciple of the division of .labour, it cannot be
Satd that two commissions. exist.
The report we are awaiting will be the first
report that· we shall receive. There will be another.report.on the incidents which are to be investigated later on, The report which is expected
to· arrive here in ~ few days is the first report;
~ther would be made by the ComIJlission
__
had

successives de l'armee et de la gendarmerie
grecques, redoute toujours les··traces et les esprits
invisibles. Toute personn~ impartiale decouvre
facilement de quoi il s'agit.
Quant a l'insecurite de la CoIlUlliE&on au
COUl'S de l'enquete, dont on a parIe ici, je tiens a
rappeler que les agents de liaison qui accompagnaient une Sous-Commission en territoire
grec se sont vus obliges de rester dans les voitures
parce que des quislings albanais et des criminels avaient ete amenes deIib&bl1ent sur place
pour manifester contre eux. Je signale que, dans
ce cas, notre agent de liaison protesta aupres des
membres de la Sous-Commis..cnon.
M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) ttraduit de l'anglais) :
Je desire m'expliquer brievementsur les raisons
de ma proposition et repondre a certaines objections eIevees par le representant de l'Australie.
Celui-cl est d'avis que ma proposition, si elle
etait adoptee, aurait pour resultat de creer deux
commissions. Or, je n'ai jamais ell l'intention
de creer deux commissions; fai voulu seulement.
corriger un· vice technique inherent a la situation. J'estime qU'il n'y a qu'un~ commission.
11 est heureux que chaque Etat Membre represente aupres de la Commission ait dispose de
.plus d'un representant; la Commission a pu ainsi
se scinder en deux groupes:un groupe de redaction charge de preparer le rapport sur les
cas deja examines, et un autre groupe charge,
comme il a' ete decide, de poursuivre sur place
le mandat confie a la Commissipnpar le Conseil de securite. Ce second groupe a eteappeIe
le Groupe subsidiaire.
La fonction fondamentale estexercee par le
Groupe subsidiaire; l'autre groupen'cst qu'un
simple comite de redaction issude la Commission
elle-meme. Cela ne signifie pas qu'il existe deux
commissions.
Dans le cas present, si nous ne considerons pas
la situation sous ct:t angle,. il y aura deux organes,' l'un travaillant en tcmt que commission
principale a Geneve, et l'autre :un simple groupe
subsidiaire, issu de la Col1lIlliss:'on et assumant
des fqnctions limitees. Je desirera~s que la meme
Commission continue. son trava}l; quand ses
membi'e§ auront termine la redactio:ndu rapport,
ils pourront soit rejoindre les autre'! ou rentrer
dans ·leurs pays s'ils le desirent, saIt venir'ici
comrne les y a invites une propositioltpresentee
par les deIega:tions de l'Australieet des EtatsUnis. Si .la Commission vient ici,····elle se reunira
ici,et les· representants de ~ous les Etatsseront
presents. Mais dans ce cas, .sinousconsiderons
que laCotnmission prlncipale, qui est chargee
d'inspecter et d'enqueter, demeure toujours sur
place, et que l'autregroupe n'est qu'unsimple
comite de red~ction cree en vertu du principe
de la division du travail, on ne peut pas dire '.
qu'il. rociste deux commissions.
Le rapport que. nous .attendons est le premier
que nous allonsrecevoir. Il y en aura un autre
.sur les incidents qui devront etreexamines ,plus
tard. Le rapport qui doit nous .parvenir d'ici
quelques joursest le premier rapport; l'autre
.• 'sera redige par la Commission elle-meme.

The Commission does not depend on individuals. We consider it as a commission on
which all the members of the Security Council
are represented. It is not necessary that all the.
members of the drafting committee should be
here. They may leave or they may stay. We are
not concerned with them as individuals. We
know that there is a commission continuing its
work in the area, .on the spot, in conformity
with the ·decision of the Security Council.
The representative of Australia made a remark about the word "instruct." I am ready to
amend my draft to read "invite" or "request."
That does not change the situatiun.
.
Those are the remarks I wanted to make.
The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakers on
my list and, we shall therefore proceed to take
a vote. I shall take the proposals in the order of
their submission.
The first resolution is the one su.bmitted by the
delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which reads as follows:
.
cCHavingdiscussed the decision taken by the
Commission of Investigationconceming Greek
Frontier Incidenf!l 'on 29 April 1947, about the
.terms of reference of the Subsidiary Group of the
-."
CommiSsion.
.cThe Security Council resolves
"1. That the Subsidiary Group will carry out
the investigation of facts only on the instructions
of the Commission in each separate case and will
report to the Commission about .the results of
such investigation;
.
"2. That the Subsidiary' Group will have its
headquarters in .Athens· and will carry out such
functions as' the Commission of.' the Security
Council will assign to the Subsidiary Group in
accordance with the provisions of the above
.
. paragr.aph 1;
"3. That the Subsidiary Group will cease its
activity with the liquidation' of the Commission
~
..'
itself;
"4.. That the Commission should bring its decision on the terms of reference of the Subsidiary
Group. UI conformity' with this decision. of Jhe
Security Council."
.
,..4 vote was taken with the followlng results:
Votes/or:
Poland
Union' of Soviet Socialist Republics
.JTotes against:
Australia
Belgium
Br(.l.Zil
China
United Kingdom
.United States of America.
. Abstentions:
Colc,mbia
Fr~ce

,.Syria
Mr.EL"KHOURl. (Syria) : . . lhave a point of
order: if,the proposal doesltothave seven votes

Ce ne sont pas les iridividualites qui comptent dans la CoInmission. n s'agit pour nollS
d'une €;ommissior ou se trouvent representes
tous les Etats membres du Conseil de securite. n
n'est pas necessaireque tous les membres du
comite de redaction soient ici. Ils peuvent ou
s'en aller ou rester. Nous ne nous interessons pas
a euxen tant qu'individus. Nous savons qu'il
existe une commission qui poursuit ses travaux
dans la region, sur place, conformement a la
decision prise par le CQnseil de securite.
Le representant, de l'Australie a fait une observation a propo~ du mot "prescrire". Je suis
dispose a amender mQn projet de maniere a lui
faire dire "inviter" ou "prier". Cela ne change
rien a la situation.
Telles sont les remarques que je voulais faire.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : 11 n'y a
plus d'orateurs inscrits;. nous allons done proceder au vote. Je presenterai les propositions dans
I'ordre dans lequelle,Conseil en a ete saisi.
La premiere est ce11e qu'a presentee la -delegation de I'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, et qui est amsi conSiue:
"Ayant examine la decision prise le 29 avril
1947 par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus le long de la frontiere grecque
relativement au mandat du Groupe subsidiaire
de la' Commission,
ccLe Conseil de securiU decide
"1. Que le Groupe subsidiaire ne procedera a
wleenquete sur des faits que selon les inl'itructions qu'il recevra de la 'Commission poui'c,aque
cas particulier et fera rapport, a la Commission
.sur ·les resultats de ladite enquete;
"2. Que le Groupe subsidiaire aura son siege
a Athenes· et remplira toutes fonctions que la
Commission du Conseil de securite lui assignera,
conformement aux dispositions du paragraphe 1
ci-dessus; (

"3. Que le. Groupe subsidian-e cesserason activite au moment 011 la. Commission elle-meme
sera dissoute;
"4. Que la CommissiCln devra mettre sadecision sur''le' .rnandat du Groupe subsidiaire en
harIIloriie a:vec la~ presente .decision du Conseil
de securite."
Le vote donne les resultats suivants:
V ofent pour:
Pologne
Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques
Votent tontre:
I,
Australie'
Belgiqtte
Bresil
ChIne .
Etats':'Unis .d'Am6rique
Rdyaume-Uni.
S'abstierJ/n,ent:
Colombie
France
Syrle.
M. Er.-KHOURI.(Syrie»(traduit de l'anglais ):
Je dCsiresoulever une question d'ordre. Si la

92B

5
in favour, it is not carried. Therefore, it is not
necessary to ask who is voting against the proposal.

proposition ne reunit pas sept voix, elle n'est
pas adoptee. n n.'est done pas necessaire que le
President demande que1s sont ceu.."C qui vatent
contre la propc,ition.

The' PRESIDENT: That is technically true, but
the Chair finds that the tradition here is to
record the votes both for and against as well as
the abstentions.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Du
point de vue technique, c'est exact; mais le
President estime qu'il est d'usage ici d'enregistrer
tant les votes en faveur de la resolution que les
votes contre, ainsi que les abstentions.
·n y a eu deux voix pour, six voix contre et
trois abstentions.
La resolution presentet' par la delegation de
1'Union .sovietique est dO,nc rejetee.

There were two votes in favour, six against,
and three abstentions.
The resolution submitted by the Soviet delegation is rejected.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): Will the Aus,tralian motion be put to the vote now?

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): La proposition australienne va-t-elie
etre mise aux voix mamtenant?
'
Le PRESIDENT (traduit del'anglais): Oui.

The PRESIDENT : Yes.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): May I make a
short statement?

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): M'autorisez-vous a faire une breve
declaration? .
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de !'ang1ais):
tainement.

The PRESIDENT : Yes.

C~r­

, Colonel HODGSON (Australia): We have
heard from the representatives of Albania, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria that the action and, comments of their liaison officers with the Commission did not imply a refusal to accept the Security Council's decision. They have asked for
clarification and elucidation, and have stated
that it is a question of interpretation as to the
functions of the Commission and of its authority
to frame certain terms of reference.

Le colonel' HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Les representants de l'Albanie, de la
Yougoslavie et de la Bulgarie ont declare que
les mesures prises par leurs agents de liaison et
les observations que ces derniers ont presentees a
la Commission~ ne signifiaient pas' un refns d'accepter la decision duConseil desecurite. Ils ont
demande des eclaircissements et ont ajoute qu'il
s'agissait d'une question d'interpretation portant
sur les fonctioI15 de la Commission et sur sa
,competc::nce pour definir certains termes du mandat a donner an Groupe subsidiaire.
Le fait que la proposition de rUnion sovieFrom the rejection of the propo,sal of the
tique ,a ete, rejetee m'amene a formulerttois
Union'of SovietSoc~alist Republics, three things
conclusions: 1) en rejetant cette proposition; la
,flow: (1) that rejection affirms th~ view of the
majorite des membres du,Comeil affirmeque la
majority' of the members that the Commission
Commission d'enquete a interprete fidelement la
of Investigation did interpret the will and intenvolonte et les intentions dll Conseil; 2) la resolution of the Coun<;il; (2) that the resolution of
the l:;ectirity Council of 18 April is now positively 'tion du Conseil desecurite en date du 18 avril
se trouve maintenant reaffirmee de maniere,
re-affirmed and'stands; (3) that the instructions
definitive et demeure en vigueur; :?) la pr6lente
of the Commission dated 29 April have not been
discusSion n'apas infirme les instructions de la
in~alidatedby this discussion.
Commission en date du 29 avril.
For those reasons,.
,now feel that' there is
En consequence, lions estimonS qu'il n'est plus
no need. for, a forinaJ., motion to that' effect'.iThe
necessaire de present~r uneproposition forme1le
, representatives' of the States concerned-Albania,
acette fin.. I,.es representants des Etats int~resses~
, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, and Greece--have heard
a savoir 1'Albanie, la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarieet
the views of the Security Council. They will, no ' . la Grece, ont entendu le". vues du Conseil' de
securite. A n'en pas douter, ,ils les,transmettront'
doubt,communicate them totheirGovernments,
along with" the recorda! the meetings on this
a·leurs Gouvernementsrespectifs .aveC le. procesverbal des seances ou.. l'c;m '.a discute cet aspect
partic1,llar aspect, of the, Greek question. For
thgse reasons, we think there is no need now to
precis de, la question grecque. Nous ~ommes done
present our motion which had the' effect Ihad
d'avis' ,qu'il n'est "pIns nec.essaired.epresent~r
,~dicated,and I ask for permission to withdraw
uotre proposition qui tendait a 1'effetql.1e j'ai
It.
.
mentionne, et je demande .1'autorisation de la
retirer..
"

we

'The , PRESIDENT: ',I now call on .', the repre-'

s;nt~tive ofth~ Union~ofSoviet Socialist Repub.,

lics;if he wishes to sPeak on thisresolutiori.

IW.nllt..,_ ......~

..,ttillillllt:

........

I.eP~$IDEN'l\,(traduit .de l'anglais): Je
dQnne m~intel1ant la parole aurepresentant de
l'UniondesRepubliques socialistes sovietiques,
s'il, dbJireparler sur cette, resolution.

.- CiliU'«

p

M. GROMYKO (Union d~s Republiques socia~
listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je vou~
drais prendre la parole, non paS pour examiner
la resolution, mais pour examiner la question de
savoir si elle doit ctre mise aux. voix.
Etant donne la situation qUi s'est creee a la
I think that, in view of the situation created
sUite du Fejet de la proposition sovietique, j'esby the rejection of the Soviet Union proposal, we
time que nous devrions ajourner la discussion
should postpone further discussion of this matde cette question; nous ne devrions prendre
ter and should take no decision whatever on the
Australian and Syrian resolutions until the Com- ' aucune decision sur les resolutions australienne
et syr.i.enne avant 'd'avoirexamine le rapport de
mission's report is examined.
la Commission.
On sait que ce rapport doit nous parvenir
As we know, this report is expected in the
d'ici quelques jours. D'apres les renseignements
cow:-ge of the next few days. According to the
que nous a fournis le Secretariat (je ne sais pas
information supplied by the Secreta.-iat-I do
a quel point ces renseignementscorrespondent a
hot kp.ow how correct it is-this report is exla realite), ce rapport devrait nous parvenir le
pected on 3 or 4 June. Apparently, the Com3 ou le 4 join. 11 semble mcme que ·la Commismission is expected to arrive here on 3 or 4 June.
sion doive arriver ici .le 3 ou le 4 juin. 11 se petit
It is possible that the report may be received
ev.en earlier. I suggest that we close our meetipg . done que nous recevions son rapport encore plus
tot. Jepropose donc de lever la seance, et
now and defer further discussion and the adopd'ajourner la discussion, ou la decision quelle
tion of any kind of decision on this question unqu'elle soit, jusqu'a ee que le Conseil de se~urite
til the Commission's report has been considered
ait examine le rapport de la Commission.
by the Security. Council.
Je vous _prie de considerer cela eomme une
I ~ that this be, regarded as a formal.proproposition
que je vous soumets.
~ posal.
¥r. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I still wish
.to speak, not on' the resolution, but on the
question of bringing..it to a vote.
, ' -

The PRESIDENT: According to-our rules of
procedure,the Councfr=should now decide
whether it wishes to postpone this discussion or
to proceed to vote on the Syrian proposal.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Aux
termes de notre reglement'interieur, le Conseil
doit maintenant decider s'il desire remettre la
presente discussion a plus tard, ou s'il faut proceder au vote sur la proposition du representant
de la. Syrie.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY, (Poland): I thank the
President for call1iig on me. I wanted to speak
on the. Australian.motion" but since that motion
has been withdrawn, there is noneed for me to
speak.

. M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de ['an.,
glais): Je remercie le President de m'avoir donne
la parole. J'avais l'intention de discuter laproposition de l'Australie, mais, cette proposition a,yant
ete retiree, mon intervention deVient inutile.

···Mr. JOHNSON (United SJatesof,America): I
M~ JOHNSON (Etats-Unis cl'Am6ique) (-traduit de l'anglais) : Je voudrais appuyerlaproposhould.like to support the proposal of the represition du representant de l'Union des Republisentative of the Union of. Soviet Socialist Republics. I .do not see' what really useful purpose
ques socialistes sovietiques. Je ne voispas a quoi
cQuld be served by having the Council contiIiue . il servirait que le Conseil poursUive une discus~
sion sur la question" grecque, .soit dans son ena .discUSsion on the Greek q'l!estion, either in
semble,soit sur la resolution que nousa presentee·
general or on the particular resolution of the
.
le representant de la Syrie.
.representative of Syria which is before us.
The Council has given its •decision· on the SoLe Conseil,s'estprononce sllrla resolution de
viet resolution," SQ· .that the situation, from :the
I'Umon sovietique,' en sorte que la situation, si
legal point of view, as I understand it, is enje la comprends bien, est parfaitement claire du
tirely .clear. We stanclwhere we stood before the .point de vue juridiql,le. Nous en sommes OU nous
questio~ was brought up,. and the directive given
en etions avant que la questio:o, ne fUt soulevee;
to the Subsidiary· Group by our Commission at
les directives que la Commission a donnees a
Geneva, under the resoluti()n of 18 April, has the
Geneveau Groupe .subsidiaire, conformement
effect of law. Accordingly, there is nothing
a la resolution.du 18. avril, .ant maintenant force
further. todlscuss. As the representative of Ausde loi. 11 ne nous reste done plus ·rien adiscuter.
tralia very •. rightly pointed out, there are attriComme I'atres jU:stem~t fait remarquer le representant de'!,Australie, la· Commission est inbutes.and .powers. ~hich the. Commission has.
which have not been given to the Subsidiary
vestie de 'certames attril:mtionset de certains
. Group. I think it would be unfortunate to enpouvoirs qui n'ont pas ete deIegues au Groupe
large the scope of activity· of the' Subsidiary
subsidiaire. l'estime qu'il setait regrettable d'eIarGroup beyond the poixlt which the Commisgir'kcharnp cl'action du Groupe subsidiair~ au
dela de ce que la Commission' elle-:-mcxne a juM.
,sion'its(1f thought necessary, and that would. be
the ,effect· of the.resolution of' the' Syrian reprenecessaire; or la resolution du representant de
.• la Sytie tendraitprecisement a cette fin.
sentative.
Mr;QaOMYKO (UnionofS'ovietSocialist Republics).: I should like tos.ubmitfor the consideration of the Security Council th~ ,following

M. GROMY1~()-(Union des Republiques sodalistes sovie.'tiq. ue.~)(.tr.adu..z."tde l'anglais.): J.e.· vou~ •. t~
drai& soumettre a.!'examen du Conseil de se- . .'
.

..

.

•••

-------~---···"'9~2'fM-------------

draft resolution which is in accordance with the
statement I have just made:
uThe Security Council resolves
"That further discussion or decision on the
question of the terms of reference of the Subsidiary. Group of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents should
be postponed until such time as the final report
of the Commission is submitted to· the Security
Council."

curite le projet de resolution suivant qui I~t
conforme a la declaration.que je viens de faire:
uLe Conseil de securiU deqide
"Que tout nouveau dc5bat;' ou toute nouvelle
decision, sur la question du mandat du Groupe
subsidiaire de la Commission d'enquete sur les
incidents survenus le long de la frontiere grecque
sera differe jusqu'au momentou la Commission
d'enquete aura presente son rapport final au
Conseilde securite."

The PRESIDENT: I should like to ask the rep-.
.resentative of Syria if he agrees to the postponement of the discussion of his proposal.

. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais demander au representant de la Syrie s'il
consent que la discussion sur sa proposition soit
remise a plus tard.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): Any motion which
refers to the adjournment or postponement of
the ~cussion has priority over anything else.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de.l'anglais):
Toute proposition qui atrait a l'ajournement de
la discussion· a prioriM sur toute autre question.

The PRESIDENT ~ I was going to say that, if it
was agreeable to you, I would declare the motion of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Repuh..
lies unanimously adopted.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de·l'anglais): C'est ce
que j'allais faire lemarquer, et je me propose, si
vous etes d'accord, de declarer que la proposition
de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
est adoptee a I'unammite.

Mr.EL;.KHOURI (Syria): Yes, if it is unanimous.
.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais): .
C'est entendu, it condition qu'il y ait efIectivement unanimite.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I wish to
speak on a point of order,Mr. President.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je desirerais prendre la parole sur un
point d'ordre, Monsieur ·le' President.
La . proposition du representant de I'Umon
so"ietique, avant qu'il ne I'ent formulee par·
ccrit, tendait a' ce que la discussion portant sur
les propositions de l'Australieet de la Syrie fftt
differee jusqu'au moment· ou nousparviendrait
le rapport de la Commission. La proposition de
l'Australie a ete retiree. n ne nous reste done
plus q-iIe la proposition de la' Syrie~
En attendant, les instructions donnees au
Grollpe subsidiaire par la Commission demeurent
valables. La Commission est· investie depleins
pouvoirs et a toute l'autotite voulue.
Nous. etions tout disposes a'appuyer la proposition de l'Union sovietique, mais, telle qu'elle
est redigee,. elle tend a ce que J;10US examinions
le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire. Or, cet. examen a deja pris fin~
,

The motion of t.~e· Soviet representative was,'
before he committed it to writing~ that the discussion .on the Australian and Syrian proposals
should be postpom:d until the report of the Commission had been. received. The Australian proposal has been withdrawn. All that remains on
this question. is the Syrian proposal.
In the me~time,.the·instructionsof the Com:
mission are to be carried out. It has full powers,
full authority.
.
We were' prepared to agree to the Soviet motion; but as it. was written out, the proposal is
. that we should consider the terms of reference.
We are finished with that .consideration. .
Mr.GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republici) (transl(lted from Russian): My draft
resolution states: ."That further discussion or decisioQ. on the question of the terms of reference
of the Subsidiary Group . . . be postponed." I
can see no difference. It would be betterto postpone further discussion and decision on· the
Gree~ problem, in.30 far as the question of the
functions. and powers of the Subsidiary Group is
co~cerned,until the Commission's report is receIved. What is vague' about this? lwould ask
the President to read this text once ~gain. I do
not quite see why" anyone should be confused
about this.
..
.
Mr. LA~FoRD(United 'Kingdom): I' was
under the impression that we had made a decision on the terms of reference of the S';1bsidiary

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russc): Voicice
ql1e j'ai ditdansmon projet de resolution:· "Que
tout nouveaudebat, ou .toute :'1ouvelle .discus..,
sion, sur la question du mandat duGroupe subsidiaire. .; sera diff-ere ...". Je ne vois aucune
difference. Userait bon d'aj01.trner la discussion
ainsi que la decision a prendre sur la question
grecquej pour ce. qui est de la question du man. dat du Groupe subsidiaire, jusqu'a ce que ilous
ayoils re~u le rapport .de.la Commission. Qu'estcequi n'est pasclairdans ce texte? Je voueJrais
demander au President de. le relire encore· une
fois. Je ne comprends pas tres· bien ce qu'ily' a
la·d'incomprehensible.
M. LAwFoRD (Royaume-Uni). (traduit de
l'anglais): J'avais crn compren.dre que nous
.. avions deja pris une decision concernant le man..

Group. When I see Mr. Gromyko's new resolution,. it looks now as if we are leaving the whole
questi,on in the air. I certainly (:annot do that. H
we adjoumthe discu$Sion now, I should like to'
have it understood that we have rejected the first
resolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and thlitthe Governments of Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria, and Albania will conform to the Security Council's. decision and co-operate with the
Subsidiary Group.
.
l~ould like to hear the opmons of the other
members on this matter before we adjourn.
.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of,America:) : I
agree with· the remarks made by the representative of the United Kingdom. The Commission of
Investigation, on 29 April, set up and gave certain directives to a subsidiary group, under mandate of the resolution of this Council of 18 April.
That' action of the Commission was questioned
by the Governments of, Albania, Bulgaria, and
Yugoslavia; it was also questioned by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Reoublicswhose representative proposed a resolutibn to
effect c:;hanges in the directives given by the
CoIIln}issio~. The Council has rejected the sug'gestionsitrlPlicit in the action of the Soviet representatives and' of the three other States that there
· was any irregularity in the action taken by· the
'Commission.
"
I think· that the situation would be entirely
clear, if the representative of Syria would con..
sider .. withdrawing his motion. The Council's
resolution'of 18 April and the Commission"s
directives of 29 April are in full 'vigour. Until
there has been .a refusal on the part ofthe interested parties . to conform. to. that mandate, the
Council must assume ':that· they will. I would
be willing not to ask the representativesofAlbania, .Bulg~a, and Yugoslavia if they now in- ,
· tend to conform. I would take it for granted that
. they will conform. H they do not,they will face
whatever consequences may subsequendy flow
·from that refusal.

a.

dat du Groupe subsidiaire; maill, en ju,ger de
la nouvelle resolution de M. Gromyko:, il semblerait que la question reste en suspenso Je ne saufaill accepter,ce point de vue. Si nous levons la
seance fllaintenant pour ajourner le debat, je
voudrais qu'il soit entendu que nollS avons rejete
b premiere resolution de l'Union· des Republiques socialistes sovietiques et que les Gouvernement<; de la Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et d~
l'Albanie, se confonnanta la decision du Conseil
de securite, consentiront a cooperer avec le
Groupe subsidiaire.
Avant que' nollS adoptions la proposition
d'ajoumement, je voudrais entendre l'opinion
des autres membres sur cette question.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Ameriijue) Uraduit de lJanglais): Je suis d'accord avec le representant du Royaume..Dui. Le 29 avril, ·la
Commission d'enquete a etabli un Groupe subsidiaire et lui a donne certaines directi,ves,
vertu·
de la resolution du· Conseil de securite en date du
18 avril La l11csure prise par la CO:n1mission a
ete conteStee par les Gouvernements de l'Albanie,
de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie, ainsi que par
le Gouvernement de I'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques .dont le representant a
propose une resolution tendant a modifier les
directives donnees· par la Commission. Le Conseil
n'a pas accepte d'admettre que la decision priSe
par la Commission fUt entachee d'irregularite,
comtneJe laillsait entendre l'actiont des representants de l'Union' sovietique et des troiS autres
Etats.
'
, A mon aviS, si le repre~entant de la Syrie consentait a retirer sa proposition, la situation deviendrait tout a fait claire. La resolution du Conseil en date du 18 avriL et les directives de la
Commission en date du ·29 avril demeurent en
vigueur. Tant que les parties interessees ne S"
refuseront pas a r~connaltre ce mandat, le COL.'
seil doit presumer qu'elles s'y conformeront. J'inclineraill assez a ne pas demander aux representants de I'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la Ypugoslavie s'ils ont l'intention de se conformer la .la
deciSion du Conseil.. J'estimequ'il est entendu .
qu'ils s:y conformeront. S'ils ne le faillaient pas,
ils auraienta supporter les consequences que
pourrait entrainer·leur· refl's.

en

Mr. DELAToURNELLE (France) (translated
from French): 1 alsQ consider that the vote
which has j~tbeentaken does not allow of an
adjournment of the debate; on the contrary it
closes •it. ' Otherwise, the Subsidiary Group's
authority . might continue to be contested by
certain. States, . and . tlris would obviously be
· regrettable.
.'
,

M. DE LA TOURNELLE (France): J'estime
egalement que le vote qui vient d'avoir lieu ne
laillse pas ouverte la·possibilite d'un ajoumementdu debat,maill, au contraire, qu'iI le,.termine. S'il :en etait autrement, l'autorite du
Groupe subsidiaire pourrait continuera ctre
contestee par certains Etats, ce qui serait evidemment regrettable..

Mr. KRAsoVEc (Yugoslavia) : It seems to me
that some confusion has ,occurred, and I do not
underst~l.l'ld the legal situation clearly.

, M. KRAsoVEc (Ypugoslavie) (traduit de lJann me semble qU'il s'est produitune certaine confusion et je ne saisiSpas bien la situationdupointdevue Juridique.
La delegation de la Yougoslavie a· demande
une interpretation des deciSions du Conseil et de
la Commission a Geneve. Dne interpretation, a

The Yugoslav'delegation asked for an. interpretationof the deciSions· of the· Council, and of
theCqmmission at Geneva. An interpretation,
as ,. far as weunderstarid it, must be given in a
positive form.. I wonder whether some negative
attitude towards the proposed resolution of the

glai~):

cl~:. eJ.s.:ihedd;.~:;. ~~u:.,,:.~.;~.:.~•.p.e~.,'i:.

J.•'•.

.•.
tives a regard de la resolution proposee parIe._

s

929
Unian of Soviet Socialist Republics does in fact
give a positive interpretation; I have my doubts
about that. Moreover, I must state that the Soviet resolution does not cover all the points which
were in the Geneva decision and regarding which
we requested· clarification in our statements.

representant de. l'Union sovietique constituent
vraiment une interpretation d'wl caractere positif~ je me pennets d'en douter. En outre, je dOL;;
ajouter que la l'es0lution de I'Union sovietique
.ne repond pas a tous les points que cOlltenait
la decision prise a Geneve et au sujet desque1s
.nous avons demande des eclaircissements.

Mr. GROMYKQ (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I think that
there has been some misunderstanding about my
proPosal.
When I proposed deferring the discussion ·and
decision on this question, I was, of course, thinking of postponing the .discussion and decision on
the. question of the rights and powers of the
Commis..,1on's Subsidiary Group. Some members
of the Council are assuming that we have already tdopted and approved the Commission's
decision on the powers of the Subsidiary Group..
I cannot agree.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Rcpubliques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) ~ n me semble qu'un certain malentendu a'est produit en ce
qui conceme ma proposition.
En proposant d'ajourner la discussion ainsi
que la decision a prendre sur cette question, je
voulais, bienentendu, faire ajourner la discussion ainsi que la decision a prendre sur la question des droitS et pouvoirs du Groupe subsidiaire
creepar la Commission. Certains membres du
Conseil tiennent pour acquis que nousavons
deja adopteet approuve la decision de la Commission au sujet du mandat du Oroupe ·3ubsidiaire. Je ne puis accepter cette maniere de voir.
Ma proposition tend a ajourner .ladiscussion.
ainsi que la decision a prendre sur la question
des pouvoirs .du Groupe subsidiaire, et a lie· pas
decider pour l'instant sinous approuvons·ou non
la decision de la Commission au sujet desdits
pouvoirs du Groupe subsidiaire. C'est la le sens
de maproposition. Jevousdemande:'qu'y aurat-il de chan.ge d'ici quelques jOlfrs, pendant que
nous attendons le rapport de la Commission? n
n'y,aura rien de change.
.C'est, pourqu9i je maintiens ma proposition
d'ajourner la decision a prendre sur cette question.

My proposal means that we should postpone
discussion and decision on the question of. the
powers of the· Subsidiary Group and that we
should not decide yet whether or not we approve
the Commission's'decision on the powers of the
Subsidiary Group. That is the meaning of my
proposal. I ask: What change can there be in the
few days during which we are awaiting receipt
of the Commission's report? Nothing will
change.
I therefore. re-affirm my proposal to postpone takL'1g a decision on the question under
discussion.
Mr. ATHANASSOV (Bulgaria): I think that
the negative vote on the- proposal of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics does not settle anything.
\
_
As regards the countriesintert:stedin knowing what the sense of the Council is and whether
the Commission of Investigation h~.s 'acted in accordance with its terms of reference by. giving
t~nns of reference tothe Subsidiary Group, I believe that nothing has been decided ina positive
'way.
n this .doubt persists, I consider .that the best
solution would be to accept the second proposal
of the Umon of Soviet Socialist Republics:
namely, to wait a few days until the report ar. rives· and until the Council is better equipped to
deal with ,the question. However, if the second
. Soviet. proposal is not accepted, I think that the
four :Balkan States concerned would 'De interested
in knowing exactlywhattheir obligations are. We
cannot be left in the dark. As a· matter of fact,
all the discussion which took place during the
past three or four meetings arose from .the fact
that the resolution of 18 Aprilwas.not sufficiently explicit. ~deed, it was woided in such a way
that different interpretations were possible.
From .this confused situation,· we shall run
into another, still more·· "Confused. That is why
I quite agree with the opinion expressed by the
YUl?~slav. represehtative that, unless a. positive
'lSlon 18 taken as to the sense of the "Council

M. ATHANASSOV (Bulgarie) (traduit de l'anglais): A mon avis, le vote negatif sur laproposition de l'Union sovietique ne regIe nullement la '
..
.
question.
Pour lea pays interesses a connaitre l'opinion
duo Conseil sur le point de savoir si la Commission d'enquete a agi conformement a son mandat
en etablissant le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire,
rien, a mon avig, n'a" ete decide de fagon positive.
Si le doute subsiste, la meilleure solution serait,
je crois, d'accepter la deuxieme proposition de
l'Union sovietique: a savoir, depatienter quelques jours, jusqu'?neception du rapport; le Conseil sera alors mieux~. meme de s'occuper de
cette question. Toutefois, si ladeuxieme proposition del'Union soviftiquen'est pas acceptee,
j'estimeque .le-s quatre .Etats balkaniquesen
cause. ont interet a connaltre exactement Ianature de· leurs obligations. On ne saurait n01lS
laisser dans l'incertitudea ce sujet.En rca}ite,
les .1ongues discussions qui se sont derouIees' z .
coursdes trois ouquatre dernieres seances s'e~'
quent par le fait 'que la resolution du 18 a
n'etait pas suffisamment explicite. Elleest, .~~
effet, redigee de telle fa~on qu'elle peut dormer
lieu a plusieurs interpretations.
De cette situation confuse, nous tomberions
,dans •. une autre plus. confuse encore. Voila "pourqnoije partage l'opinion exprimee par le representant de la Yougoslavie, et j'estimecomme
luiqu'a moins que l'on n'indiquepar une uecla-

•

"'"_------""..------------.-,:J'I7\ir------~--~~-------~- . . . .-.UOO

when the Sub&idiary Group was created" w~
shall be left in the dark.

""'Il

ration de cara-etere positif queUe ~tait l'intention
du Conscil de securite au moment de la creation
du . Groupe subsidiaire, nous resterons dans
l'obscurite ce sujet.

a

Mr. JOBNSON (United States of America):
As I understand the situation, the Council has
, not been called upon to approve the directives
issued by the Commission of Investigation. The
Commission acted under a mandate from this
Council in setting up a Subsidiary Group. Three
States which were supposed to collaborate with
the Group cuallenged the authority of the Coin~OJl in gi:viJ:'g th~e directives. They obviously
do not like tht:existence of the Subsidiary Gi"OUp,
and they have come before this Council witn
complaints. The representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics has supported them~
Those. complaints have been rejected.
H the representatives of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria,
or Albania: had any proposals to put before the
Council, if seems to me that they might usefully
have done so at the beginning of this debate, and
not waited until now when the Council has rejected their complaints and their accusations
that the Commission had acted ultra' vires.
.

'I1tis Council was not called upon to approve
the action of the Commission. In fact, in a tech':'
.!l!c~_~~.i P-Plipproval of the Council was
called for.
'Therefore, as .I s~e it, those directives stand,
and I do not know why the Council should be
called upon to spell out, 3!i: you would the ABC's
to a child ill school, the me~g of certain of its
own directives which' are challenged by people
who. do not find them convenient.
-

.Mr. LA~""FORD (United Kingdom): I agree
. whole-heartedly, wIth what the representative of
the United States has just s2Jd. With.regard to
statements of the Yugoslav and Bulgarian
representative5, we feel no obligation to produce,
a positive xesolution. There is no need for it. We
have rejected, .as a Council, the proposal of the
Union of SoViet Socialist Republics which implied that the terms of reference were invalid. H
they are not. invalid, th.ey are valid.

, M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amenque) (traduit de !'anglais): Si je comprends bien la situation, le Consdl n'a pas approuver les directives
emanant de la Commission ci;enquete. En creant
un Groupe subsidiaire, la Commission a agi en
vertu d'un mandat que le Conseil de securite lui
aassigne. Trois Etats qui etaient censes collaborer avec ce Groupe ont conteste que la ComrrJssion fUt habiHtee a donner ces directives.
Manifestero~t, I'existence du Groupe subsidiaire
ne leu! agr~e pas et ils se sont present-es devant
le Conseil pour exposer leurs plaintes. Le representant de rUnion sovietique les a appu~. Ces
plaintes ont ete rejetees.
Or, il me semble que si les representants de la
Yougoslavie, de la Btilgarie et de I'Albanie desiraient presenter des propositions au Conseil, ils
auraient eu avantagea le faire au debut des
presentes deliberations, au lieu d'attendre que le
Conseil ait rejete leurs plaintes et les allegations.
selon lesquelles la Commission d'enquete aurait
agi ultra vires.
Le Conseil de securite n'avait pas a approuver
la decision de la Commission. En realite,. du
point de .vue de' la procedure, cette decision
n'exigeait en aucune maniere l'approbation du
Conseil.
'
Ainsi done, ces directives restent valables, a
mon avis, et je ne vois pas pourquoi le Conseil
:aurait a definir, a la manjh-e de l'ABC que 1'0n
epelle auxeIeves, le sens de certaines de ses
propres directives,simplement parce qu'elles sont
eon~estees :par ceux a qui elles n' ~greent pas.

a

M~LAWFORD

(Royaume-Uni)

(trad1.lit de

!'anglais) :. J'approuve entierement la declaration,

que vient de faire le repr&lentant des Etats-Unis.
Pour envenir aux declarations des representants
de la Yougoslavie et de. la BuIgarie, nousne
voyons paspourquoi nous serions tenus de leur'
fournir une resolution .d'un caractere positif.
C'est patiaitement. supecllu. Siegeanten Comeil,
nousavons "rejete la proposition du representant
de rUmon sovietique ,qui teildait ainfirmer le
9
mandat en cause..Si ce mandat n est pas nul"
il va de soi,qu'il est valable.
NoussommeS, quanta nous,toujours lies par
We, Jorpur pait, are still bound bytlic Counla decision duConseil, et nous· nom: en' tenons
cil's decision. and there is no need for anything
.la.• Je.penseque. c'est au Gouvememwt yougom9re, It on!ly remains, innty vi~w, for the Yugoslave et awe autres Gouvernementsinteressesde
slav and .other Govequnents concerned· to conse conformer a ·la lettre et.a l'esprit de 'cette
form.to that decision in the spirit as well as in the
letter.."
.'
decision.
.
Pour ce qui. est du. projet de 'resolution de'
As regards' Mr. Gromyko's proposed resolu- .
Iv.r.Gromyko; je dITaiqu'ajoumer la discussion
tion,postpon~mer~t will merely .mean ~hat ,the
de laquestionaurait UJliquement pour resultai:
GovernI:qents of· Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, and Al·,
,:k p",~klettre aux Gouvernementsde la Yougpbania,may .'rwhatever reason,continue '!J.<.,t
s1&:¥~,~, de la Bulgarie etde l'Albanie de continuer,
_~9.g()-Operate,],~ith the Subsidiary Group. Under
pour une raison 9U pour tine autre, a ne. pas
the terms of Qur resohItionof ·19 "Decemher, they
coopereravec le Groupe Sl1bsidiaire; Or, aux
~e, . . . in •. f~et;i' 9hliged .to (".a-operate .with that
termesdelaresolution du Conseil de secldite en
Group. That: .resolution .s1;ilLstands; ~.' ~ay he
date· du. 19decembre,. ces Gouvernementssont
1 verycyhi.cal,::hutp-ersonallyI do not really be··.li;;ve'that th~;Bulgarian representative isint-he .effec.tivement tenus de cciopereravecce Groupe.
Cette .resolution. est . toujOUnl envigueur. Au
dark about it~tall.· If he wishes t()knowthe

the

,. l1li'''''11

I
!

I

•

•

a i

551

obligations of his Government under the Council reso!ution, I think that he has only to read
t.~e t~:.t d it.

ri.c:que de paral"tre cynique, je dirai qUl; ponT ma
part, j'ai peine a croire que le representant de la.
Bulgarie eprouve un doute que1conque a ce sujet.
S'il desire connaitre les obligations qui derivent,
pour son Gouvernement, de la resolution du Con..
seil, j'estime qu'il n'a qu'une chose a faire, c'est
d't:n relire le texte.

Mr. DENDll.AMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): As tile Australian representative has
asked the four Balkan Governments to define
th.err positions, I consider that I should repeat
oitce again, in the name of my Government, that
Greece will comply 'with the decisions taken by
the Security Council and the Commission of Investigation and wiU co-operate withth~ Submdiary Group, whose task it will make every effort
to facilitate,

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Le r:::presentant de
l'Australie ayant invit6les quatre Gouvernements
balkaniques a definir leur position, je me crois
tenu de repeter encore une fois, au nom de mon
Gouvernement, que la Grece se conformera aux
decisions, prises par le Conseil de securite et par
la Commission d'enquete, et cooperera avec le
Groupe subsidiaire dont il s'efforcera de faciliter
la tache

Mr. :EL-KHOURI (Syria): It seems that the
trei:ld of the Council is not in favour of my motion. For that reason, I prefer to withdraw it.
Mr. lKR.<\.SOVEC (Yugoslavia): J must state
again, with regard to the declaration of the representatiive of the United Kingdom, that our request was not identical with the request and
proposals. of the representative of the Union of
, Soviet Socialist Republics~ Therefore, one cannot exactly say that the Soviet representative supported our proposal.
We asked Ior a clarification and an interpretation. A clarification ~d an interpretation are
always given in a positive form. I regret that we,
,have not receivedtheIrt. It seems to me that this
is a situation which is called, in French deni' de '
justice.
Finally, may I protest against the words of the
United Kingdo~ representative as to the' cynicism in our attitude.

M. EL-KHoURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :

n semble que les membres au Conseil, d'une
maniere generale, ne soient pas favorables a ma
proposition. Aussi, je prefere la retirer.

M. KRASOVEC (YougosIavie) (traduit de ['anglais): Je dois revenir a la declaration du representant du Royaume-Uni et repeter a ce propos
que notre dernande n'est pas idenpque a la de,;.
mande et aux propositions du representant de
I'Union sovietique. On ne saurait done dire, en
toute rigueur, que le representant de rUnion '
sovietiquea appuye nbtre prop'dsitibn.
Nous avons demande des eclaircissements et
une interpretation. Or, des eclaircissements et
une interpretation sont toujours donnes sous une
forme positive. Je regrette que nous ne lesayons
pas re~us. n me semble que nous noustrouvons
en presenced'une situation qu'en fran!Sa1s 1'on,
appelle' "' denide justice.
En ,terminant, je voudrais protester contre les
paroles du representant' du Royaume-Uni, qui
a pade du cynisme de notre attitude.

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): You misunderstood me. I said I was cynical, not you.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduitde
l'anglais): Vous m'avez malcompris. J'ai dit
.que j'etaiS cyniqu~, non pas que VOllS retiez.

:Mr. KRASOVEC (Yugoslavia) : Excuse me.

M. KRAsoVEc(YougoslaVie) (traduit del'an..
glais) : Je vous presente mes excuses.

Mli'.lhilANAssoV,.(Bulgaria): Mter what my
Yugoslav colle2.gue has just said, I think it 'is
superfluous for me to speak any more. I just
wish to answer the representative of the United
Kingdom arid the other members· of this Council
who.oppoSe a vflte on a-clear, frank formula. As
the representative of the United Kingdom suggested; 1 certainly could learn by reading the
verbatimtecordsof the debate concerning the
Subsidiary Group in this Council,but I think
that this is not the usual way of ansWf.ring a
direct, definite, qll~tion.

M. ATHANASSOV (Btilgarie)' (traduit de l'anglais): Apres .la dec1arationde mon, colle~e
yougoslave,. j'estime que toutenouvelle interviention de ma part est superfiue. Je voudrais simple- ment repondre au representant dn Royaume~Uni
et aux autres membres de ce Conseil quis'ppposenta ce que 1'0n mette' aux voixune formme
precise et franche. Jepourrais, certes,COmtr4el'a
suggere le representant du Royallillc-Uni,prenme connaissance des comptes rendus steno-,
graphiquesdes deIiberationsC[pisesont d~roul.ees
au sein. du Conseil de securite a proposdu
Groupe ,subsidiaire, mais ,voila qui. n' est paS,-. je
pense, la maniere habituelle de repondre ,aune
questiondirecte et precise.
Nous avons formuIecette que:,--tion en. terfiles
tres clairs. Je me demande pourquoi ceI't<,d.I,lS
membres duConseil cherchent i..·~mej-'- line
reponse ·directe.

We have put this question in, averyde'ir
form. I wonder why some members of the ':::ouncilshoUld shun a direct answer:

The PRESD)ENT:-Before we vote on the pro..
• •tt-the Sovietrepre,sentative,. r ~. to.ex-

Le PRESIDENT '(traduit".de l'anglais) :'Avant
cle proceder aut. vote 1>.
sur la . propqsition
clu
repre'''- ..'
','
•

Ik

plain that the Chair had not considered the debate on the question of the terms of reference as
being closed, inasmuch as we still had to consider the Syrian proposal, whiCh, in the meantime, has been withdrawn.
Although I-recognize that the doubts and objections'raised by the representatives of Bulgaria,
Albania, and Yugoslavia-in so far as they have
been correctly interpreted by the Soviet representative in his proposal-nave been rejected by
the majority of the members of the Security
Council, I really do not feel that the representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia will
entertain any doubts as to the feeling, the sense,
and the wishes of the Council in the matter)
after the debates which they have been invited
to attend,
I shall now put to the vote the proposal of the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, which reads as follows:
uThe Security Council resolves
"That further discussion or decision on the
question of the terms of :reference of the Subsidiary Group of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents should
be postponeduntil~uch time as the final report
of the Con:unisSion is submitted to the Security
, Council."
,
Colonel HODGSON (Australia') : Mr. Presi~ dent,you t as a careful President, will l1()tice as
will the Assistant Secretary-General, the catch in
the Soviet resolution. If it is defeated, the discussion is not postponed and can· continue until
- three ()'cloclii in the morning. Unless you are
.-prepared to give aruIing that .we should adjourn,thedis~pssioncontinues.

I· propose. the follo~g amendinent: "That
further discussion on the Greek question should
be postponed until such. time . a&.• the final report, of the Commission is submitted to the Security Cotuicil."

.:

sentallt de l'Union sovietique, je voudrais declarer que le President n'a pas juge que le debat
sur cette question du mandat fUt clos, car il nous .
restait encore a. examiner la proposition de la
Syrie, qui, sur ces entrefaites, a ete retiree.
Tout en admettant que les doutes et les objections souleves par les representants de la Bulgane, de l'Albanie et de la Yougoslavie, pour
autant que le representant de I'Union sovietique
les ait mterpretes fideIement dans sa proposition,
ont ete rejetes par la majorite des membres du
Conseil de securite, je )le pense pas, pour ma
part, que les representants de l'Albanie~ de la
Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie, apres avoir assiste
a nos deliberations,. comme nous les avons convies a le faire, puissent entretenil' des doutes sur
le sentiment, I'opinion et -les desil's du ConseiI
en cette affaire.
Je vais maintenant mettre aux voix la proposition dli representarit de I'Union sovietique. En
voici le tcxte:
"Le Conseil de sCcurittff decide.

"Que tout nouveau debat, ou toute nouvelle
decision, sur la question du mandat duGtoupe
subsidiaire de' la Commission d'enqu~te sur les
incidents survenus le long de la frontiere grecque
sera differe jusqu'au moment ou la Commission
d'enquete aura presentc5 son· rapport final au
Conseil de securite."
,
,Le -colonel HODGSON (Anstralie) (traduft de
l~anglais): Monsieur le President, la prudence
upnnraus faites preuve en conduisant ces debats
me permet d'affirIller que vous nemanquerez
pas de deceler le piege que diSsimule hi. resolution de rUnion sovietique - et le Secretaire .
general adjoint l'aura. sans doute remarque
egalement. Si·cette resolution est rejetce, la
discussion ne sera pas remise. a plus tard et
pourra se prolonger jusqu'a trois heures dti
. matin. A moins que vous ne decidiez de suspendre les debats, la discussion continuera.
Je propose l'amendement suivant: "Que tout
nouveaudebat sur la question grecque soit
difrere,jusql1'au mommtou la Conunissiond'enquete aurapresente'son'-rappoitfinal an Conseil
desecuriM/'

Mr. GROMYKO (Union. of Sovie~Socialist Re~
M. GRmJIYKO (Union des Republiques sociapublics).: .I ,should like to remind the COUW:il
liStes sovietique.'l)( traduit de .l'anglais ): . Je vous
that I have submitted ~e followip,g text to rer~ppene que j'ai soumisle texte suivant,en rem,place the one I proposed earlier. Here is the ~ext
pla?ementde J;llon projet origmal:'
,
in its amended fonn:
'
. "The decision on the question ofthe terms of ' "Que la decision stir Jaquestion .dumandat
reference ()fthe Subsidiary Group of the. Comdu Groupesubsidiairede la-Commission d'enmission fif Investigation cqpceJ;'lling Greek Fronqu~te sur l~sincidents:survenus le long de la
tier. Incidents should be postpo~ed until suCh
fronti~re grecque soit differeejusqu'auIrtom~l1t
time.as .the Jinal. report .of the ·Commi~on is
ou la Commission d'enqu~te . ' aui'apresente son
.submitted to theSecnrityCouncil.'."
rapport final au Cons~il.rle securite."
The word "discussion" does nota.ppear. \ Le mot,"debat"n!,y figure pas. EnconseTherefqre,theaIllencIwentsubmitted hy the
quence, l' amendement propose parte representant de l'Austi'alien'a rien avoiravec.le noui'epresentative of Australia does:J1ot relate to the
new text.
veau texte de]ap~position.c- ..
The PRESIDENT , 1:'heC1UtirWshesto~sure
Le\PIllisIDEN'l' {traduitae l'a1fg1ais): Jev()uthe representative oLAl~tra;~aand.alrotherrep-drais donner J'assurance aurepI'esentant de
resentativ~ J~at it is. not.Ql.W intentiontc) stay '.' l'Australie,>ainsi qu'aux .a.utresrepresentants,
here yVUtil ,.eeo'clQl;k:'::r.~f~'~j~ing, in' anY-'r' que no.us n'avcfis pasl'intention desieger jusqu'~
c~~•. __ .>,<,,"£,;;
. . . . c . / , > · t r o i s heures du matin. '

<

.e.a_-------------:;-"u......,-~~

.

The Chair is very glad to see that the representative of Australia submitted a concrete
proposal incorporating his point of view, just as
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics had done on his part.
This concrete proposal reads as follows:
tfThe Security Council resolves.
"That further discussion of the Greek question
should be postponed until such time as the final
report .of the Commission is submitted to the
Security Council."
Unless the Council decides otherwise, we
shall now take a vote on this amendment.

Je suis heureux de constater que le representant de l'Australie a presente une proposition
precise exprimant son point de. vue, comme l'a
fait. de son cote~ le representant de 1'Union
of
sov'- lque.
Voici cette proposition:
uLe Conseil de securiU decide
"Que tout' nouveau debat de la question
grecq1.le sera differe jusqu'au moment OU la
ColllIillssion d'enqu~te aura presente son rapport
final au Conseil de securite."
A moins que le Conseil n'en decide autrement,
nous allons maintenant mettre aux voix cet
amendement.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)· (translated. from Russian): 1 want to
say that I have withdrawn my original draft resolution. I now propose that the Security. Council
resolve that the adoption of a decision on this
question be postponed until the Commission's report is received. That is my proposal. The Australian representative's, propqsal is a different
one; he proposes that we should postpone the
discussion but not the decision. These are two
quite different proposals. 1 would ask you to
note that . according to my. proposal it' is the
" adoption of a decision on the terms of reference
of the Subsidiary Group which should· be postponed, whereas. the Australian repl'eselltative's
proposal aims at. postponing the discuroion of this
question. These, I repeat, arc two. different pro. posa!s; I have withdrawn my original text; it is
no longer pending. 1 now propose that the decision we have to'take be postponed. When there
are two motions, a decision must be taken on
each one of them.

, .M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je veux
dire que j'ai retire mon premier projet de renolution. Je propose maintenant que le Conseil de
stkurite decide d"ajourner la decision a prendre
sur la question qu'il est en train d'examiner,
jusqu'a ce qu'il ait re~u le rapport de la CoInmission. Telle est ma proposition. Le- representant de l'Australie a propose autre chose; sa'
proposition tend a ajourner la discussion, et non
pas la decision. Ce sont la deilx propositions
entierement distinctes. Je m~ permets' de vous
rappeler qu'aux termes de ma proposition,il y
a' lieu d'ajourner la decision a prendre.sur la
question du mandat tiu Gronpe subsidiaire; mors
que la proposition du representant de fAUstJ.'alie
tend a. ajourner la discussion de cette question.
Ce sOIltJa" deux prppositions clistinctes, je le
repete. J'ai retire mon anCien texte, qui n'e..·:t
plus a 1'Qrd1:edu jour. Je propose maintenant
d'ajourner la decision a prendre. Lorsqu'il y a'
deux propositions, il· faut prendre une decision
.
sur chacune d' elIes.

The PRESIDENT:' Before I recognize the repreLe PRisIDENT(traduit tie l'anglaiS): Je vousentativeof the United States I should like to say
drais direquelques mots aY~t~cle .. donner la
a few words.
.
parole aurepresentant des Efats-Unis.
The-Chair considers that the Security· Co~­
Je .considereq* le Conseil de ~ecurite •.~
dlhas, twoprPflosals before it: one, submitted by
saisi de deux propositions. Nousayons, d'une
th~_ Australian representativcand the new pro- .
part, celle. du .representant de l'Ailstralie, .et,
posal sqbmitted. by' the representative .ofthe
d'al.ltrepart,< la ~ouvellepropositio*presentee,.,.,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. In the . par' le, representant de 1'Unionsovietique. A,mon
opinion ofthe Chair, they shoulti be put to the ,avis, ces._propositions"devraient etr~! mises ,aux
vote in theorder of ,theirsublllis§ion. Therefore"
voix d
l'ordre olrelles ont ete presentees. Je
I first intend to put tothevote~he<AustraIian me.proposedoncde,mettre auxvoix,ld'abord,la "
proposal and "next,. that of'. the, SovietUnioll .proposition .de l'Australie et,ensui~e,· celle <ie
whichwas,~ubn:rittedas a new proposal after. the
1'Union •s6vietique,quia·. ete preseI1tee. comme
Australian proposal.
.. '
"' .une'ptoposition nouvelleapres celle de l'Ahstralie.
'

ans

Mr.JoHNSON(Unit~d Stat~ of America}: 'I
M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis ,d'Amerique) (trahave nothing particular to say beyond the comduit de l'anglais): Jen'airien de parti~mli~ra
t ~~t, as. I understand it,the A~lstralianprodire, maisjed~irecepenclant faireuneremaiqu~
posal.1S predicat~a.onthe assumption~which.l
cQncernant lapt?po~iti()J,1 d~ .1'Australie.Si•ie la
believe istlieopinionQf tNs'·CeunciL, that the,
comprelldsbien, cette proposition. est fondeesur
decision has ,been takenregarditlgthe tel'l!JS, of
J-. :uppositioul.iu'une deqision aeteprisetou~
.·.·refer,ence of the Subsidiary Group,•whereas .the
le'manflat du Grollpe subsidiaire-...~tje
§qvietresolution is <iesignedtohavethe Cc)Uncil
pe~sequec'est'bienlal'avis, duCo~il de .se...
say. that -this .. decision ,has, not ,beentaken.13r~t . cur~t~ .• ·La .resolution de .1'Union. sovjetique,. all
it h~beCI\ taken,and I think that that is; 'in
cpntraiJ;e, .•. entend . fairesigIlifier •par le •. COJ,lSeil
fact the <9pinionof the, Oouncil and that the
quel'dnn'a pas encore pm dedecision.Mais,
Greek question remains on i~ agenda.
enrealite;une de.cisiona bienete priseetc"est, ',
7 2$
, .. _
.

Illen

....... t

IIlIIIriri

The Australian motion merely decides to post~
pone any further talk abut that question until
the report .of the Commission is received.

a. man sens, l'avis du Conseil. Le Conseil est
cf novis que la question grecque, dans so~ ensemble, demeure inscrite' a son ordre du jour. La

"--

proposition de l'Australie tend simplement &.
differer toute nouvelle discussion sur cette question jusqu'au jour ou le rapport de la Commission sera parvenu au Conseil.
·Mr. KRASOVEC (Yugoslavia): I wish to speak
on a point of order. I should like to ask what de~
cision was taken on the terms of reference and
what is the actual text of that decision.

M. KRAsoVEc (Yougoslavie) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais soulever un point d'ordre.
jaimerais savoir quelle decision nous avo!lS
prise en ce qui conceme le mandat au Groupe
subsidiaire et quel est 'le texte de cette decision.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques soda-,
listes sovietiques) ( traduit 'du russ~): Le repre- "
sentant des Etats-Unis fait erreur lorsqu'll. af,fume que nous avons pris une decision. Nous
n'avons pris aucune decision; il n'existe aucune
decision. De quelle decision parle-t-on? La dele-.gation sovietique a presente une proposition,
mais celle-ci n'a pas reuni la majorite requise au
Conseil de securite. Rien de positif n'a.ete decide
en ce qui conceme la decision de la Commission
en date du 29 avril au sujet du mandat du
Groupe subsidiaire.
Monsieur le President, vous avez dit quenous
Mr. President, you· have pointed out that we
etions saisis de deux propositions. Je suis d'accord
have two -proposals before us. 1 agree that there
avecvous quenoussommes, en efiet, en presence
are two proposals, the Australian and the USSR
de deux propositions: celle de la' delegation
proposals; but·1 want to point out that the
australienne d'une part, et celle de la .delegation
USSR proposal should be voted on first because,
sovietique de·l'autre. Toutefois, je voudrais vous
H theSecuiity Council votes on the Australian
faire observer que c'est sur la proposition sovieproposal, it would mean'that the Council was
tique qu'il y aurait lieu de voter d'abord, etant
taking. a decision. My proposal, on the other
donneque le simple fait de voter sur k proposihand, is that we should take no decision and
should close the discussion 6fthis matter. That' t:,on australienne equivaudrait a -une decision dn
Conseil de securite. Ma proposition, par contre,
is the essence of my proposal. If we begin by
prevoit qu'aucune decision ne devrait ctre prise
., voting on the Australian proposal,' that would in
et qu"il soit mis nn 'a l'examen de cette question.
itself constitute a decision. 1 woUld, therefore,
Tel est le sem de ma proposition. Si IlOUS VOtOD.'!'
ask you to bear tilis in mind and to reconsider
d'abord sur la proposition austra1ienn~ cela
your, conclusion regarding the. voting procedure
constituera precisement une decision. C'est pouron these twoproposals~
quoi je vous dentande de tenir com.pte de ceci
Jet de revenir sur ce que vous avez decide au
sujef de l'ordre· dans lequel ces deux propositions
doivent etre mis~ aux voix.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : The United
States representative is wrong wh~n he states
that we have taken· a decision. No decision has
been taken and there 7J; no decision. What de~
cision is he referring to? We have had the USSR
proposal, .which did not secure a majority in the
Security Council; No positi,,-e decision was taken
o~ the Co~on's decision of 29 April regard~
ing the powers of the Subsidiary Group.

I

. The PRESIDENT: Inconnexion with the re- '
marks of the, Soviet representative, the Chair
finds that, according to rule 33, paragraph 5; of
our rules of procedure,the motions which take
precedence are. those io postpone discussion of
theq~estionto a certain day or inc1efinitely. The
Australian proposal is just~at__a proposal to
postponediscussiQn ()f the .Gree~question,
where~ the Sovietproposal,is to postpone a deoman.
'
.

Le PRESIDENT '( traduit de l'anglais): Pour
repondre aux observations du representant de
rUnion soVietique, je yous rappelleraiqu'aux
termes ,:de l'.article33, paragraphe 0, de notre
reglement interieur, il existe une 'priorite pour:
l~ .pr()positio~qui tendent. a' remettre la discussion d'une questionsoit a un johr determine,
soitsine die. Telleest bien .la proposition du
representant • de l'Australie.• Elle tend 30remettre
la discussion de laq~estion grecque, tandis que
la· proposition' so'0~tique' tend a remettre une
decision.

Mr.GROMYKO. (Union. of.&0vietSocialistRepublics) : A decision taken on the discussion is.
a decision.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques social.
!'Eie..'l 1H]'i!ietiques) '. (traduitde l'anglais):. Une
~~~C35i(l1"! portantsur unedil;cussion estbien une .
d!f.~~;-:·~1>n.

. The PREsmENT~TheSovietproposal is that
the deciSion on the question of the. terms ofreference of theSubsicliaryG~tlF'Sh5u1~bep()st­
poned, whereas tlie"A:nstraliail-'proposal- is that
the discllSSion of tlje Greek\ qUeStionshQuld be

Le ,·PRESIDENT, (traduit', de l'anglais )': .Le
representant· de l'UniOll sovietique propose de' ,
rernettre la d~cisionconcernantle mandat du
Groupe. subsidiaire, .alors que le ,represelltant de
I'Australie propose de remettre la discussion de
'.
"

,.

.

,~

-

.w

postponed. Therefore, we have two different
proposals. The Chair finds. that the Australian
proposa!t which was submitted first, must have
precedem:e. The new Soviet proposal was only
presented afterwards.
However, as I said, in addition to tliat, according to our rules of procedure, motions that
shall have precedence are those to postpone illscwmon of the question; that seems to be the case
here.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): lam quite

prepared to· accept the ruling 01 the Pres:id~t
that my monon comes fi-st. In any case, I moved
it as an amendment,and it is stilI an amendment to ,the Soviet proposal, because the first two
words and the last two lines are exactly the
same. I used f>...xactly the same wording as appe..ars in the Sovi~tproposal, and· I therefore
suggest that my amendment is a proper one
under our roles of procedure. But if you rule that
it has priority under ru1e 33, I am quite prepared to accept that decision. In eiilier case, my
amendment comes fIrSt.
.'

The PRESIDENT: I am not qmsidering the
Australian motion as·an amendment, because. it
was circulated as a proposal and discussed as
such by the Soviet representative. Of course,
under' the circumstances it makes no 4if£erence.

la quemon grecque. Nous avons done deux
propositions differentes. festime que la proposition de J'Australie doit avoir lapriorite,
puisqu'elle a ete presentee en premier lieu. La
nouvelle proposition sovietique n'est venue
qu'erumite.
De plus, comme je I'ai deja. dit, -notre ~Ie­
ment interieur dispose qu'il y aura priorite pour
les motions qui tendent a remettre la dj~on
d'une question. Tel semble bien etre le cas ici.
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (tTaduit de·
l'anglais): j'accepte volonuers la decision ;In
Presi.dent de considerer ma proposition en premier lieu. A vraidire, je l'avais presentee romme
un amendement, et elle reste un a,mendement A
la proposition sovietique, puisque les -dMJX premiersmotset les deux dernieres lignesdes deux
propositions sont identiques. rai repris 1e3 t.ermes
exacts de la proposition sovietique et festime
donc que mon texte constitue bien un amendement, aux termes de notre reglement.interieu!'.
Maissi vous decldezque mon texte a priorite et!
vertu de I'article 33, j'acrepter-ai tout aussi vokmtiers cette decision. Dans un cas comme dans
l'autre, mon atttendement a priome.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit del'anglais): Je ne
oonsidere pas que la motion du repdaentant de
l'Australie soit unamendement, parce qu'eDe a
ete pr&ent&:awr membres du Conseil comme
une proposition et qui'elle a ete dismtee oomme
telle par le repr6lentant de l'Unionsovietique.
Dans le cas present, cela n'a evidemment aucune
importance.

..M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) ·(troom, de faMr. KATZ~UCHv (Pol~d): Mr. President, I
accept your ruling with ~gard to rule 33,. but;
glais): Monsieur le Prlsident, j'aceepte votre
with regard to procedural matters, there is one
decision en ce qui concerne l'article 33, mais it ,
point which you may have overlooked. We aD
y a Un point de proc&lure qui vous a peUt-&re
know that
Australian proposal was primarily echappe.Nous savons tous que la propositiondu
representant de l'AustraIie a,ete, a I'origine,p*
moved as an amendment to the Soviet resolu.tion. Iri. the meantime, the Soviet representasent6e comme un amendement a la r6lolution
,du. :rep~tantde rUnion sovietique. Mais le
tive has withdrawn his resolution and, at the
same time, the· Australian amendment has been
represenjant de l'Union sovietique ayant retire sa
automaticallywithch:awn.You ~ot propose
resolution entre temps, I'amendement austraIien
an· amendment to a non-existing. resolution. I . ~est trolW~. retire ipso facto. - On ne saurait.. et'
.never heard the Australianrepresentat'iveontlrls·
effet pr~ter un amendement a UIle resolutioo
, Council moye the previous amcmdmentas asepqui n~existe pIus. Je n'ai pas entendu le ~.;;
arate proposal. Therefore, with regard to pritant .de l'AustraJie presenter son amendemtL'.,
ority, the Soviet proposal waS fh:st.aild,at the
comni.e uneproposition distincte. - y a. donc'
moment, I am afraid that we have neither a . priorite pour la proposition sovietique. ]ecraiDs,
. writtenno~ a"verbal Australian proposal.
du ~, qu'en cemoment· iI, n'existe aucune
proposition de l'Australie, ni soUS forrile ecrite, ni
sous forme verbale. .
.
I:really do Iiotsee why we are discussing the
Je ne voil'l vraiment pasptlurquoi nous
S.0Vlet proposal·'1Jl(l prolonging ·ourdeliberatinuons a discuter la propositionsovietique et A
tions.Whether we acceptor rejeetit, no deciSion
prolonger. ainsi les debats.. Que .nouS l'~cceptions
.substance will J:>e taken today,andno deou que. nous .la rejeuons,rious ne ·prendrons
CISlOll was taken today.
.
aucune decision aujourd'hui .en cef.J.uiconceJ'ne
\ le fond de la qllestion, et nous n'avons d'aiII~~
pris aujourd'hili-· c'eSt·un· "fait·_·aucune d6-,
cision.
.
1 qtt%teagree. with the point raised by the
Jesuls. parfaitement d'accordav€C.lereprerepre$entative of Yugoslavia, that, by·· rejecting
sep.tant de la Yougostwiequi a sigJ1aI6qu'cm
the Sovief;pmposal, we. did not accept anypOSi';
rejetant la proposition sovieuque,ncus n'avons
ti"e ruling concer,aing the. terms of . r eferenceQf
prisaucll.ned6cision positive encequi\c9nceme
.the,Subsidiary Group;. at the tnoI!1ent,· the only -le mandpf; duGroupe subsidiaire;pour l'in$nt~
'\termsof .refe~nceal'Ccontainedin the-Council's
le' seul!rnandat: valable est ·celui. contellu dans

the

n.

can-

o!

flllrrtUbl%

*

{-' ' ..-

tt

$

-

lA

resolutions of 19 December and 18 April. That
is where we :rltand. At an'y time, anybody is allowed to enter into a discussion to' c.nange our
decision or to change the terms of reference.
Therefore, we shall support, the Soviet pro-

posal for postponement of the discussion until
receipt of the final report of the Commission of
Investigation.
Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China): T am reluctant to
intervene at this late, hour, hut it seems to me
that the Council has taken a decision on the
terms of reference of the Subsidiary Group.
Judging from the tenor of the discussions which
have taken place in the last two- or three meetings, and also from the rejection this aftemoon
of the draft resolution proposed by th(~ Soviet
representative, I would say that the Council has
already taken, a decision. That decision is both .
explicit and implicit. It is explicit because the
Council has to stand by its resolution of 18 April
whereby' it created the Subsidiary Group arid
specificaIly empowered the Commission of investigation to prescribe, in accordance with its
terms of reference, such functions as' it might
d.eeJn necessary, or· appropriate for the, Subsidiary .Group to perform. Moreover, 1 think
tbat the great majority of the members have expressed the view' that the Commission acted within its colIlpetence and rights in prescribing the
termS of reference. Therefore, that is implicit in
the Council's' decision and vote.
We must stand by our own resolution. Furthermore; we cannot let down the Commission,
when it determined th~ terms of refeI""...Ilce for
the Subsidiary, Group in, accordance with the
Council~s resolution. The new Soviet resolution
seems to consider that no decision has been taken
.by tJie Council. ,1 think that the Council has
definitely taken a decision on the terms qf ref~ce for the Subsidiary Group. That decision;
as, I say, ,is both explicit and implicit.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): I
, apologize for speaking again in this rather
tangled' discussion, but I think that we ate at a
point of impasse which might have rather serious consequences~ U it can be maintained that
the Council has not taken a decision today re~ '
garding' the question' raised by the three Balkan
representatives and the Soviet representative, no
decision of the Se~urity Council would 'ever have
any final validity; indeedJ it will always be open
to 'the objection of any representative who may
have' a notion that he does not like it and who
will say: "1 do not accept the decision; I do
not like it; I do riot think it isconvenient",and
who will then challenge it on some such groun.d.

.The ,issue of whether or not, a decision Jtas

been -~en, it seems to me, is El veryimportaI}t

one.ItemS ofoUl' agenda concerns the Gre~k
question; under paragraph (a), we have a letter

les resolutions du Conseil en ~~te du 19 decembreet du 18 avril. Voila OU nous en sommes;
N'importe que! membredu Conseil peut~ a tout
moment, au cours de nos debats" demander que
nou'3 modifiions notre decision ou que nons
modifiions le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire.
pappuierai donc la proposition de l'Union
SOTfietique qui tend a remettre la discussion
jusqu'au moment ou nons aurons ~u le rapport
{inal de la Commission d'enquete.

M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine) (traduit de l~af&­
glais) : J'hesite a intervenir dans le debat a cette
heure tardive, mais il me semble bien que le
Conseil a pris, en fait, une decision touchant le
mandat du Groupe subsidiaire., A en juger .du
sens general des discussions, qui ont eu lieu au
cours des deux ou trois demieres -seances et
compte tenu du rejet, au cours de cet apresmidi, du projet de resolution presente par le
representant de I'Union sovietique, je dirai que
~e Conseil a effectivement pris urie decision. Cette
:,jt!icision est a la fois, explicite et implicite. Eue
est expIicite, ca!' le Conseil doits'en tenir a la
resolution du 18' avril par laquelle il a cree le
Groupe subsidiaire et autorise expressement la
Commission d'enquete a assigner ace' Groupe,
dans le cadre de son propre mandat, les fonc-.
t,ons qu'elle jugera necessaires ou appropriees.
Je pense d'ailleurs que la grandemajorite des
membres du Gonseil a exprime I'opinion que la
Commission etait restee dans les liIrJjt~ de sa
competence et de ses droits en definissant le mandat du Groupie subsidiaire. n s'agit done de roon, clusions implicites a .la fois dans la decision et
dans'le vote du Conseil.
Nons devons rester fi.deles a notre propre resolution. Nons ne saurions, d'autre part, desavouer
la decision par laquelle la Commission a fixe le
mandat du Groupe subsidiaire en execution'de
la 'resoluticTI. dt~ Conseil. La nouvelle resolution
sovietique semble I.;onsiderer que le Conseil n'a
pris aucune decision. Je penseque le Conseil a
.bel et bien pris une decision toucharit le mandat
du Groupe subsidiaire. Cette decision est, comme
je I'ai dit, a la fois explicite et implicite.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je m'excuse ~e prendre a
nouveau la parole dans ce debat plutot confus,
mais je croisque nons sommes arrives a une
impasse et qu'il pourrait resulter de cette situation des consequencesassez seneuses. Si l'on peut,
soutenir que le Conseil n'a paspris, aujourd'hui,
de decision concernant la question soulevee par
les trois representants des Et~ts balkaniques et
par,le representant de rUnion sovietique, aucune
decision du Conseil de securite n'aurait jamais
de valeur definitive; car une decision peut tou
jours donner lieu a des critiques, pourpeu qu'un,
'representant s'avise de ne pas la trouvera. son
goftt et dise: "Je u'accepte pas cctte decision;
je ne l'aime pas; je ne crois pas qu'elle Boit indiquee", et ,I'attaque sous que!que pretexte de
cetordre~
,
n:me semble de la plus haute ~importance de
trancher laqQestion desavoir si une decision a
ete. priseounon. I..e point 3 de notreordre du
jour concernela questiongrecque. A l'alineaa),
c

......

5 j f~ ~e representative of the Umon of SovietSocialist Republics!'; fmm that letter flowed
the Soviet r~(,)lution whiCh has been- rejected;
under paragraph (b), we have a cablegram
from the Chainnan of the Commission of Investigation2, in which he includes pertinent documents, and reports to the Council the refusal for
various reasons of Yugoslavia, Albania, and
Bulgaria to co-operate with the Commission, although the former country is a Member and the
other two, which are not Members, have accepted the obligations of the Charter. Now those
countries question the au.thority of the Commission. We have referred to that question and rejected their complaints. How can we now say
that no decision has been taken? I think this
places the Council in a most invidious position.
In the most literal sense, I am utterly unable to
understand the arguments raised by the representatives who have spoken in the sense that
no decision nas bren taken in the case., I am
utterly unable to understand those arguments on
the basis of the rules of procedure, the Charter,
and the actions in this case as they appear from
the record.
'

Mr. ATHANASSOV (Bulgaria): I wish to ask
two questions.
First, is there any precedent in the established
practice of this Council, the General Assembly,
or any organ of the United Nations, UNESCO
or some other committee, sub-committee, or commission, where a decision is taken without voting
upon a,resolution? I cannot remember any such
case.
Secondly, what reasons are there for not putting in .black and white the opinions of the
Council on this question? '
The representative of,the •United Kingdom
advised us to read the minut~ ....

Mr. LAWFORD (Unite~ Kingdom): A point

o! order, Mr. President. _I was :misinterpreted.

I said that if the Bulgarian representative would
. read the Council's decisioDs of 19 December and
, '18 April, he would see what the duties of his
Govemmentand country were.
Mr. ATHANASSOV (Bulgiu'ia): I am sorry. I
repeat, the decisions ma.y be similar on some
points and may be different on other points. So,
I merely wish to request that the representatives
who so strongly oppose voting on any resolution
should.be invited to state what their reasons are
because, if such a procedure-I shall :not say rar~
procedure for I have never heard of it before-is adopted now, there must be some reason for
it, in this case.
'.
.../~

nous avons une lettre du representant de rUnion
des RepubIiques socialistes sovictiqueg1: cette
lettre est a l'origine de la resolution sovietique
que nous venons de repousser. Aralinea b), n.ous
avons un teIegramme du President de la Dommission d'enquete2 , au~uel sontjoints les documents qui se rapportent a l'affaire, ainsi qu'un
rapport au Conseil sur les diverses raisons pour
. lesquelles la Yo~goslavie, l'AIbanie et la Bulgarle
refusent de collaborer avec la Commission, bien
que le premier de ces pays soit un Membre des
Nations Unies et que les deux autres aient accepte, encore que n'etant pas Membres,les obligations definies par la Charte. Or, ces pays refusent maintenant l'autorite de la Commission.
Nous nous sommes prononces sur cette question
et avons rejete leur plainte. Comment, dans ces
conditions, peut-on affmner qu'aucune decision
n'a ete prise? Ce serait, a mon avis, placer le
facheuse. Je suis
Conseil dans une situation
litteraIement incapable de comprendre les arguments ~es representants qui ont parM dans cc
sens et qui ont pretendu que l'on n'aprir. aucune
dcki&lon dans cetteaffaire. Je suis absulument
incapable de comprendre ces arguments, que je
me reporte, pour les examiner, aureglement intCrieur, a la Charte, ou aux debats tels qu'iE
apparaissent dans les proces-verbaux. ' t

tres

M. ATHANASSOV (Bulgarie) (traduit de fanglais): Je 'voudrais poser deux questions.
,

Premierement, existe-t-il un precedent qui
permette au Conseil, a l'Assemblee generaIe, a
un organe quel<:onque des Nations Unies, comme
l'UNESCO, ou a toutes. autres commissions,
sous-commissions ou comites, de prendre une decision sans la so~ettre a un vote? Je ne puis me
souvenir d'un te! precedent.
Deuxiem~ent, quelles sont les rmsons qui
empechent le Conseil de mettre son opi71iori sur
cette question noir sur blanc?
Le representant du Royaume-UrJ nous a conseilIe de lire les prod:s-verbaux ....
M. !..AWFORD . (Royaume-Um) (traduit 'de
l'anglais): Un point d'ordre, Monsieur lePr~­
dent. On ril'a mal compris. 1'ai dit que si le
representant de la Bulgarie voulait bien lire les
decisions du' Conseil du 19 decembre et· dti 8
avril, il ve..,<rit queUes sont les obligations de son
Gouvemement et de son pays.
M. ATHANASSOV (Bulgarie) (traduit de 'fanglais): Je vons demande pardon. I..es decisions,
je le repete, peuvent etre semblables' sur certains ,
points et diffe.rentes sur certains autres. Aussi'
desirerais-je seulement demander que 1'0n invite
les representants qui sont. si formel1ementopposes a ce quel'on vote sur une resolution; a'
exposer les raisons de leur opp()sition.· Car.il faut .
une raison pour adopter justem~nt dans le cas
present une telle procedure .; ,je ne dirai. pas in,.
solite, mais dont je ne connais pas de precedent.

. The PRESIDENT: I shall noW' ask the Council
if it approves of the order of voting. which .I
have suggested.
.'

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) :- Je.vais
demander au Conseil s'il apprOuve. l'ordre -de
vote que j'ai propose.
.

See :Official Records of tke Security Council, Second
ear. Supplement No. 11. Annex 28.
Ilbid:,Second Year. Supplement No. 11, Annex 27.

1 Voir lesProces-verbaux officiels du 'Conseil d~ s/~
curite. Deuxieme Annee, S~pplement No 11, Annexe 28.
"Ibid., Supplement No 11. Annexe 27.
'

..,. 1
I

~"W11

l'

e,.

:.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from ,Russian): I have no
objection to decide to close the discussion, not
of the Gr.eek question generally, as the Australian representative proposes, but of, the particular question we are now, discussing. May I recall
that certain members of the Council objected to
our discussing the Greek question at 'all, and I
agreed. That is, I agTeed that we were not dis,cussing the Greek question generally, but a definite' aspect of that problem. When we speak of
closing the disr:UllSion, we, do not mean the Greek
question, but the particular question we are now
considering. I repeat that I do not mind agreefug
to postpone the discussion of this question until
we receive the report, so long as it is understood
that no decision bas bet'.11 ~aken. That is the only
correct interpretation. This is not a question in
~bich the Charter or any other consideration
can be invoked> since neither,' the Charter nor
, any other consideration can confirm the adop,tion of a decision 'which does not exist. The
,Council has
no decision on this question,
and, to judge from its attitude, it, does not intend to take one immediately.Th~if we adjourn, 'I shall raise no objection on the understanding, 'therefore, that' we are postponing the
c.tiscwmion untit the, Comniission's report is received, aJ.ld that no decision is being taken. ~
the discussion is being postponed, it fonows that
any 'palSiole decision on ~ question is also
p<l8tponed.

taken

'C

/

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du' russe): Je ne
m~oppose pas a ce que nous mettions fin
la
dL~ussioh de la question que nous sommes en
train d'examiner; mais je ne suis pas d'accord
pour suspendre la discussion sur l"ensemble de la
question grecque, ainsi que le propose le representant de l'Australie. Je voudrais vous rappe1er
que certains meIilbres du Conseilde securite se
sont opposes un examen de l'ensemble de la
question grecque. rai ete d'accord pour reconnaJ."tre que ce n'est pas l'ensemble de la question
grecque qui fait l'objet de notre examen, mais
un aspect particulier de cette question. Par consequent, lorsqu~il' s'agit de clore le debat, ce1a
ne conceme pas la question grecque, mais bien
la question particuliere que nous examinons en
ce moment~ Je ne m'oppose pas, je le repete,
ce que nous ajournions la discussion' de cette
question jusqu'a ce que nous ayons re~u le rapport, mais a condition qu)il seit bien entendu
qu'aucune decision n'a ete prise. Cette maniere
de voir est la seule correcte. n n'y a pasJieu id
d'invoquer la Charte, oU de faire vaIoir quelque
autre consideration,' car ID la Charte ni aucune
'consideration n~ sauiait confiJ!!ler l'adoption
d'une decision qui n'existe pas. Le Conseil n'a
prisaucune decision a ce sujet et, a eJ. juger par
,son etat dtesprit, il ne semble pasavoirl'intention
d'en prendre une iinmlidia(ement. Si done nOllS
ajoumon -' la discussion jusqu'a ce que nous
aYQns : ';,~Jle rapport de la Commission et s'it
est bien 'eritendu que nous ne prenons 3.ilcune
decision, je ne m'y opposerai pas. Puisqu'on
ajourne la ~cussion, on ajouqle aussi toute tie, cision qui poittrait etre prise a ce sujet.

a

a

a

Mt.LAWFORD, (United Kingdom): I only ,
wish to raise a point of order. I thought that t.he
Chair had given a ruling.' Is that I'Ulirig chal, lenged? If sO, can we vote on it?

"M.. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) '(trOOuit de
f anglais): Je voudrais seulement soulever un

The PRESIDENT: I' understand that, in fact,
my ruling has been cha1!eDged.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Je crois
que l'on vient de faire appe1, en effet, de ma
decision.

Mr. LAWFPRI> (Unitoo Kingdom): Can we
vote on it?

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (trOOmt de
l'ang1ais): Ne va-t-on pas mettl'e cet appe1 aux
voix?

Mr. 'JOHNSON (United States of America): I
only wanted to inquire whether, in the opinion
0'£ tJie Chair, the condition mentioned by Mr.,
Grrimyko, in his last statement, that he would
consent to 'a postponement of the di..~ussionin the '
, Council-it being understood that no decision
has been taken-'is only an expression of, the
opinion ofthe Soviet representative. The Council
is not in any way bound by that, if we vote now
toJdecidethat the discussion is adjourned.

M. ·JOHNSON (Etats-Unis) (traduit de fanglais): Je vomfiais seulement vousposer ~e
question, Mons:'~ur, le President. M ..Gromyko a
dit dans Sa derniere 4eclaration qu'il consentait
a un ajourilementde la discussion, etant entendu
que l'on considereraitqu'aucune, decision n'a
ete prise•. S'agit-illa simp~ement de l'opinion du
representant de l'Unionsovietique? Dansce c~,
sa positionn'engage enrien le. Conseil si no~
votons l'ajoumement de la discussion:.

The PRESIDENT : That is the opinion of the '
Chair.
I think it will be in order to vote on the
Australian proposal7

Le PRESIDENT, (traduit de l'anglais): Tel1eest
.
bien .mon opinion.
Je pcnseque nous po~vons votersurIa propOsition de r Australie.

Mt. IUTZ-SUCHY (Poland): Is it a. proposal

M. KA':J,)Z-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'an..
glais) : S"agit-il d'une propositionou d'un ,

or 'an m:nendmcT _? I . ,have not yet heard the

point d'ordre. Je croyais que le President avait
prisune decision. Est-ce qu'il ,est fait appel de
cette decision? S'il en eSt ainsi; pourquoi ne pas
mettre .c et appel aux voix?

~

•

opilIlion of the Australian representative. The
President is the only member who spoke about
an amendment to the proposal. made by the Soviet representative, and that nb longer exists.

amendement? J'attends qu~ le representant de
l'AUS1l'alie s'exprime ace sujet. Le President est
le seul membre du Conseil qui ait pade d'un
amendement a la proposition faite par le repre.sentant de l'Union sovietique; or, cette proposi~
tion n'existe plus.

,Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I shall reply
to that point of order. I origil"1ally presented my
motion as an' amendment to the first proposal of
the Soviet representative. The Chair ruled then
that it was a proposal. I was, prepared to ~ccept
that ruling, but 1 regarded my motion as an
amendment. ,If it is regarded as an amendment,
it applies exactly in the same manner. Since the
:first '~oviet proposal, has been withdrawn, my
amendment falls. Therefore, 'I '~apply it now ilL
exactly the same terms to the second proposal,of
the Soviet representative. The :first two words
and the' last two lines are the same. And, ,~ I
see it, the-amendment still comes first.

. Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je v:ais repondre a ce point d'ordre.
Ma motion a ete effectivement, a i'origine, un
amendement a la premiere prop.osition, du repre.sentant de rUnion sovietique. Le President de.cide de considerer mon texte comme une proposition. l'etais dispose a accepter cette decision,
bien que je considerais' moi-meme ma motion
comme un aniendement. Si on la considere
comme un atnendement, la situationrestein-.
changee. Puisque la premiere proposition sovietique a ete retiree, mon amendement, ipso facto,
est sans objet. Je desire done proposer le meme
amendement a la secondeproposition du repr6sentant de l'Unionsovietique. Les deuX premiers
mots et les dernieres lignes de sa proposition et
de l'amendetnentsont les memes. Et, amon a~,
l'amend~ent conserve toujours lapriorite.

Mr. ~L-KHOURI (Syria): Before .voting on
'M. EL-KHoURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
the Australian proposal" I wish to ask a question
Avant de voter sur la proposition derAustralie,
about the "final" report. Does the Australian
jet desire poser une question concernant'le terme
representative consider the report which is ex"final~ que l'on y trouve pour qualifier ~ rappected within a fc<wdays to be the last one, the
port. Le representant de l'Australie considexe-t-il
"final" one? I do not consider it final as long
que nous alIons recevoir d'ici quelques jou.rsle
as the Subsidiary Group is working on the spot . dernier rapport, le -rapport "final"? Pour moi,
and continufug to prepare reports.
.
, l'on ne pourra parler de rapport finaltantque
, le Groupe subsi"diaire reste sur les lieux et pn'cpare .
d'autres rapports.
.
I .
Colonel HODGSON (Australi~) : I suggest, with
due respect, that this question should be addressed to the Soviet representative because, as I
said, mine was a genuine amen,dment, and I
adopted the last two lines' of the Soviet proposal. As those are his words/he should answer
that question.
-

,

.

. Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
z:anglais): Je me permets' de fme. ;rema.rquer '
que cette' question doit are adressee ~ti. repre.sentant de I'Union sovietique puisque, comme je
l'ai dit, mon' texte est",un amendement· authentique; j'ai en dIet repris l:;s deux demiereslignes
de la proposition sovietique. 'Comme il s'agit
mot3 employespar It representant de, I'Umon
'sovietique, c'est
a llli qu'il :convient- de repondre.
,,'
.',

des

_.

"',

Mr. GROMYKp (Union of Soviet Socialist R~
M. GR:OMYKO (Union des Republiques socia. publics); The statement made by therepresentalistes sovietiques) (tr,~uit' de l~anglair): La
tiveofAustralia.:-I do not speak of the "text",
declaration quevient -..e faire le represen~t
becaUse I 'do not have any tevi' of the pro~al-de I'Australie '--'::je'ne parleraipas de ·"texte", ,
puisque, amaconnaissance, on n'a pas presente
refers to the Greek questi('l~" \"t'e are not discuss, ing the-Greek .question ..;', :Ui1t. We aredisdetexte de cette proposition---':'concer.nelaquescUssing. the question, raised. by the Soviet· repretion grecqu,e. Nous. nediscutons pas apropresentative l:1efore the Security Council and also
ment parler la question grecque. Nous discutons
bytheChainnan of the Commission of InvfStila 'question. soulevee"·· par le represent~t. .• de
gation in his cablegram to the Security Council.
I'Unionsovietique•• devant. ce Conseil et par, le
Accordingly, the phrasing of the Australi~ proPresident de,la .Commission d'enqu~te dans sa
posal' should be brought into conformity with
lettre au Conseil' de securite. Le libelle deJa
'the real meaning of our disc::usSion and of the
proposition· c1e.l'Australie devrait donc,etreconqu~tion under consideratioll.
formeau sens reel de notre disc.ussion· et de la
\
question soumisea.. notre ·examen.
D'ailleurs,il n'existepas,<l.e texte'de laseconde
Furthermore, there is no text of the second
~ovietproposal. I fonnulated it or~y. It is very
propositionsovietique. J'ai formule cetk proposunple: .to postpone the decision· ofthe Security
sition oralement. Elle est tr~sL"llple: jt': demande
Council on the question under consideration un..
que le Con'Seil de securlte remette toute decision
til the Council :receives th~ report of
00111concernant la question solUIlise a son examen
mission. As I have already s~d, I do not have I jusqu'au 1p.omentou il aU1'are~u le rapport de la
a text of the/Australian proposal.. .,
'.. ,' /. Cormnission~ Connne je I'ai'deJa rot, je ne p()Sn,
sedepas Ie.texte, de la proposition de. l'Australie.

the

......
, •.••••trn.II·ITIII.'ri*li1iliiw.·ilII

~_"

940
Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): I should
like to ask Mr. Gromyko one question in order
to clarify the Soviet proposal. The proposal im­
plies that we have not taken a decision on this
question. If we had adopted his original resolu­
tion, would he have called that a decision? We
have rejected it, and he says that this is not a
decision.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
I'anglais): Je voudrais poser une question a
M. Gromyko afin d'eclaircir la proposition de
l'Union sovietique. Cette proposition implique
que nous n'avons pas pris de decision sur cette
question. Si nous avions adopte sa resolution
primitive, l'aurait-il consideree comme une deci­
sion? Nous l'avons rejetee, et M. Gromyko affirme qu'il ne s'agit pas la d'une decision.

Mr. KRASOVEC (Yugoslavia): I regret very
much to be compelled to bother you again with
these questions. As I understand it, however, we
shall soon close the discussion, and I may have
no further opportunity to ask for clarification.

M. KRASOVEC (Yougoslavie) (traduit de I'an­
glais) : Je suis desole d'etre oblige de vous importuner a nouveau avec mes questions. Mais
comme nous allons, semble-t-il, clore cette dis­
cussion dans quelques instants, je n'aurai peutetre plus l'occasion de demander des eclaircissements.
Je suis oblige de transmettre a mon Gouvernement la decision que vous avez prise. Je declare
que mon Gouvernement se conformera a la
decision du Conseil. Cependant, j'aimerais savoir
ce qu'est cette decision et quels sont les termes
exacts de la reponse aux questions formulees dans
le telegramme du President de la Commission
d'enquete. II n'y a qu'une chose que je sache de
fagon certaine et que je puisse transmettre de
fagon certaine a mon Gouvernement, c'est que
la resolution du representant de l'Union sovie­
tique a ete rejetee. Mais je ne suis pas en mesure
de communiquer a mon Gouvernement des renseignements quant a la decision positive que l'on
a adoptee ici.

I am obliged to transmit to my Government
the decision which has been taken. I state that
my Government will comply with the decision
of the Council. However, I should like to know
what that decision is and exactly how the ques­
tions mentioned in the cablegram from the
Chairman of the Commission have been an­
swered and settled. The only thing I know
clearly and which I can clearly transmit to my
Government is that the resolution of the Soviet
representative has been rejected. However, I am
unable to transmit to my Government any infor­
mation as to what has been positively decided.

The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representa­
tive of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
in order that he may give his reply to the ques­
tion asked by the representative of the United
Kingdom. I would also ask him to read his pro­
posal.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Je donne la parole au representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques afin qu'il puisse
repondre a la question posee par le representant
du Royaume-Uni. Je lui demanderai egalement
de nous donner lecture de sa proposition.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translated from Russian): My answer
to the United Kingdom representative is very
simple. The rejection by the Security Council
of the Soviet proposal means that the Security
Council has taken no decision—positive or nega­
tive—on the substance of the question under
discussion. This means that the proposal has not
been adopted, that it has not secured the requi­
site majority.
As regards my proposal to postpone a decision,
I have already pointed out that to postpone the
discussion is tantamount to postponing the deci­
sion also. I am prepared not to object to our
deciding to postpone the discussion of this ques­
tion—not of the Greek question generally, but
of the question under discussion—as I consider
that to postpone the discussion means also to
postpone a decision on this question. I do not
object to this text, if it is understood that no
decision has been taken. I would ask you, Mr.
President, to bear in mind that the Greek ques­
tion as a whole should not be raised here and
that you have agreed to this.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socia­
listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Ma re­
ponse au representant du Royaume-Uni est extremement simple: si le Conseil de securite a
rejete la proposition sovietique, cela signifie qu'il
n'a pris aucune decision — ni positive, ni nega­
tive— sur le fond de la question. Cela signifie
que cette proposition n'a pas ete adoptee, qu'elle
n'a pas reuni la majorite requise.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I wish to move
an amendment to the Australian amendment. I

Quant a ma proposition d'ajourner la decision
a prendre, le simple fait d'ajourner la discussion
equivaut, comme je l'ai deja dit, a ajourner
egalement la decision. Je ne m'opposerai pas a
ce que nous prenions le parti d'ajourner la deci­
sion sur cette question (j'ai en vue non pas 1'ensemble du probleme grec, mais seulement la
question que nous examinons en ce moment)
car j'estime qu'en ajournant la discussion, nous
remettons egalement a plus tard une decision au
sujet de cette question. Je ne m'oppose pas a
l'adoption de ce texte, s'il est bien entendu
qu'aucune decision n'a ete prise. Je vous de­
manderai, Monsieur le President, de ne pas
oublier que la question grecque dans son ensem­
ble ne doit pas etre soulevee ici et que vous avez
signifie votre accord a ce sujet.
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de I'an­
glais) : Je desire presenter un amendement a

941
am sure that the Australian representative will
accept, since it leaves him more than two words
at the beginning and two words at the end of
his previous amendment.
I propose that instead of the words "Greek
question", we should insert the words the ques­
tion under consideration. I believe that we may
be able to arrive at a solution on such an amend­
ment much sooner.
On the other hand, I consider that the rep­
resentative of Yugoslavia is quite justified in ask­
ing what kind of positive decision he has to trans­
mit to his Government. Should we have adopted
the first resolution submitted by the representa­
tive of Australia, we would have had a certain
positive decision regarding the terms of reference
of the Subsidiary Group as prescribed by the
Commission of Investigation. That resolution has
been withdrawn. We have only a negative vote
on the resolution of the Soviet representative.
Therefore, I believe I am quite justified in stat­
ing that there is no decision on the terms of ref­
erence of the Subsidiary Group. Except for the
resolutions of 19 December 1946 and 18 April
1947, no decision has been taken.

1'amendement de 1'Australie. Je ne doute pas
que Ie representant de 1'Australie 1'accepte,
puisqu'il lui restera plus de deux mots au debut
et deux mots a la fin de son amendement initial.
Je propose de remplacer les mots "la question
grecque", par le membre de phrase "la question
soumise a l'examen du Conseil de securite". Je
crois qu'en redigeant 1'amendement de cette
maniere, I'on pourrait arriver a une solution bien
plus rapidement.
D'autre part, je considere que Ie representant
de la Yougoslavie a parfaitement raison de demander quelle est la decision positive dont il doit
informer son Gouvernement. Si nous avions
adopte la premiere resolution presentee par le
representant de 1'Australie, nous aurions ete en
presence d'une decision positive concernant le
mandat que la Commission d'enquete a assigne
au Groupe subsidiaire. Mais cette resolution a ete
retiree et il n'y a eu qu'un vote negatif sur la
resolution du representant de 1'Union sovietique.
J'estime done qu'il est parfaitement juste de dire
qu'il n'y a pas eu de decision en ce qui concerne
le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire. En dehors des
resolutions du 19 decembre 1946 et du 18 avril
1947, nous n'avons pris aucune decision.

The PRESIDENT : Before we go any further, I
should like to ask the Australian representative
whether he wishes us to discuss his proposal with
the Polish amendment as one proposal, or
whether we should take them separately, in
which case we would proceed to vote on the Po­
lish amendment first and then on the Australian
proposal.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Avant
d'aller plus avant, je voudrais demander au
representant de 1'Australie s'il desire que nous
discutions de sa proposition telle qu'elle a ete
amendee par le representant de la Pologne, ou
s'il prefere que nous examinions les deux textes
separement, auquql cas nous allons d'abord proceder a un vote sur 1'amendement du represen­
tant de la Pologne, puis mettre aux voix la
proposition du representant de 1'Australie.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): That further
amendment is not acceptable to my delegation.
With all respect, the Chair made a ruling some
considerable time ago. We accepted that ruling
and we asked if it was challenged. I suggest that
the ruling of the Chair should be put to the vote.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
1'anglais): Ma delegation n'accepte pas ce nouvel amendement. Je vous ferai respectueusement
remarquer, Monsieur le President, que vous avez
pris une decision il y a longtemps deja. Nous
avons accepte cette decision et nous avons demande s'il y avait eu appel de cette decision ou
non. Je propose que la decision presidentielle
soit mise aux voix.

The PRESIDENT: We shall proceed to vote on
the ruling of the Chair.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Nous
allons mettre aux voix la decision presidentielle.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) : I do not understand the ruling, and
I ask you to explain it.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de I'anglais): Je ne
comprends pas cette decision et je vous prie de
l'expliquer.

The PRESIDENT: The ruling of the Chair was
that we should first vote on the Australian pro­
posal.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): La de­
cision presidentielle etait que nous votions
d'abord sur la proposition de 1'Australie.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) : What proposal?

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de I'anglais): Quelle
proposition?
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): En
voici Ie texte:
"Le Conseil de securite decide
"Que tout nouveau debat sur la question
grecque sera differe jusqu'au moment ou la
Commission d'enquete aura presente son rapport
final au Conseil de securite."

The PRESIDENT: The proposal reading:
"The Security Council resolves
"That further discussion on the Greek ques­
tion should be postponed until such time as the
final report of the Commission is submitted to
the Security Council."

942
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) : I do not agree with that.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de I'anglais): Je ne
suis pas d'accord.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I presented an
amendment to that proposal.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de I'an­
glais) : J'ai pr&ente un amendement a cette
proposition.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) : It does not make sense.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de I'anglais): Cela
est depourvu de sens.

The PRESIDENT: The Polish representative
wanted to ask the Australian representative if
the Polish amendment was acceptable to him,
did he not?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Le re­
pr&entant de la Pologne a bien demand^ au
repr&entant de l'Australie s'il acceptait l'amendement de la Pologne, n'est-il pas vrai?

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): Nevertheless, I
move the amendment, whether the Australian
representative accepts it or not. Therefore, as an
amendment, it has to be voted on first.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de I'an­
glais) : Je presente mon amendement, que le
repr&entant de l'Australie 1'accepte ou non.
Puisqu'il s'agit d'un amendement, il doit etre
mis aux voix d'abord.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translated from Russian): I consider
that the Australian proposal is untimely and be­
side the point. Mr. President, I would ask you
to bear in mind that the Australian representa­
tive's proposal with its reference to the "Greek
question" is, as I have said, beside the point,
as we are not discussing the "Greek question".
If anyone has forgotten this, I would ask him
to read the minutes of the Security Council's dis­
cussion. We all agreed that we were not discuss­
ing the Greek question generally, but the ques­
tion raised by the Soviet Union representative's
letter and by the cablegram from the Chairman
of the Commission. If you have forgotten this, I
would ask the Secretary-General to bring the
minutes of that meeting to the cognizance of
those representatives on the Council who might
have forgotten its contents, so that they may be
convinced.
We have on our agenda the letters of the So­
viet Union representative and the Chairman of
the Commission, but not the Greek question.
There is no point in the proposal tabled by the
Australian representative; therefore, we cannot
vote on it.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'estime
que la proposition australienne est dep!ac£e et
qu'elle est en dehors du sujet. Monsieur le Pr&i­
dent, je vous prie de noter que la proposition du
repr&entant de l'Australie qui mentionne la
"question grecque" n'est pas a sa place ici. En
effct, ce n'est pas la "question grecque" que nous
examinons; je recommande a ceux qui seraient
tent& de 1'oublier de relire les proc&-verbaux du
Conseil de securite. Nous avons tous ete d'accord
pour dire que nous examinions non pas l'ensemble du probleme grec, mais une question particuliere qui avait ete soulevee dans la lettre au
repr&entant sovietique et dans le cablogramme
du Pr&ident de la Commission. Au cas ou vous
l'auriez oublie, je demanderai au Secretaire g£n&
ral de communiquer le proc&-verbal a ceux des
membres du Conseil qui 1'ont oublie, afin de les
convaincre.
Ce qui figure a 1'ordre du jour, ce sont les
lettres du repr&entant de l'Union sovietique et
du Pr&ident de la Commission, et non pas la
question grecque. La proposition que nous a
soumise le repr&entant de l'Australie n'a pas de
raison d'etre. Nous ne pouvons done pas la
mettre aux voix.
Nous n'avons pas examine l'ensemble de la
question grecque. La question grecque ne figure
pas a notre ordre du jour. Le repr&entant des
Etats-Unis a meme interrompu la declaration du
repr&entant de la Yougoslavie, parce qu'il
croyait que celui-ci s'etait ecarte de la question
que nous examinons. Le repr&entant de l'Aus­
tralie s'est egalement oppose a ce que nous
elargissions la question; il a soutenu que ce n'est
pas la question grecque que nous examinons,
mais une question bien plus etroite, qui avait ete
soulevee par le repr&entant de l'Union sovi&
tique et par le Pr&ident de la Commission. Par
consequent, une decision pr&identielle est deplacee ici et il n'y a pas lieu de mettre aux voix
la proposition australienne. Je ne comprends pas
que l'on puisse nous proposer une telle methode.
Nous devrions respecter notre propre reglement
interieur; nous devroins nous conformer a nos or-

We have not been discussing the Greek ques­
tion generally. The Greek question is not on our
agenda. The United States representative even
interrupted the representative of Yugoslavia dur­
ing his speech, because he thought the Yugoslav
representative was straying from the point which
we were discussing. The Australian representa­
tive also objected to widening the question and
attempted to prove that we were not discussing
the Greek question, but only the narrower ques­
tion raised by the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the Chairman of
the Commission. Any rulings from the Chair,
are, therefore, in this case, irrelevant, and, in
general, the Australian proposal should not be
put to the vote. I fail to understand the proce­
dure suggested. We must at least respect our own
rules of procedure, our agenda, our records, our
documents, to say nothing of common sense

943
considerations, which we should at least take into
account.

The PRESIDENT: I should first like to ask the
Soviet representative whether his proposal stands,
or whether he implied in his remarks that he is
prepared to vote for the Australian proposal with
certain qualifications?
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translated from Russian): I said that,
inasmuch as postponement of the discussion of
this question amounts in itself to postponing a
decision, I have no objection to the Australian
representative's proposal, bearing in mind, of
course, that the Security Council has taken no
decision, and also bearing in mind that it is the
discussion of the question before us which is
postponed, and not the discussion of the Greek
question as a whole.
I have already told the President that my
original text no longer exists, as, with this in­
terpretation of the matter, I agree with the pro­
posal to postpone the discussion.
The PRESIDENT : Then the Chair submits that
we should vote on the amendment to the Austra­
lian proposal submitted by the Polish repre­
sentative.
Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): Before the
Polish amendment is put to the vote, I should
like to explain why I am going to vote against
it. My delegation sees no reason for renewing
the debate on this particular aspect of the Greek
question which we have had under discussion
here; if and when the Australian resolution is
put to the vote, I shall vote for it. I do not my­
self accept Mr. Gromyko's interpretation of that
resolution.
The PRESIDENT : The Polish amendment reads
as follows:
"The Security Council resolves
"That further discussion on the question under
consideration should be postponed until such
time as the final report of the Commission is
submitted to the Security Council."
A vote was taken with the following result:
Votes for:
Poland
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Votes against:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
_ China
United Kingdom
United States of America.

dres du jour, a nos proces-verbaux et a nos docu­
ments; pour ne pas parler du simple bon sens,
dont nous devrions tout au moins tenir compte.
Nous ajoumerions aussi la d6cision a prendre.
Je ne m'opposerai pas a ce texte, s'il est bien
entendu qu'aucune decision n'a 6te prise. Je vous
prie, Monsieur le President, de comprendre qu'il
ne faut pas mentionner ici l'ensemble du probleme grec. D'ailleurs, vous etiez d'accord avec
moi sur ce point.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Je voudrais d'abord demander au representant de
l'Union sovietique s'il maintient sa proposition
ou s'il faut conclure de ses remarques qu'il est
pret a voter en faveur de la proposition de
1'Australie, avec certaines reserves.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'ai dit
que puisque 1'ajournement des debats portant
sur la question que nous examinons signifie un
ajournement automatique de la decision a pren­
dre, je ne m'opposerai pas a la proposition du
representant de l'Australie, pourvu qu'il soit en­
tendu que le Conseil de securite ne prend aucune
decision, et pourvu que nous ajournions la dis­
cussion de la question qui fait l'objet de notre
examen et non les debats sur le probleme grec
dans son ensemble.
Comme je 1'ai deja dit au President, mon texte
primitif n'existe plus puisque, si l'on adopte cette
interpretation, j'accepte la proposition d'ajourner
les debats.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Je pro­
pose done que nous votions sur 1'amendement
du representant de la Pologne a la proposition
de l'Australie.
M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
I'anglais): Avant que nous procedions au vote,
je voudrais expliquer pourquoi je voterai contre.
Ma delegation ne voit pas pourquoi l'on rouvrirait le debat sur l'aspect particulier de la ques­
tion grecque que nous examinons actuellement.
Je voterai en faveur de la resolution de l'Aus­
tralie lorsqu'elle sera mise aux voix. Je n'accepte
pas, quant a moi, l'interpretation que M. Gro­
myko donne de cette resolution.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): L'amendement de la Pologne est congu comme suit:
"Le Conseil de security dicide
"Que tout nouveau debat sur la question soumise a l'examen du Conseil de securite sera
differe jusqu'au moment ou la Commission
d'enquete aura presente son rapport final au
Conseil de securite."
Le vote donne le result at suivant:
Votent pour:
Pologne
Union des Republiques socialistes sovi6tiques.
Votent contre:
Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Chine
Royaume-Uni.
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

944
Abstentions:
Colombia
France
Syria.

S'abstiennent:
Colombie
France
Syrie.

The PRESIDENT: The motion has been re­
jected by six votes to two, with three absten­
tions.
We now come to the Australian proposal,
which reads as follows:
"The Security Council resolves
"That further discussion on the Greek ques­
tion should be postponed until such time as the
final report of the Commission is submitted to
the Security Council."

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): L'amendement a ete rejete par six voix contre deux,
et trois abstentions.
Nous arrivons maintenant a la proposition de
1'Australie, concue comme suit:
"Le Conseil de securite decide
"Que tout nouveau debat sur la question
grecque sera differe jusqu'au moment ou la
Commission d'enquete aura presente son rapport
final au Conseil de securite."

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I shall explain why
I shall not vote in favour of this proposal as long

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de I'anglais):
Je veux expliquer pourquoi je ne voterai pas en
faveur de cette proposition tant que le mot
"final" y figurera. Ce mot va compliquer nos
debats futurs; en effet, quand nous aurons regu
le rapport, ou quand un rapport, quel qu'il soit,
nous sera soumis, on va nous dire qu'il ne s'agit
pas du rapport final; nous attendrons alors
jusqu'a ce qu'on nous soumette ce rapport final.
Or, aussi longtemps que le Groupe subsidiaire
travaillera sous les auspices de la Commission
d'enquete, nous ne poifrrons pas savoir quand ce
rapport final nous parviendra. Cela va remettre
les debats indefiniment. C'est pourquoi je ne
voterai pas en faveur de la proposition de l'Australie.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): We should
certainly like to have an affirmative vote from
the representative of Syria. Accordingly, we
would certainly be prepared to leave out the
word final.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
I'anglais): Nous aimerions bien que le representant de la Syrie nous apporte un vote favorable.
Aussi sommes-nous prets a supprimer le mot
"final".

The PRESIDENT: I was going to propose that
we should omit the word "final."

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): J'allais
moi-meme proposer que nous omettions le mot
"final".
La proposition de 1'Australie est done la suivante:
"Le Conseil de securite decide

as the word "final" is included. That word
would complicate future proceedings; indeed,
when the report arrives or when any report is
submitted, it would be said that it is not the
final report. We shall wait until the final report
is submitted, but, as long as the Subsidiary
Group is working under the auspices of the Com­
mission, we shall not know when the final
report will arrive. That would postpone all busi­
ness indefinitely. For that reason, I shall not
vote in favour of the Australian proposal.

The Australian proposal then reads:
"The Security Council resolves
"That further discussion on the Greek ques­
tion should be postponed until such time as the
report of the Commission is submitted to the
Security Council."

"Que tout nouveau debat sur la question
grecque sera differe jusqu'au moment ou la
Commission d'enquete aura present^ son rapport
au Conseil de securite."

A vote was taken with the following result:

Le vote donne le resultat suivant:

Votes for:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
China
Colombia
France
Syria
United Kingdom
United States of America.
Abstentions:
Poland
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Votent pour:
Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Chine
Colombie
France
Syrie.
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The proposal has been
adopted by nine votes to none, with two ab­
stentions.

S'abstiennent:
Pologne
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): La
proposition est adoptee par neuf voix. II y a deux
abstentions.

945

158. Application of Italy for membership
in the United Nations

158. Demande d'admission au sein de
•'Organisation des Nations Unies
formulee par i'ltalie

The PRESIDENT: I propose that we should
meet again next Tuesday at 10.30 a.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Je pro­
pose que notre prochaine reunion ait lieu mardi,
a dix heures trente.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) : What will be on our agenda at that
time?

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de I'anglais)'. Quel
est l'ordre du jour de cette reunion?

The PRESIDENT: We have the letter from the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Italy to the Sec­
retary-General, dated 7 May 1947.1

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Nous
sommes saisis de la lettre du Ministre des Affaires
etrangeres d'ltalie au Secretaire general, en date
du 7 mai 19471.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
May I make just one observation with regard
to the Italian item? The procedure is covered
completely in rule 59 of our provisional rules
of procedure.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tra­
duit de I'anglais): Je voudrais faire une seule
observation concernant la question de l'admission
de I'ltalie. La procedure est decrite en detail a
Particle 59 de notre reglement interieur.

The PRESIDENT: If it is the sense of the Coun­
cil, we might then adjourn without setting any
definite date.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Si tel
est l'avis du Conseil, nous pourrions ajourner la
seance sans fixer de date precise.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): Maybe we could
vote on the Polish motion which was made at
the morning discussion, along the lines of rule
59 of the provisional rules of procedure, thereby
disposing of another item of our agenda for the
next meeting.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de I'an­
glais) : Nous pourrions peut-etre mettre aux voix
la motion que la Pologne a pr&entce au cours
de la discussion de ce matin, et qui tend a ce
que nous suivions la procedure decrite a Particle
59 du reglement interieur provisoire. Cela nous
permettrait de regler un autre point de notre
ordre du jour de la prochaine seance.

The PRESIDENT: I was going to propose, un­
less the Council decides otherwise, that we might
refer the application of Italy to the Committee
on Admission of New Members, in order that it
might examine and report to the Security Coun­
cil at the appropriate time, as suggested this
morning, in accordance with the provisions of
our rules of procedure.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): J'allais
vous proposer, sauf decision contraire du Con­
seil, de renvoyer la demande d'admission de
I'ltalie au Comite des demandes d'admission de
nouveaux Membres. Ce Comite pourrait alors,
comme on Pa propose ce matin, proceder a
l'examen de la demande en question et faire
rapport au Conseil de security, conformement
aux dispositions de notre reglement interieur.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) : This was the proposal made at the
beginning of our morning meeting. We may sub­
mit the application of the Italian Government
to the Committee which we established last year.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de 1'anglais): C'est
bien ce que l'on a propose au debut de notre
reunion de ce matin. Nous pouvons renvoyer
la demande d'admission du Gouvernement
italien au Comite que nous avons cree 1'annee
dernicre.
Comme je l'ai deja dit, nous ne pouvons exa­
miner aujourd'hui le fond de la question, ni
au Conseil de securite, ni au Comite, car cette
question fait partie de tout un ensemble, a
savoir l'examen des demandes d'admission des
pays avec lesquels nous devons conclure et ratifier des traites de paix.

As I have already stated, we cannot consider
the substance of the application today, either in
the Security Council or in the Committee, be­
cause it is a part of the whole question of the
consideration of applications from the countries
with which peace treaties must be concluded and
ratified.

"The Security Council resolves
"That the application of Italy to the Security
Council for membership in the United Nations

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): J'ai
sous les yeux le texte d'une proposition du representant de la Chine, congu comme suit:
"Le Conseil de securite dicide
"Que la demande presentee par I'ltalie au
Conseil de securite en vue de son admission aux

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 12, Annex 33.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de se­
curity, Deuxiime Annee, Supplement No 12, Annexe 33.

The PRESIDENT: I have a written proposal
from the Chinese representative to this effect:

946
be referred to the Security Council's Committee
on Admission of New Members, for study and
report to the Security Council."
If there is no objection, I take it that the
Security Council accepts the motion of the Chi­
nese delegation.

Nations Unies sera renvoyee au Comite des
demandes d'admission des nouveaux Membres,
aux fins d'examen et de rapport au Conseil de
securite."
S'il n'y a pas d'objection, je considere que le
Conseil de securite accepte la motion du representant de la Chine.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I wish to re­
cord an abstention.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
I'anglais): Je veux faire enregistrer une absten­
tion au proces-verbal.

The PRESIDENT: We then have to put the
motion to a vote.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): II faut
done que je mette la motion aux voix.

A vote was taken with the following result:

Le vote donne le resultat suivant:

Votes for:
Belgium
Brazil
China
Colombia
France
Poland
Syria
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

Votent pour:
Belgique
Bresil
Chine
Colombie
France
Pologne
Syrie
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
S'abstient:
Australie.

United Kingdom
United States of America.
Abstention:
Australia.
The PRESIDENT: The motion is adopted by
ten votes to none, with one abstention.
The meeting rose at 8.10 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): La mo­
tion est adoptee par dix voix; il y a eu une
abstention.
La seance est levee a 20 h. 10.
