S/2007/286

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 May 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 16 May 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1664 (2006), I have the honour to
convey the attached letter from His Excellency Emile Lahoud, President of the
Republic of Lebanon, dated 15 May 2007 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-34706 (E) 180507 180507

*0734706*

S/2007/286

Annex
Letter dated 15 May 2007 from the President of Lebanon
addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: Arabic]
I have learned through the news media that Mr. Fuad Siniora, the Prime
Minister of a Government which is devoid of legitimacy in terms of the National
Pact and the Constitution, sent you a letter calling on you to establish “the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon” through the Security Council under a binding resolution on
the grounds that its establishment by means of the Lebanese Constitution has
become impossible and that the failure to set up the Tribunal will delay the advent
of security and peace in the region.
In his letter, according to the version that was made public, Prime Minister
Siniora stated that the Speaker of Parliament was preventing the Parliament from
meeting to establish the Tribunal and suggested that no comments had been made
about its Statute during the recent visit to Lebanon of your Special Envoy,
Mr. Nicolas Michel.
I truly regret that Prime Minister Siniora should repeatedly indulge in such
tactics in dealing with the highest international authority and should resort to
falsifications and distortions of the facts in order to implicate the Security Council
in action alien to its objectives, its role and its concerns as the supreme political
authority of the United Nations and that he should endeavour to secure support for
one Lebanese group over the other by using the international legitimacy that is the
guarantor of the sovereignty of States and the unity and well-being of their people.
I refer to the letter that you addressed to me on 2 January 2007 in which you
expressed your determination to do everything in your power to ensure that the
United Nations is equal to the hopes placed in it by the Member States. Perhaps the
most outstanding illustration of that honourable position were the discussions which
you held with me on more than one occasion and the fact that you sent your Special
Envoy, Mr. Nicolas Michel, to Lebanon to meet me and to obtain my written
comments on the draft agreement on the Tribunal and its Statute. He received a copy
of those comments which, in every detail, convey my desire to set up the Tribunal
using authorized constitutional means in Lebanon, free from any suspicion or
political agenda and without any distortion of its mandate, thus making the Tribunal
legally unimpeachable, and enabling it to perform its expected role, namely to
prosecute those responsible for the assassination of the late Mr. Rafiq Hariri and his
distinguished companions without any deviation into political conjectures
aggravated by the factionalism and sharp divisions and apprehensions which still
beset the free and honourable citizens and officials of my country.
There is no harm in reminding you of the following established facts about
which there is no dispute:
1.
I was the first Lebanese official to ask for an international investigation
immediately upon the occurrence of the terrorist crime that took the life of Prime
Minister Rafiq Hariri and his companions.
2.
Approval of the Tribunal did not take place in Lebanon in accordance
with the provisions of the Constitution, beginning with the negotiation phase. In that

2

07-34706

S/2007/286

regard the competence of the President of the Republic, as provided for in article 52
of the Constitution, was transgressed, leading to a complete disregard, in the case of
the Tribunal and its Statute, of the procedure for approval of international treaties as
set forth in the Constitution.
3.
The President of the Republic is, according to the Constitution which
guides our political system, Head of State, symbol of national unity, and guardian of
respect for the provisions of the Constitution and of the integrity of the homeland
and its people. It was from this standpoint that I pointed out to you in my letter of
5 February 2007 that approval of the Tribunal directly by the Security Council
would constitute a transgression of the constitutional mechanism that had been
completely ignored, thus increasing anxiety about its being politicized or used for
political purposes, which would ultimately rob it of its capacity to produce the
juridical results expected of it, resulting in dire consequences for the stability and
civil peace of the country that I have tirelessly been trying to preserve.
4.
The Security Council, including its President, its members and the
Secretary-General, has on more than one occasion expressed its desire to see the
provisions of the Lebanese Constitution adhered to in the course of concluding the
International Agreement on the Special Tribunal. But this has not been the case,
contrary to what is claimed by Prime Minister Fuad Siniora, who, along with his
Government, which lacks legitimacy under the National Pact and the Constitution, is
disregarding the will of an entire people who yearn for justice and nothing more,
and fear for their unity should there be imposed upon them a Tribunal that they have
not taken part in establishing and reinforcing in order to achieve that goal.
5.
I draw your attention, Sir, to the fact that the constitutional institutions in
Lebanon are not closed to a Tribunal established by the discretionary decision of
those in charge of them, especially the Parliament. But it is the duty of the
Parliament not to bypass the Constitution and not to violate its provisions and the
competence of its authorities, beginning with the competence of the President of the
Republic under article 52 of the Constitution.
This is in addition to the fact that Parliament cannot stand by and watch the
violation of the Constitution and the tyranny of a ruling clique that disregards the
imperatives of national reconciliation and communal existence and resorts to
seeking power through an outside force over its people and institutions. How can
this Parliament consider the draft act on the Tribunal that has been published in the
Official Gazette as though it had been properly submitted to it, knowing that that
publication and submission took place without the signature of the President of the
Republic who alone is charged by the Constitution with submitting draft laws to
Parliament in accordance with article 53, paragraph 6, of the Constitution.
6.
This Government lost its legitimacy under the National Pact and the
Constitution as of 11 November 2006, when an entire significant sectarian bloc
withdrew from it, and its Prime Minister has not tried for one day to secure its
return, so that it has been completely absent from the decision-making process as
though it were out of the country.
Is this what is desired for a nation based on coexistence and on the Charter that
emerged from the Taif Agreement, which ended one of the worst conflicts that could
ever beset a people and from which it emerged with a unifying strength? It has no

07-34706

3

S/2007/286

desire to fall back into a state of strife and polarization according to its leaders, who
are most solicitous of preserving this unique form of coexistence.
Do we wish to undermine this will or strengthen it?
Is it conceivable that the Security Council could be used in a manner contrary
to the purposes of the United Nations when it ought to be used to affirm them by
helping peoples to strengthen the bonds of their unity and the source of their
strengths and unify their efforts aimed at bringing about a collective national
resolve?
7.
I should like to remind you, Sir, that I have yet to receive a substantive
and written reply to the detailed observations that I had made on two occasions in
response to the successive “last minute” drafts of the Agreement and Statute of the
Special Tribunal, which reached me in a manner not sanctioned by the Constitution.
I promised myself that I would not use lack of time as an excuse, as though the
Tribunal were punishment in and of itself. I tried, instead, to set forth detailed
observations on what I considered, and still consider, to be a unifying goal for my
countrymen — to know the truth — in the hope those observations might be of help
in reaching that noble goal. There has been no procrastination and there are no
closed roads. Perhaps Mr. Nicolas Michel informed you of those observations,
which are documented with both your esteemed Office and mine.
Yet my desire not to involve the Security Council, the highest authority within
the United Nations, in the internal affairs of my country and its established
constitutional mechanisms or in the political groupings that have arisen out of those
blatant constitutional violations, has only been met with the insistence of the group
which rules outside the bounds of the National Pact and the Constitution on
entreating the Council, whose impartiality and dignity I greatly value, to involve
itself in internal Lebanese affairs and favour one political grouping over another.
I shall not enumerate the many violations of my country’s Constitution by a
group which rules outside the bounds of the National Pact and the Constitution. I
only ask that you remain mindful, as you promised me, of the interest of the United
Nations and its exalted, effective and impartial role on the one hand, and the interest
of my nation and people on the other as they tirelessly strive to preserve unity,
stability, security and peace in a troubled region that is rocked by polarization,
conflicting interests and struggles. I hope, Sir, that you will take action. Please have
this letter circulated to the members of the Security Council and place it on file at
the United Nations to be referred to when necessary so as to recall its contents and
the righteous desires and true warnings contained therein.
(Signed) Émile Lahoud

4

07-34706
