S/PV.8911

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8911th meeting

Tuesday, 23 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Fodda
Mr. Singh
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani/Ms. Kinyungu
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Bynoe
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-35153 (E)
*2135153*

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Prosecutor Khan.
Mr. Khan: It is a singular honour to brief the
Security Council on this occasion, which is my first
opportunity to do so in my new role as Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). I present the
twenty-second report that has been presented before
this organ since resolution 1970 (2011) was adopted
in 2011. It is also a pleasure because this is the first
face-to-face briefing that the Prosecutor of the ICC has
had with the Council in the past two years, due to the
strictures of the pandemic.
I think it is only right and proper, with your leave
Mr. President, that because this is my first report as
Prosecutor, perhaps I may be indulged to say a little bit
about my vision. It is a vision in which the relationship
with the Council plays a very important part. We live,
we say, in the age of reason, the age of man, the age of
science in which remarkable battles are done against
invisible foes. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic is but one example of that. Harnessing
collective effort, sharing knowledge, working with
purpose shows that amazing things can happen and that
lives can be saved. Despite that proven, demonstrable
reality, we unfortunately are in a somewhat miserable
state when it comes to the continuous violations that so
many of our brothers, sisters and children suffer as we
speak.
I have hope that the Rome Statute system and the
Office that I lead can help to ensure that the tomorrows
of our children are better than the yesterdays of so many
2/17

23/11/2021

of our fellow members of humankind. That message is
one that needs to be translated into action. My view is
that the Rome Statute principles echo the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. This organ — and
the Council knows this far better than I — has a very
serious and unique role in the firmament of public
international law in terms of international peace and
security, not only being a principal organ of the United
Nations but having the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.
The Council has acted on notable occasions to
ensure that the value of human life is not viewed as
some tradable commodity and that impunity will not be
committed with abandon. The referrals that the Council
has made in the situation of Libya is one example of
that action. I look forward to ever-more constructive
dialogue with the Council, and I believe quite sincerely
and quite practically — not as some theoretical
possibility — that there can be a convergence between
the Council’s own responsibilities under the United
Nations Charter and the principles of the Rome Statute
to ensure that no safe haven is given for war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide.
I was sworn in on 16 June; I have barely been in the
post for five months. When I was sworn in, I emphasized
something that is obvious; however, sometimes the
obvious is forgotten. The Rome Statute system that
creates the ICC is not the property of Italy, or of Europe
or of the West. The values of the Rome Statute belong
to humankind everywhere. It is a large family to which
every single member of the Council belongs. It is not
something that is the sole preserve of States parties. It
is owned as much, in my view, by non-State parties as
well, should they wish to take ownership of something
they already have. It is not the preserve of the common
law system or the civil law system or the Islamic law
system, but of all traditions of the East and of the West.
I think, by any common-sense analysis, this body of
law, this joint quest to narrow impunity for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, must be
a cause that can bring us closer together, instead of
driving us further apart.
The success of my mandate requires support from
the Council and from Member States, States parties and
non-States parties alike. I am going to be looking at new,
imaginative ways of embracing regional organizations
and international organizations to share the burden and
to do better in the discharge of our human, moral as
well as legal responsibilities in relation to the categories
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

of crime that I have mentioned. I commit today to the
Council to use my best endeavours to work towards
broader inclusivity in terms of the Rome Statute
system and the principles that are owned by Council
members. I believe that by doing that we can also foster
reconciliation. We can enhance stability and security,
not only of nations but of regions. But we can do that
only if we work together.
During my term of office as Prosecutor, I am
going to give renewed purpose to the principle of
complementarity, working with States and allowing
States to step up. It is not a favour; the Rome Statute
makes it clear that national authorities have primacy.
It is in black and white. National authorities have the
fundamental right and also the essential responsibility
to make sure that these types of crimes are declared
illegal — going as far back as the Nuremberg principles,
which all permanent members of the Council adhered
to. It presents an opportunity to move things forward.
Turning now to Libya, I emphasize again that the
Security Council referrals are a priority for me. Perhaps
it was the case that over a period of time the scarce
resources of the Office were spread too thin. In my view,
when the Council acts, we should work in accordance
with the Rome Statute to prioritize the matters referred
to us by the Council, given its own responsibilities. Of
course, we will independently and impartially review
the evidence without any view of politics or other
agendas. However, in my view, the referrals deserve to
be prioritized. In relation to all the inventory before the
Office, I have asked that we review those matters. That
includes the Security Council referrals that are before
the Court: Libya and the Sudan. I hope in my next report
that I will be able to set out clear objectives and a road
map that would give clarity on these important matters
and that would help to more transparently and clearly
communicate what the plan is, what we are hoping to do
and how we hope to achieve it.
I should also emphasize that, upon assuming office,
cognizant of my own responsibilities under the Rome
Statute and my ethical obligations under article 42,
paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute, I recused myself from
any case or situation where there may be an appearance
of lack of impartiality, and that includes the case of
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. I will therefore refer
all Council members to the written report submitted,
which deals with those matters. Those cases have been
completely handled by my Deputy, Mr. James Stewart,
and not by me.

S/PV. 8911

This reporting period has been a challenging time
due to COVID-19 as well as due to the security situation
in Libya. It has not been easy, and the team has not been
able to travel physically to Libya. I had a good meeting
with His Excellency Mr. Taher Elsonni, Permanent
Representative of Libya, yesterday. I hope and pray
that it will be the first of many such meetings, because
we need to work together. We need to speak openly
and candidly regarding the obvious problem of lack
of security and the crimes that merited the Council’s
referral of matters to the ICC. Conditions permitting,
I intend to go to Libya early next year. I would like to
engage further with the Government of Libya, but also
other stakeholders. That conversation will inform the
objectives and the understanding that will be presented
to the Council in my next report. There needs to be an
open dialogue, and I think that will also be an extremely
important part.
Despite the difficulties of the security situation
and the challenges within Libya, progress has been
made: interviews have taken place; missions have
been conducted by members of my Office to different
countries; various documents and evidentiary material
have been collected, and there has been dialogue with
different domestic law enforcement entities. The Office
has also taken steps to further confirm, or to try to
further verify, reports of the deaths of two suspects,
namely, Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli
and Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled. I take this
opportunity to ask the representative of Libya for further
help and assistance, as well as Council members. If we
can verify the exact status of those two individuals, we
can take the necessary action of informing the Judges
of the International Criminal Court.
We continue to investigate. The simple but
unfortunate truth is that, since the situation was referred
in 2011, cogent and coherent allegations continue to
arise from that ancient land. The plight of women,
children and men is something that requires greater
action. That requires renewed focus from my Office.
I accept that. It requires an acceleration and more
demonstrable utility of the Office of the Prosecutor. But
it also requires — with the greatest of respect — more
engagement and more support from this organ, which
referred the matter to the Office of the Prosecutor in
the first place.
In this period, we also looked further into the
attacks on Tripoli in April 2019, including those related
to the Tarhouna mass graves. We have been looking at

21-351533/17

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

the detention facilities in Libya and have a stream of
information on both official and non-official detention
sites, with allegations ranging from rape, torture and
mistreatment to sexual and gender-based violence. There
have been allegations regarding the Mitiga Detention
Centre, which is controlled by the Special Deterrence
Force, and the Gernada, Al-Kuweifiya and Tarek Bin
Zayed detention facilities, which are controlled by the
Libyan Armed Arab Forces. I ask Libya, all respected
members of the Council and States parties to reach out
and lend a hand in giving information that will help to
stop the suffering and the crimes that are not new to
anyone in the Chamber. We cannot do much alone and
without partnership. First and foremost, I look forward
to a reforging of the relationship with Libya so that we
can move forward together.
The other matter that is important is the troubling
situation of migrants in Libya. We have had recent
allegations of raids on migrant settlements in Tripoli,
the excessive use of violence and arbitrary detention
of migrants. We call upon the Libyan authorities to
establish prompt, thorough and impartial investigations
in relation to those matters, with a view to ensuring
accountability for those responsible.
With the greatest of humility, I genuinely
commend the Council’s constancy in condemning
all acts of migrant smuggling and human trafficking
into, through and from the Libyan territory and off the
coast of Libya. That situation manifestly undermines
stabilization efforts in Libya and continues to endanger
the lives of tens of thousands of people. Accountability
efforts must march alongside such condemnations. That
situation, by any benchmark, is of such magnitude and
complexity, involving multiple States and regions, that
it calls out for imaginative and nuanced responses.
With your leave, Mr. President, I would like to give one
example of such a nuanced response.
Given the scale of the problem and the lack
of dedicated resources available to my Office, we
have partnered with a joint team — consisting of
the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation (EUROPOL), Italy, the United Kingdom
and the Kingdom of the Netherlands — to combine
efforts, share knowledge and try to move things
forward in a way that is principled and positive. That
engagement has been positive. A couple of months ago,
I attended one of the joint team meetings, and I was
delighted that, further to that collaborative partnership,
the national prosecuting authorities of the Kingdom
4/17

23/11/2021

of the Netherlands in October arrested and charged
someone with this egregious crime. That is one example
where, in my humble view, we need to redefine success
for the Court. Success does not simply mean the
number of trials or proceedings at The Hague. Success
means narrowing accountability, supporting national
authorities and looking at imaginative ways to work
together in a united manner, rather than separately.
Earlier this month, I also had an opportunity to meet
with the President of the European Union Agency for
Criminal Justice Cooperation, Mr. Ladislav Hamran,
during the annual meeting of the Genocide Network.
We spoke about this collaboration together, and we
are going to be looking at new ways in which we can
embrace not just the Agency or EUROPOL, but other
regional partners from other parts of the world, and
how we can use the Office within the mandate of the
Rome Statute to lend a hand to national accountability
mechanisms. Article 93, paragraph 10, of the Statute
makes it clear that that can take place.
I also take this opportunity to make a plea to the
Council, unashamedly and without embarrassment.
I do this knowing that the fiscal environment of all
Member States has been rendered more acute by the
COVID-19 pandemic. We need resources. As compared
to the unquantifiable cost of human suffering, even in
terms of the movement of people, the lack of security
and the other expenditures that are needed, money
to the Court, in my humble view, can be well spent.
The Council has an option. Article 115, paragraph
b, of the Rome Statute makes it clear that the United
Nations can provide funds to the Court, subject to the
approval of the General Assembly. I would ask that the
Council give urgent consideration to the possibility of
requesting the United Nations to fund the Court and my
Office, at least in relation to the two matters that the
Council has referred to the Court. In my humble view,
that is completely consistent with the principles of the
Rome Statute. It is also consistent with the principles
of the Charter. Furthermore, it is consistent with the
Council’s decision to refer the matter of Libya to the
Court. I will make every effort if the Council would
take that step, and it would be money well spent. It
would be a statement of intent for a new dawn, a new
relationship of cooperation with the Office of the
Prosecutor, and I think it could have many dividends
that could be discussed in other forums.
In conclusion, one thing is clear: the Council
has consistently reminded us all that the interests of
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

peace and stability in Libya require that all parties
comply with their public international law obligations,
including respect for international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The victims cannot
be a soundbite. The victims cannot just be raised as
an incantation that makes it look as if we are doing
well — and I am talking about myself as well in this.
We need to do far better than we have done to date,
and we can if we are united. I really ask that we look
at new, imaginative ways of partnering, that we look at
synergies. We can advance our common objective of
accountability in the Libya situation.
If a cause unites us, why not this one? If a response
falls upon us — upon the Council — surely that cause
and that response must be to eradicate in the twentyfirst century genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, and to ensure accountability based
upon evidence, not polemics, political agendas or
political interests. In these remarks, through the
lens of justice, I call for a paradigm shift, a new and
evermore constructive dialogue and partnership with
the Council. In short, I call for nothing less than a new
era of engagement between the Office of the Prosecutor
and the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Mexico.
On behalf of Mexico, I welcome the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Karim
Khan, to the Council. It is his first meeting in that
capacity, and I thank him for presenting the twentysecond report, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), on
the situation in Libya.
We recognize the investigative efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor during the 10 years since the
situation in Libya was referred to the International
Criminal Court. With the upcoming elections, Libya
is at a crucial moment. In that political context, it is
necessary to underline the importance of the fight
against impunity as a cornerstone in the transition and
reconstruction of the social fabric. I wish to highlight
three points in particular.
The first pertains to cooperation. The cooperation
of both the Libyan authorities and the States involved
continues to be essential to consolidate progress towards
accountability. The fact that the arrest warrants issued

S/PV. 8911

by the Court continue not to be executed constitutes
a serious obstacle to the administration of justice.
Mexico urges the Libyan authorities, as well as those
of other States, to redouble their cooperation efforts
with the Court, including the exercise of jurisdiction
in national courts, in accordance with the principle of
complementarity. In that regard, the ICC’s investigative
efforts have benefited from close collaboration with the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We consider
it important to strengthen that coordination, with the
necessary flexibility to add more positive results. On
the other hand, we call for the cooperation agreement
with the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation to be finalized. That will make it possible
to strengthen investigative actions in areas such as
crimes committed against migrants.
My second point refers to the crimes committed in
Libya against migrants. Both the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/752) and that of the ICC Prosecutor
emphasize the seriousness of the crimes, and about
which the Court continues to receive information. We
deem it very important to give due attention to their
investigation and the applicable sanctions, for which
cooperation with regional actors is as necessary as that
with other States that seek to exercise their jurisdiction
to prosecute those responsible.
For my third and final point, we note that the
Prosecutor has indicated in his report that he will give
priority to the situations referred by the Council. In that
context, we underscore the importance of the Council
facilitating support, through the United Nations,
for the expenses incurred by the Court as a result of
such referrals.
I wish to conclude by reiterating Mexico’s support
for the work of the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Court in general to fulfil its mandate. We hope that
the upcoming meetings that the Prosecutor will hold
pertaining to the situation in Libya at the end of this
month, as well as the visit scheduled for 2022, will
make it possible to concretize the progress achieved.
This situation was referred to the Court precisely to
close the impunity gap, and thereby contribute to the
achievement of lasting peace in Libya. We trust that
all the actors involved will honour their commitments,
keeping in mind the principles of truthfulness and
justice that underpin our obligations to the victims of
atrocity crimes.

21-351535/17

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): At the outset, I welcome
Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his first briefing to the
Security Council. I also welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representative of Libya in this meeting.
In today’s meeting, I wish to stress the following three
points.
First, it is imperative to advance the political
process in Libya, especially through efforts to ensure
the holding of presidential and parliamentary elections
on time and successfully. It is equally important that the
relevant parties continue to fully respect the ceasefire
agreement and the Council arms embargo related to
Libya, in order to create a security environment that is
conducive to the preparation and holding of elections.
We highly commend the recent efforts of the United
Nations and regional and international partners in
supporting the Libyan parties in those processes.
Secondly, it is essential to continue to improve the
humanitarian situation in Libya. The United Nations
and international partners must continue to provide
support to address the various challenges in that regard,
particularly those affecting vulnerable groups such as
women, children, migrants and refugees. Furthermore,
Viet Nam continues to call for strengthened efforts to
protect civilians in Libya from the risks of mines and
explosive remnants of war, both in clearance and in
education activities.
Thirdly, we take note of the twenty-second report
of the Prosecutor of the ICC, pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011). At the same time, we would like to reiterate
our consistent position that the State bears the primary
responsibility for the implementation of international
humanitarian law and the prevention and suppression
of serious criminal acts, such as war crimes and crimes
against humanity. The establishment of accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law and
serious criminal acts shall be conducted in accordance
with the fundamental principles of international law,
including respect for the independence and sovereignty
of States.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Prosecutor Karim Khan to a meeting of the
6/17

23/11/2021

Security Council for the first time and congratulates
him on his election to the post of Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We also welcome
Mr. Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya,
to this meeting.
The ceasefire in Libya has been generally
maintained for some time, and election preparations
have continued to advance. The 5+5 Joint Military
Commission agreed in October on the action plan for
the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries from
Libya. The International Conference for Libya was held
in Paris in November, where participating parties sent a
unified message in support of the elections as scheduled
and the complete withdrawal of foreign forces and
mercenaries. Libya has been suffering from turmoil
for more than 10 years, and the current situation has
not come about easily. China encourages all parties to
resolve their disputes regarding the elections through
dialogue, consultation and other peaceful means and to
continue to steadily advance the preparations for the
elections. We call on all foreign forces and mercenaries
in Libya to complete their withdrawal as soon as
possible, in accordance with the relevant action plan,
so as to create favourable conditions for the political
process in Libya.
Last, but not least, I would like to reiterate that
China’s position on the Libya-related matters before the
International Criminal Court remains unchanged. We
expect the ICC to follow the principle of complementary
jurisdiction, as stipulated in the Rome Statute, in
handling the Libyan issue. We also expect the Court
to respect Libya’s judicial sovereignty and to play a
positive and constructive role for the peace process and
national reconciliation in Libya.
Mr. Bynoe (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): At
the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes
and congratulates Prosecutor Karim Khan in his new
role at the International Criminal Court (ICC). We
also thank him for his first presentation of the twentysecond report of the Prosecutor of the ICC to the
Security Council, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Libya to today’s meeting.
Let me begin by reaffirming the unwavering
commitment of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
upholding international criminal justice, which is the
raison d’être of the ICC and the premise on which we
ratified the Rome Statute in 2002. Fundamentally, we
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

emphasize that the ICC has a critical role to play in our
collective pursuit for peace, justice and accountability,
particularly in the investigation of the worst crimes
against humanity, including genocide and war crimes,
as well as in ending impunity and bringing justice to
victims.
We are cognizant that States have the primary
responsibility in ensuring that justice is properly
dispensed, in accordance with their own domestic laws
and systems. We are equally mindful that whenever
States are unable or unwilling to prosecute those
accused of committing the most serious crimes, our
multilateral system ought to play a significant role. For
those reasons, international courts such as the ICC have
been established to guarantee that justice prevails for
victims.
Libya is on the precipice of a new era to turn a new
leaf in one of its darkest chapters in history. At this
juncture, approximately one month before Libya holds
its first national elections, the people, especially the
victims, must be at the core and the backbone of Libya’s
justice system in order to facilitate peace, stability and
national reconciliation. We therefore encourage the
Libyan authorities to continue advancing efforts to end
impunity, protect human rights and bring justice and
reparations to the victims.
Specifically, we urge the Government of National
Unity and Prosecutor Khan to consolidate the gains
of their predecessors. At this crucial stage of Libya’s
history, stakeholders can ill afford to lose any momentum
in seeking justice for the victims of atrocities. We
therefore underscore the importance of cooperation and
the principle of complementarity of the Rome Statute.
We maintain that the circumstances in Libya are
propitious to the strengthening of cooperation between
the Government of National Unity and the International
Criminal Court. As such, we look forward to the visit of
the Prosecutor to Libya in early 2022 to meet with the
Libyan authorities and enhance cooperation that would
allow the International Criminal Court to effectively
discharge its mandate.
Additionally, we echo our repeated call for
non-State parties to accede to the Rome Statue and
for State and non-State parties to fully comply with
their international obligations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
remains in full solidarity with Libya and underscores

S/PV. 8911

that it is past time to redress historical injustices and
to do so in a spirit of national reconciliation, healing,
reparation and social justice.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would first
like to welcome the holding of this briefing to consider
the twenty-second biannual report of the International
Criminal Court on the situation in Libya. I take this
opportunity to congratulate Mr. Karim Khan on his
election as Prosecutor of the Court and wish him every
success in his new position. His relevant and impactful
briefing on the universality of the Court rang clear with
my delegation.
I would also like to congratulate the Office of the
Prosecutor on the considerable progress it has made in
its investigations since its previous report to the Security
Council on this situation in May, and I encourage it to
continue its engagement with the Libyan Government
of National Unity, in accordance with resolution 1970
(2011). In that regard, we welcome the presence of
Ambassador Elsonni in the work of the Council today.
Such cooperation is more necessary than ever at a time
when Libya is working towards holding elections, an
important step towards the normalization of the political
situation. Now is the time to send positive signals to the
people of Libya, and the resignation of Special Envoy
Kubiš at this key moment is far from a positive signal
in that regard.
Those responsible for crimes under the Rome Statute
can be held accountable only through cooperation and
partnership among the Office of the Prosecutor, the
Government of National Unity, the States parties to the
Rome Statute and the entire international community.
In that connection, as noted in the reports of the
Court covering the current and previous reporting
periods, my delegation welcomes the decrease in the
number of crimes under the Rome Statute since the
entry into force of the ceasefire agreement signed
on 23 October 2020 and the establishment of the
Government of National Unity in Libya. We call on
the Libyan authorities to launch investigations into the
torture, inhuman treatment and sexual crimes that are
mentioned in the report, which have been committed in
some prisons and several other detention centres under
their responsibility, with the aim not only of ending
those violations but also of punishing the perpetrators
and their commanders, thereby rendering justice to the
victims. The same action should be taken for victims
of air strikes, landmines, kidnapping and torture, as
well as missing persons. We encourage the Libyan

21-351537/17

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

authorities to continue their cooperation with the Office
to ensure that the aforementioned crimes committed in
Libya are investigated and prosecuted by the competent
Libyan courts.
I commend the efforts of the Office in undertaking
several investigative missions in Libya, interviewing
witnesses and collecting important documents
and evidence from individuals, non-governmental
organizations and representatives of victims’
organizations. We support the Prosecutor’s intention
to visit Libya in early 2022 to meet with the relevant
Libyan authorities and other stakeholders. We need to
work with the Libyans and listen to them in order to
achieve the progress that we are anticipating.
My delegation welcomes the information that the
Office has received on the activities of mercenaries and
foreign fighters in Libya. In that regard, we express
our support for the call made by the new Libyan
authorities, the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and the Security Council on armed
individuals and groups to withdraw from Libya without
delay, as that would undoubtedly contribute to stability
in Libya and its neighbouring countries. Furthermore,
we join the Office in welcoming the important
initiatives and efforts made by Libya, UNSMIL and the
international community to bring peace and stability
to the country, including the ongoing discussions on
traditional reconciliation processes and transitional
justice mechanisms.
We note, as previous reports have mentioned, that
crimes against migrants continue in the context of human
trafficking, a consequence of the conflict in Libya. My
delegation shares the concern about the situation of
migrants in Libya expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report to the Council in September (S/2021/752),
which mentions serious violations against migrants
and refugees. To that end, we encourage the Office
to continue to enhance cooperation, coordination and
the exchange of information and expertise with the
Libyan authorities, the European Union Agency for
Law Enforcement Cooperation and other partners on
crimes committed against migrants and refugees,
so that the perpetrators of these violent crimes are
held accountable.
In conclusion, I reiterate my sincere congratulations
to Prosecutor Karim Khan and his Office for their
constant, unwavering commitment to combating
8/17

23/11/2021

impunity, establishing the rule of law and deterring
further crimes from being committed in Libya.
Mr. Fodda (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank Prosecutor Khan for his report and his briefing.
I reiterate our congratulations to him and wish him
success in fulfilling the crucial missions entrusted to
him.
France reaffirms our unwavering support for the
International Criminal Court and its staff, as well as
our commitment to the independence of the Court.
We will continue to cooperate actively with the Court,
the only permanent international criminal court with
a universal jurisdiction, which plays a key role in
combating impunity. France will support reforms to
strengthen its effectiveness.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
1970 (2011), France recalls that combating impunity
is one of the key elements in resolving conflict and
achieving reconciliation among Libyan parties. We are
counting on the Libyan authorities’ full cooperation
with the Court and with the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. The Prosecutor’s visit to Libya,
planned for early next year, will reflect the priority that
the Court has attached to this case.
The deaths of the alleged perpetrators of the
most serious crimes cannot be considered justice for
the victims. All States, whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute, have an obligation to cooperate
fully with the Court and its Prosecutor under resolution
1970 (2011).
The perpetrators of the crimes committed in
Libya since 2011 must be prosecuted. The atrocities
committed in Tarhouna and south of Tripoli must
be fully investigated. The crimes against migrants,
refugees and detainees, which are again referenced in
the report, cannot go unpunished.
The principle of complementarity, a foundational
principle of the Rome Statute, must be leveraged to the
fullest extent. We welcome the Office of the Prosecutor’s
increased interaction with the relevant Libyan
jurisdictions and services. International investigators
must be granted guaranteed and safe access to Libya’s
entire territory. The Security Council must continue
resolutely to combat impunity and prevent new crimes
from being committed. France welcomes the fact that
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya added Osama Al Kuni Ibrahim
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

to its sanctions list in October, owing to the fact that
he has committed serious human rights violations,
including torture and violence.
The effectiveness of the fight against impunity will
also depend on progress that is made in the political
process in Libya. The prospect of parliamentary and
presidential elections set to begin on 24 December offers
the possibility of a lasting peace. On 12 November,
France, Germany, Italy and Libya co-convened an
international conference for Libya facilitated by the
United Nations. The conference gave the international
community and Libyan actors the opportunity to
reaffirm their support to the electoral process and for
the withdrawal of mercenaries, combatants and foreign
forces from Libya. In accordance with the commitments
made by all of the participants in the Paris conference,
we must now work to implement the commitments of
the Libyan road map endorsed by the Council. France
will continue to support the political transition in
Libya, in particular through concerted efforts with its
European partners and Libya’s neighbours.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank
Prosecutor Khan for his report and briefing this
afternoon during his first visit to the Security Council
as Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). I also want to welcome our friend and colleague,
Ambassador Elsonni of Libya.
We have seen a number of hard-won achievements
in Libya since the October 2020 ceasefire agreement,
including the inauguration of the interim Government
of National Unity in March. We continue to view these
developments as an opportunity to renew the Court’s
relationship with Libya and its relevant national
authorities and stakeholders. The Prosecutor’s intention
to prioritize engagement with the Libyan authorities
is therefore welcome. Ireland further encourages the
Government of National Unity’s efforts, working with
the African Union in particular, to create a national
reconciliation process, as well as its work with the
Libyan authorities to strengthen transitional justice
institutions. Those are important steps for the future of
the Libyan people.
At the same time, we cannot ignore concerning
developments. In September, the Secretary-General
outlined reports of serious violations in relation to the
situation of migrants in Libya. That included reports that
certain State officials affiliated with the Directorate for
Combating Illegal Migration had allegedly committed

S/PV. 8911

serious human rights violations. We welcome the fact
that the Office of the Prosecutor has reviewed those
findings. We echo the Prosecutor’s point that granting
amnesties and pardons for serious crimes, including
murder constituting crimes against humanity, is
incompatible with internationally recognized human
rights.
In the report under consideration, as well as in
previous reports, the Prosecutor has voiced concerns
about credible and substantive information regarding
past and ongoing crimes allegedly committed in
official and unofficial detention facilities in Libya.
That was echoed in the conclusions of the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya in its October report
(A/HRC/48/83), which refers to systemic and widespread
violence against anyone opposing the interests of those
running prisons. Reports of sexual and gender-based
violence, primarily targeting women, remain of deep
concern to us. We welcome continued engagement
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, as well as steps that
the Office has taken to foster coordination between
stakeholders, including the European Union Agency for
Law Enforcement Cooperation, and all efforts aimed at
accountability for violent crimes against migrants and
refugees in Libya.
The work of the ICC is, of course, complementary to
domestic initiatives, and we continue to urge all States
to cooperate with the Court as it investigates allegations
of serious international crimes in Libya. The continued
lack of cooperation with the Court in the execution
of arrest warrants is worrisome. We urge all Member
States, whether or not they are States parties to the
Rome Statute, to execute outstanding arrest warrants.
In particular, we once again urge Libya to arrest and
surrender Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi as a matter
of urgency. We note the Prosecutor’s statement that he
will extend particular prioritization to referrals by the
Council to the ICC. We reiterate our view that cases
referred to the ICC must be accompanied by consistent
follow-up support from the Council. That includes
budgetary support. Findings of non-cooperation by
States in relation to situations already referred by the
Council, including the situation in Libya, also require a
substantive response.
Ireland strongly supports ICC efforts to hold
to account those responsible for the most serious
international crimes in Libya in order to ensure true
accountability for victims. The Court’s pursuit of

21-351539/17

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

23/11/2021

justice and accountability in Libya will serve to build
trust in the State, especially among communities
disproportionately affected by violent conflict.
Accountability for atrocity crimes can assist with the
important reconciliation processes in Libya and the
consolidation of peace. We know that accountability
for atrocity crimes also acts as a strong deterrent and
contributes to conflict and atrocity prevention efforts.

demands our ongoing attention and a concerted
international response.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating Ireland’s
steadfast support for the work of the ICC in Libya. We
remain convinced that accountability is key to peace,
stability and justice for the future of Libya.

As another marker of the importance of
documentation, we also welcome the report of the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya (FFM)
released on October 1 (A/HRC/48/83). The Mission
interviewed more than 150 individuals and reviewed
hundreds of documents on violations and abuses in
Tripoli, Ganfouda and southern Libya. The Human
Rights Council’s establishment in June 2020 of the
FFM, mandated to document alleged violations
and abuses of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by all parties in Libya
since the beginning of 2016, represented a positive step
toward accountability. We welcome recent adoption of
the Human Rights Council resolution 48/25 to extend
the Mission’s mandate, but deeply regret that the
extension was granted for only nine months, rather
than the customary twelve months. The Mission must
be afforded the time to conduct an exhaustive review of
its current and future findings.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Prosecutor Khan for his briefing. We
congratulate him on his appointment as Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. We wish him success
in his new role. The United States looks forward to
working with his Office and commends the efforts of
the Court to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for the atrocities committed against the Libyan people
since the adoption of resolution 1970 (2011).
The United States has historically been and
will continue to be a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for the victims of atrocity
crimes through the appropriate mechanisms. Justice,
accountability and the rule of law are values that
we share and continue to believe are best advanced
together. That brings me to today’s topic — the Court’s
ongoing investigation into the situation in Libya.
The chronic insecurity we are witnessing in Libya
today is best addressed through accountability, which
starts with rigorous documentation and investigation.
The precarious human rights situation makes such
work all the more difficult. Numerous armed groups
and forces have faced allegations of arbitrary killings,
indiscriminate air strikes, forced disappearances,
torture, unlawful detention and sexual and gender-based
violence. Disturbing reports of violence committed in
Libyan prisons, with detainees subject to torture and
their families denied visitation rights, continue. The
situation of internally displaced people, as well as that
of migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers, remains
dire. Regrettably, Libya remains ill-equipped to
accommodate such large population movements.
The unearthing of the mass graves in the town of
Tarhouna remains at the forefront of our minds. The
gravity of the allegations connected to those graves
10/17

We thank the Court, the United Nations, and
national authorities for their ongoing investigative
work, including efforts to exhume the mass graves
and to collect and preserve evidence for use in future
prosecutions, truth-telling and other transitional
justice measures.

I will now address the question of justice. Former
senior officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime, such as
Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
the latter of whom is subject to an arrest warrant by
the ICC for charges of war crimes and crimes against
humanity, must face justice. The perpetrators of serious
human rights violations, war crimes and crimes against
humanity must not be allowed to continue to inflict
violence and turmoil. We call on the Government of
National Unity to take all possible action to secure
the arrest and surrender of those wanted by the ICC.
Moreover, any individual, group or country providing
protection and refuge to those individuals should and
must immediately alert and otherwise facilitate their
transfer to the appropriate authorities.
We also continue to monitor the Libyan legal
proceedings against Al-Senussi. We support the
ongoing efforts to build domestic capacity to punish
perpetrators of human rights abuses and violations
and encourage support for local capacity-building and
judicial reform in Libya. Guaranteeing due process
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

rights, as well as protecting the rights and security of
victims and witnesses, is central to the success of any
domestic prosecutions.
We would like to express our concern, as reported
in the final report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan
(S/2021/40), that Abdallah Banda, a prominent exJustice and Equality Movement Darfuri commander
subject to an arrest warrant by the ICC, launched
his own rebel group and has received financing and
military materials from the Libyan National Army in
return for its support.
This briefing also serves as an important reminder
that the victims and survivors of human rights
violations and abuses in Libya deserve justice. To
achieve that end, such groups need the help and support
of civil society advocates. The work of civil society,
however, continues to be curtailed by the damaging
effects of the Government of National Unity’s Decree
286, which regulates the activities of non-governmental
organizations. We have credible reports that
non-governmental organizations fear retaliation if
they should meet with international organizations.
The severe restrictions imposed by that decree impede
domestic efforts to secure justice for victims and
survivors. We strongly urge the Government of Libya
to revoke the decree, given its harmful effects on the
rights and freedoms of its people.
Finally, I would like to turn to how we can promote
peace and security in Libya. The United States
reaffirms our call on all actors in Libya to commit
to ensuring that free and fair elections take place as
scheduled. We welcome the Libyan 5+5 Joint Military
Commission’s action plan for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries from Libya,
in line with resolution 2570 (2021) and the Libyan
ceasefire agreement. Further, all external military
support inconsistent with the United Nations arms
embargo must end. That includes the training and
financing of mercenaries, proxy forces and armed
groups. That violent instability remains a threat to the
entire wider region.
The ICC’s work in Libya is a critical element of
our shared commitments to accountability, peace
and security. To achieve those goals in Libya, the
appropriate mechanisms, including international,
hybrid and domestic courts, need to deliver for victims
of atrocities. We will continue to support the Court’s

S/PV. 8911

investigations and contributions, which we hope will
help bring true justice to the people of Libya.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Allow me to start by
extending my congratulations to Mr. Karim Khan on
his election as Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and thanking him for today’s briefing.
Norway has been a staunch supporter of the ICC
from the outset, and today, the mission of the ICC — to
fight impunity for the most serious crimes — remains
as crucial as ever. Accountability and the pursuit of
justice are key components for achieving sustainable
peace in Libya and beyond.
Norway lends its full support to the political
process in Libya, including the upcoming elections on
24 December. It is critical that the elections be held
according to plan. Free, fair and inclusive elections are
essential if Libya is to move forward and avoid further
destabilization. Norway reiterates the call from Libyans
themselves for mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign
forces to leave the country, as decided in the ceasefire
agreement just over a year ago and agreed again in the
5+5 Joint Military Commission on 8 October.
Norway welcomes the Prosecutor’s prioritization
of situations referred by the Security Council. We
look forward to his next report which, we understand,
will contain information on further concrete steps
to be taken. Addressing impunity is critical to
stability, reconciliation and sustainable peace in
Libya. Resolution 1970 (2011) mandated the Libyan
authorities to fully cooperate with and assist the ICC.
We call on the Libyan authorities, Libya’s partners
and the international community to cooperate with
the Prosecutor’s Office. We would also welcome even
closer and more flexible cooperation with the European
Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation and
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Norway notes that the Prosecutor’s Office is
continuing its efforts to verify the death of two suspects.
We remain deeply concerned by reports of ongoing
crimes, including murder, forced disappearances,
arbitrary detention in official and unofficial centres,
torture and sexual and gender-based violence. The
prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence must be a priority. We should
utilize sanctions, where relevant and appropriate, to
counter such heinous acts. We also call for reinforced
efforts to combat violence against migrants.

21-3515311/17

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

We look forward to continued cooperation with
all members of the Council in securing accountability
for mass atrocities. The Council must uphold its
responsibility to fully support the Court, especially
in cases it has referred to it. That includes ensuring
adequate resources for the Court.
Please be assured, Mr. President, that Norway’s
support for the Court and the work of its Prosecutor is
unwavering.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Mr. Karim Khan in his
new position as Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court. We hope that his accession to the Court
will lead to the correction of the significant imbalances
consistently highlighted by our delegation and bring
the Court closer to at least partially recovering its badly
tarnished reputation.
Some positive developments are already in sight.
For the first time, the Court’s report on the investigation
of the situation in Libya has something we can truly
appreciate: honesty. The Office of the Prosecutor
openly states that there is a lack of any significant
progress in this matter. That is what our delegation has
been saying for a decade and is pleased that the ICC has
finally stopped pretending to engage in intense activity
and admitted the obvious.
In general, the approach of the ICC on the Libyan
file remains discriminate, whereby all guilt is placed
on only one of the parties to the conflict. We have yet
to see any cases opened regarding ostensible crimes
committed by militants or the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham. The Court has not even tried to investigate
NATO’s illegitimate air strikes on the territory of
Libya, which caused numerous civilian casualties.
We regret that Libyan statehood has been razed
to the ground for the sake of the ambitions of Western
States. That once prosperous country still lies in ruins
and needs to be progressively rebuilt. As for the civilian
population, whom the do-gooders from NATO tried to
protect, it had to suffer the terrors of an all-out civil
war, utter chaos, total disorganization and devastation.
A decade passed before Libya could detect any positive
signs in its complicated political settlement process.
Libya’s general elections are scheduled for
24 December. We call on all parties to exercise
maximum restraint so as to enable the long-suffering
12/17

23/11/2021

Libyan people to exercise their legitimate right to elect
and be elected.
Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): I thank Mr. Karim Khan
for his report and for his first briefing to the Security
Council. I also congratulate him on his election as
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Kenya welcomes the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Libya in this meeting.
The Libyan people have endured great suffering in
the past decade, both from domestic conflicts and from
interventions by multiple external actors. In this period,
all the shortcomings of the international community’s
tools for the resolution of humanitarian, security and
political crises have been visible. Even as the situation
in Libya stabilizes, we cannot help but recall that the
travails afflicting the Sahel are a result of actions
taken a decade ago. The protection of civilians and the
territorial integrity of many States of that region have
come under threat due to the externalization of the
situation in Libya.
Given that grim history, I am glad to note the
tangible progress achieved as Libyans are once again
leading their own pursuit of peace and security. Libyans
are looking to go into a much-awaited election exactly
a month from now. In the exercise of their right to
select their leaders and determine how they want to be
governed, Libyans will be manifesting their desire for
strong national institutions and a national system that
grants its people the confidence of peace and prosperity.
Several recent events and Government efforts,
including the Libya Stabilization Conference held in
Tripoli on 21 October, speak to that determination.
Accountability and the delivery of justice are critical
elements to the enjoyment of peace and stability.
They are also key markers for the trust a people has
in its Government. The effectiveness of national
judicial and prosecutorial institutions is critical to
the exercise of sovereignty, which the fundamental
basis for membership of the United Nations, from
which the ICC’s present engagement with Libya is
drawn. As such, Kenya calls for strict adherence to the
principle of complementarity with regard to regional
and international judicial instruments, including the
International Criminal Court.
Sustained peace requires legal accountability,
particularly for heinous crimes perpetrated as a
continuation of political conflict, but it also requires a
sequencing of that accountability with the workings of a
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

political process that resolves the conflict and advances
reconciliation. Focusing solely on legal accountability,
without due regard to political reconciliation, can
endanger the very peace being sought. Kenya therefore
strongly supports Libya’s national reconciliation process
and encourages its continued implementation under the
national reconciliation commission. Reconciliation
is a long-term business requiring the goodwill and
support of neighbours and friends. That is why Kenya
encourages the engagement of the African Union in the
process.
The Prosecutor’s report has highlighted the plight of
migrants in Libya. That problem must be tackled across
a broader spectrum, not just in Libya. If serious efforts
are not undertaken to respond to the push factors behind
their migration, migrants will continue to undertake
this perilous journey and endure the indignity and
injustice we continue to see being perpetrated. We call
on all those involved and aiding in the interception at
sea and return of migrants to Libyan ports to desist
from that activity. We also urge all the relevant national
and international authorities involved to ensure that the
safety of migrants and refugees is secured and that they
are humanely treated.
Finally, Kenya continues to call for respect for
Libya’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, including
through the withdrawal of foreign fighters and
mercenaries from Libya, and for foreign interference in
that country to desist.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): I would
like to start by offering our thanks to Prosecutor Karim
Khan for his powerful briefing today, on the occasion of
the twenty-second report of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on the situation in Libya. As this is his first
time addressing the Security Council as Prosecutor of
the ICC, I would like to assure him of my country’s
support for him as he carries out his important duties.
United Kingdom welcomes the Prosecutor’s report
and his intention to visit Libya early next year. We urge
the Government of National Unity to facilitate that visit
and allow the ICC to investigate with independence,
in accordance with the Rome Statute and resolution
1970 (2011). The United Kingdom is committed to
providing our full support to the Prosecutor’s ongoing
investigations on Libya, which are as important as ever
at this crucial time in the political process.
We share the concern of the Prosecutor on the
conclusions contained in the October report of

S/PV. 8911

the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
(A/HRC/48/83). The report only serves to highlight
the importance of the Mission. The United Kingdom
welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission. We call on the Libyan
Government to support the Mission by facilitating
unrestricted and unfettered access throughout Libya.
We urge the Government of National Unity to put an
end to crimes committed in detention centres and to
investigate the crimes committed in Mitiga prison
and the Gernada detention facility. The Government
of National Unity should also investigate and address
violence against women and girls, including the fates
of female detainees at Al-Kuweifiya detention centre,
which remain unknown.
United Kingdom takes this opportunity to commend
the efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission to
develop an action plan for ensuring the withdrawal of
foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya. The United
Kingdom has been clear that their withdrawal should
happen without delay, and the Commission’s action plan
represents a Libyan-led practical step forward towards
their withdrawal. The United Kingdom draws attention
to statements of the Office of the Prosecutor that crimes
committed by those foreign forces and mercenaries in
Libya potentially fall within the jurisdiction of the ICC.
The United Kingdom is clear that civilians must
be protected in conflict and that those responsible for
violations of international law must be held to account.
We are deeply concerned by the discovery of yet more
graves at Tarhouna. We encourage the Government of
National Unity to continue its investigations and take
all possible actions to hold those responsible to account.
The United Kingdom has funded humanitarian
assistance to provide psychosocial support and
access to health care and other basic services and
assistance for migrants, refugees and asylum seekers
The United Kingdom appreciates the cooperation
that the Prosecutor’s Office has been able to offer the
national authorities in combating people smuggling and
human trafficking.
We underline the importance of the process of
national reconciliation and providing accountability
and justice for atrocity crimes. We urge the Government
of National Unity to work with the Office of the
Prosecutor to achieve those goals. We reiterate our call
for all relevant States, including both States parties and
States non-parties to the Rome Statute, to cooperate

21-3515313/17

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

with the ICC in the arrest and surrender of individuals
subject to arrest warrants.
The United Kingdom fully supports the Prosecutor’s
important investigation into the situation in Libya that
was mandated by the Council. We will continue to
work with his Office and with international partners to
close the impunity gap for atrocity crimes in Libya and
achieve justice for the people of Libya.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): We welcome Mr. Karim
Khan to the Security Council on the occasion of his first
briefing to the Council as Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We thank Prosecutor Khan for
the twenty-second periodic report on the situation in
Libya and for his remarks today.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate Estonia’s
unwavering support to the ICC as an independent and
impartial judicial institution and an important pillar of
the rules-based international order.
With regard to the situation on the ground in
Libya, we remain concerned about reports of continued
violence and a lack of security and stability. We recall
that all crimes, including those taking place in detention
facilities, need to be investigated and prosecuted by the
Libyan authorities.
Estonia also remains concerned about the crimes
perpetrated against migrants and refugees and notes the
ICC’s role in assisting national authorities to prosecute
cases.
We continue to call for the departure of all foreign
fighters and mercenaries from Libyan territory as a
first step towards the full and timely implementation of
the 23 October 2020 ceasefire agreement, in line with
resolution 2570 (2021).
The holding of free, fair, inclusive and credible
elections in December this year will prove vital for the
strengthening of the rule of law in Libya.
The full cooperation of the Government of National
Unity and all other relevant stakeholders with the Office
of the Prosecutor is crucial to achieving accountability
for those responsible for Rome Statute crimes. Estonia
reiterates that the authorities must ensure that ongoing
and future investigations be carried out in accordance
with international standards and in full cooperation
with the ICC.
Estonia welcomes the strengthening of mutual
cooperation by the ICC with national authorities and
14/17

23/11/2021

stakeholders to enhance the collection and preservation
of evidence. In that regard, we welcome the meeting of the
Office of the Prosecutor with domestic law enforcement
agencies to coordinate their respective activities.
Estonia further encourages the strengthening of
formats of cooperation and exchange of information
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the Panel
of Experts on Libya, the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya, the European Union Agency for
Law Enforcement Cooperation and the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya.
With regard to ensuring the effectiveness of
the work of the Court, we would like to take this
opportunity to point out the need to ensure that the
ICC has the necessary budgetary resources to fulfil
its mandate. That includes funds to be provided by the
United Nations in relation to the expenses incurred due
to the referral of situations by the Security Council to
the ICC.
Finally, we recall that the execution of ICC arrest
warrants remains essential to uphold justice for victims.
Unfortunately, so far there have been no tangible
results in the implementation of the warrants in the
Libyan case. We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor
to ascertain the alleged deaths of the fugitives and urge
for full cooperation with the ICC in surrendering the
remaining fugitives to the Court.
As Estonia’s membership of the Security Council
is coming to an end, allow me to once more reiterate
our full support for the work of the ICC and urge all
States and other stakeholders to uphold and defend the
principles and values enshrined in the Rome Statute.
Cooperation with the ICC to end impunity and establish
justice for the victims in Libya must be prompt
and meaningful.
Mr. Singh (India): I would like to join others
in thanking the Prosecutor, Mr. Karim Khan, for
his briefing today. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya, Ambassador Taher Elsonni.
At the very outset, let me place on record that
India is not party to the Rome Statute. I would like to
recall discussions in the Security Council back in 2011,
when India expressed our doubts about the effect of the
referral of the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in bringing about a cessation
of violence and the restoration of calm and stability.
As we had our concerns then, the referral did not have
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

its intended impact. In fact, subsequent events have
only reinforced our view that, when cases are referred
to the Court primarily for political reasons, the ICC
mechanism may not be best suited to serve the purpose
of justice.
In a month’s time, we are expecting the presidential
and parliamentary elections in Libya, as decided by the
Libyan parties and further reinforced by the Security
Council. However, challenges remain, including
impediments to the holding of elections in a free, fair
and credible manner. In particular, the involvement
of external forces in the internal affairs of Libya has
negatively impacted progress on the political track,
and terrorist forces have been raising their heads once
again. The importance of holding elections as planned
on 24 December in a free, fair, inclusive and credible
manner cannot be overemphasized.
It is also important that the provisions of the
ceasefire agreement and successive Security Council
resolutions be respected and that the Libyan parties’ call
for the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries be
honoured. India is also concerned about violations of
the arms embargo. Such violations have the potential to
cause hindrances in achieving progress in the political
process by threatening the security environment. We
must ensure that terrorist groups and affiliated entities
not be allowed to operate unchallenged in Libya. The
continued presence and activities of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant in Libya is of serious concern,
including due to the potential cascading effect it could
have throughout the Sahel region. It is unfortunate
that the issue is not drawing the necessary attention
it deserves.
India has traditionally enjoyed close and mutually
beneficial bilateral ties with Libya. We genuinely
wish to see enduring peace and stability return to the
country and remain committed to supporting Libya and
the Libyan people in that endeavour. We hope that all
efforts by the international community, including the
ICC, contribute to achieving unity, peace, security
and stability in the country and to bringing about an
inclusive and comprehensive national reconciliation.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): As this is
the first briefing by Mr. Khan to the Security Council,
we would like to join our colleagues in welcoming him
and wish him and his team every success. I also thank
him for the twenty-second report submitted pursuant to

S/PV. 8911

resolution 1970 (2011). I welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Libya in this meeting.
My country is closely following the political and
security situation in neighbourly and brotherly Libya
at this critical juncture. We stress Tunisia’s continued
support for Libya and all international and regional
efforts to achieve a seamless and peaceful political
transition in that brotherly country that promotes
security and stability in Libya, in accordance with the
will and aspirations of the Libyan people.
Resolution 1970 (2011) and the Rome Statute are the
two main points of reference for the Security Council
in exercising its functions, aimed at striking a delicate
balance between fighting impunity for the most serious
crimes and the maintenance of international peace
and security in Libya. They also form the basis of the
impartial and independent jurisdiction exercised by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya.
We welcome the regular semi-annual briefings by
the Prosecutor to the Security Council, which allow for
more interaction and coordination between the ICC and
the Security Council. We also value striking a balance
between focusing attention on the necessary political
settlement and stability and accountability.
We appreciate the continued efforts of the
Prosecutor and his Office in accordance with his
mandate in Libya, despite the restrictions imposed
by the coronavirus disease pandemic on their ability
to carry out of their functions on the ground. That is
evident in the prioritization of contacts with witnesses
and victims with a view to collecting reliable evidence
in the field. We also commend the coordination and
cooperation of the Office of the Prosecutor with the
Libyan authorities and other stakeholders, including
other States and organizations, towards ensuring
the rule of law and documenting serious violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in Libya.
Despite the adoption of the ceasefire, we are
concerned that the Libyan authorities have recently
discovered new mass graves in Tarhouna. That is
a reminder of the importance of the responsibility
of Libyan and international parties to bring about
lasting peace in Libya, in particular through the full
implementation of the ceasefire, including the full
withdrawal of all foreign fighters and mercenaries from
Libya. All parties must respect the arms embargo.

21-3515315/17

S/PV.8911

The situation in Libya

Tunisia stresses that the best means of achieving
accountability in Libya is a dialogue-based approach
and national measures based on the priority of national
jurisdiction and the need for international justice. In
that regard, Tunisia welcomes the renewed vision of
the Prosecutor of the ICC in addressing Libya’s dossier
through a practical and flexible approach that stresses
the principle of complementarity between the ICC
and the national authorities responsible for ensuring
accountability on the territory.
We also welcome the report’s reference to
traditional means of justice and reconciliation that take
all complementary options and choices into account, in
accordance with the text and spirit of the Rome Statute
and based on Libya’s ownership and leadership in
ensuring the rule of law and post-conflict justice.
We look forward to the visit of the Prosecutor next
year to Libya to lay the foundation of dialogue with
the Libyan authorities on achieving justice in Libya
in a framework of engagement with the permanent
national judiciary through the division of labour, the
coordination of efforts and building capacity in the rule
of law area towards common goals.
In conclusion, Tunisia reaffirms its hope that the
situation in Libya will be addressed on the basis of the
principles of national ownership, active partnership
and joint responsibility, with the steadfast support
of the international community and the Security
Council towards achieving the desired goals in Libya,
a comprehensive political settlement and an end to all
forms of foreign intervention, with a view to achieving
security and stability in Libya and to setting Libya on
the path of sustainable development and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish you every success.
We welcome Mr. Karim Khan and congratulate him
on his election as the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We thank him for his briefing
and for the twenty-second report. We also thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her work as Prosecutor.
The Libyan people are working tirelessly
to build their modern civil State, despite the
exceptional circumstances in the country, and to
16/17

23/11/2021

promote accountability and fight impunity through
comprehensive national reconciliation, which begins
with justice, truth, openness, apology, reparation and a
call for amnesty and forgiveness, which constitute. the
pillars of transitional justice. Taking those steps will
allow us to turn the painful page of the past 10 years
in Libya.
Ensuring justice on Libyan territory is a sovereign
right and reflects Libya’s national jurisdiction to
prosecute anyone accused of a crime under the Libyan
penal code. It reflects our territorial sovereignty and
the sovereignty of our citizens.
The Libyan judiciary is committed to ensuring due
process and fair trials for all who have been accused. We
reaffirm that our cooperation with ICC is based on the
memorandum of understanding between the Office of
the Attorney General and the Office of the Prosecutor,
which recognizes the role of the ICC in supporting the
judiciary in Libya and not substituting for it, because
the history of the ICC has been marred by politicization
and selectivity in addressing cases referred to it.
Every few days, the General Authority for Research
and Identification of Missing Persons announces the
discovery of new mass graves in Tarhouna, the most
recent of which was on 16 November in the area of
Abdaly, on the outskirts of Tarhouna. Two new mass
graves were identified and excavations continue. In
that regard, we support the cooperation between the
Office of the Attorney General and the ICC on the
investigations of these mass graves. That includes
investigations into other war crimes and violations
committed over the past years, without exception and
regardless of where they were committed. We await
the results of the investigation of the ICC team that
recently visited Libya and the Human Rights Council
Fact-Finding Mission to identify those involved and to
prosecute the fugitives.
Some criminals exploit the circumstances, but
that does not mean that they have impunity. Their
crimes are not subject to the statute of limitations. The
judiciary is fully independent and individuals who are
proven to have taken part in those massacres, directly
or indirectly, will be held accountable and prosecuted
sooner or later.
Libya is working to protect illegal migrants from
any violations resulting from the current crisis. Despite
all challenges, we are doing our utmost to rescue them,
provide them with protection and deport them whenever
21-35153

23/11/2021

The situation in Libya

possible. We will not accept attempts by some States to
require us to naturalize those illegal migrants, as it is
not in line with our national legislation.
In this context, we find it strange that the
international community is indifferent towards human
trafficking. It seems to focus only on Libya. However,
we all know that human trafficking networks are
international and transboundary in nature. Addressing
this phenomenon needs to start with ending the work of
these networks and targeting their leaders. That is why
we are asking Mr. Khan and his team and the Security
Council to prosecute those international criminals and
impose sanctions on them without exception, whether in
the countries of origin and transit in Africa or countries
of destination in Europe.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that Libyans trust that
their judicial institutions are able to achieve justice and
the rule of law despite all the challenges in the country.
The biggest challenge is the ability to enforce the law,
which requires the Council’s support for our institutions
and for the stability and progress of our State. We ask
simply that the negative interventions in all their forms
be stopped in respect of Libyan national sovereignty
and the will of the Libyan people and their right to self-

S/PV. 8911

determination, so that we can build our State into a
State of justice and law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
ask Prosecutor Khan whether he has anything to add.
Mr. Khan: I think the only point I would add is
that I have listened very carefully to the members of the
Council and the representative of Libya. Two or three
members have mentioned the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), and that point is very well taken. We
do know that ISIL generally represents, as the Council
has underlined, a threat to international peace and
security, and we also know the Sisyphean efforts that
countries, particularly in the Sahel, have undertaken to
deal with the metastasizing violent ideology. This is a
matter that I will look into further. The point is well
taken, and I hope in my next report that I will have
put some lines forward in relation to that. It is indeed
well taken.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Khan
for that final comment.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m..

21-3515317/17
