S/2016/675

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 August 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2267
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 28 February
2017 and requested me to report every six months on the situation in Guinea -Bissau
and on progress made in the implementation of the resolution and the mandate of
UNIOGBIS. The report also provides an update on key political, security, human
rights, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments in Guinea -Bissau since my
report of 12 February 2016 (S/2016/141).

II. Major developments in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Political situation
2.
Since my previous report, the political situation in Guinea-Bissau has
deteriorated. Following the decision on 15 January 2016 by the Permanent
Commission of the National Assembly to remove the parliamentary mandate of
15 Members of Parliament, parliamentary work has ground to a halt. The 15 Members
of Parliament had been expelled from the ruling African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC) for abstaining from voting on the Government ’s
programme during the first ordinary session of the Assembly.
3.
On 24 February, President José Mário Vaz circulated a draft political
agreement aimed at ensuring stability until the end of the current parliamentary
term. The agreement provided for the reversal of the decision by the Permanent
Commission and a commitment by the signatories to abandon ongoing legal actions.
PAIGC offered an alternative agreement that focused, inter alia, on institutional
strengthening, reforms and a commitment to respect judicial decisions. Neith er
proposal was adopted by the National Assembly.
4.
On 7 March, during its one-day visit to Guinea-Bissau, the Security Council
called upon President Vaz to engage the country’s key political stakeholders in
dialogue and to promote respect for the laws and Constitution of the country. The

16-12793 (E)

150816

*1612793*

S/2016/675

Council also encouraged Prime Minister Carlos Correia, Cabinet members, the
Speaker of Parliament, PAIGC and the opposition Party for Social Renewal (PRS) to
similarly engage in inclusive and constructive dialogue to ease persistent tensions
between national authorities. The Council’s messages were reiterated by the former
President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo, who visited Bissau on 2 May in his capacity
as the Special Envoy of President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria for Guinea-Bissau
and on behalf of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
5.
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union also conducted a mission
to Guinea-Bissau from 16 to 21 March, with the objective of assessing the situation
in the country and identifying ways to contribute to the resolution of the political
crisis. The delegation held consultations with President Vaz, the Speaker of the
National Assembly, the Prime Minister, Cabinet ministers, the Secretary of State for
Public Law and Order and the Attorney General. They also met with representatives
of political parties and civil society organizations, including religious leaders. The
delegation reiterated the availability and readiness of the African Union to support
national stakeholders in their efforts to find a lasting solution to the crisis and
encouraged them to exercise restraint, uphold the country’s interest and engage in
dialogue to resolve political differences.
6.
On 4 April, the Supreme Court of Justice declared that the decision of the
Permanent Commission of 15 January was unconstitutional on the basis that it
violated the immunities granted to a Member of Parliament and was made by the
Permanent Commission at a time when it did not have the legal authority to do so .
On 19 April, in an address to the nation delivered at the National Assembly,
President Vaz called upon the National Assembly to resume its regular functioning.
He also stressed the need to identify solutions to the crisis within the parliamentary
framework and ruled out the possibility of dissolving the National Assembly.
7.
On 3 May, the third ordinary session of the National Assembly was convened.
However, it was adjourned on the same day owing to divisions among Members of
Parliament over the agenda and status of the 15 former PAIGC Members of
Parliament. Consultations among the parties represented in Parliament proved to be
inconclusive up until the end of the parliamentary session on 14 June.
8.
On 4 May, the Regional Court of Bissau issued a decisio n invalidating the
expulsion of Baciro Djá from PAIGC in November 2015. Mr. Dj á had been expelled
for allegedly breaching the party’s rules and regulations by accepting the position of
Prime Minister in August 2015. According to the Court, the process lead ing to his
expulsion was illegal given that Mr. Djá had not been afforded the opportunity to
appeal the decision before the party’s competent organs. On 5 May, PAIGC
appealed the Regional Court’s decision.
9.
On 9 May, President Vaz met with representatives of the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the European Union and
the United Nations to discuss the ongoing parliamentary crisis. The President
indicated that he had decided to initiate new consultations with all partie s
represented in Parliament to find a solution to the crisis. He appealed to
international partners to exert influence by, inter alia, emphasizing the importance
of compliance with judicial decisions. International partners called for patience and
restraint to prevent the crisis from deepening. They also requested the President to
use his good offices to address the labour strikes that had been affecting the
country’s health and education sectors since March.

2/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

10. On 11 May, the Council of Ministers issued a communiqué expressing serious
concern about the political stalemate, denouncing the President ’s inability to
promote dialogue and blaming him for the “climate of misunderstanding” in the
National Assembly.
11. Addressing the nation for a second time, on 12 May, President Vaz indicated
that it had not been possible to resolve the stalemate in Parliament, notwithstanding
all national and international mediation and dialogue efforts. He explained that in
accordance with the Constitution, he could request the Prime Minister to reshuffle
the Government, dissolve the National Assembly or dismiss the Government and
appoint a new Prime Minister to form a new cabinet. He had decided to opt for the
dissolution of the Government. He also called upon trade unions to suspend their
strikes, given the “inability” of the Government to fulfil its obligations. Hours after
delivering the address, the President issued a decree dismissing the Government of
Prime Minister Correia. The presidential decree marked the third change in
Government since the general elections in 2014. On the following day, President
Vaz initiated consultations with political parties represented in Parliament during
which he requested them to present proposals for a new Government that would
guarantee stability until the end of the current parliamentary term.
12. On 16 May, PAIGC submitted its proposal to the President, in which it
suggested that the new Government be composed of representatives from political
parties, both within and outside the Parliament, and that 2 of the 33 ministers and
secretaries be appointed by the President. The proposal included a draft
parliamentary stability agreement, a pledge to work on political and social stability
pacts and details of a proposed structure to facilitate i nter-institutional dialogue. In
a press release issued on 17 May, the President rejected the proposal, stating that it
failed to provide concrete solutions to the impasse. He also noted that the
Constitution did not give him the authority to propose or sug gest individual
members of Government as outlined in the PAIGC proposal.
13. On 18 May, in a meeting at the National Assembly, PAIGC, the Union for
Change and the Democratic Convergence Party signed the parliamentary agreement
proposed by PAIGC. The New Democracy Party, which holds one parliamentary
seat, was present at the meeting but did not sign the agreement. PRS did not attend
the meeting.
14. On 19 May, President Vaz met with the leaders of the five parties represented in
Parliament to discuss the appointment of a new Prime Minister. The three signatories
to the PAIGC agreement reiterated that the new appointee had to come from PAIGC
given that it was the party that had won the most seats in the legislative elections. PRS
stated that it was expecting a resolution to the impasse to come from either the
President or PAIGC. On 21 May, President Vaz announced that he had requested PRS
to present its proposal to guarantee governmental stability. The party reportedly
complied with the request of the President; however, its proposal was not made public.
On 26 May, the President issued a decree, once again, appointing Baciro Djá as Prime
Minister. He was sworn in as Prime Minister on 27 May.
15. The appointment triggered a political and security stand -off during which the
dismissed Prime Minister and Cabinet ministers refused to vacate government
offices. On the preceding day, 26 May, in protest over the President ’s decision to
appoint Mr. Djá as Prime Minister, PAIGC supporters demonstrated in front of the
presidential palace, burning tires and throwing stones.

16-12793

3/17

S/2016/675

16. On 27 May, PAIGC issued a communiqué alleging that the presidential decree
did not comply with the Constitution and the Supreme Court ’s decision of
8 September 2015, which had declared the appointme nt of Mr. Djá as Prime
Minister in August 2015 as unconstitutional. On the same day, I expressed my deep
concern about the situation in the country and urged all political stakeholders and
their supporters to refrain from violence and settle their differen ces through
dialogue. I also called upon all political actors to urgently bring the impasse to an
end in compliance with the Constitution and urged the armed forces to continue to
act responsibly.
17. On 28 May, the deposed Cabinet issued a communiqué rej ecting the
presidential decree appointing Mr. Djá as Prime Minister and stating that only
PAIGC was constitutionally allowed to nominate the Prime Minister and form a
Government. On 30 May, the President of PAIGC and former Prime Minister,
Domingos Simões Pereira, held a press conference in which he called upon the
international community not to let instability continue in Guinea -Bissau.
18. As part of the efforts of civil society to defuse tensions, on 1 June, the
Catholic bishops of Guinea-Bissau launched an appeal to political leaders to create
conditions conducive to dialogue and a strategic partnership among State
institutions. They also called for political actors to develop a stability pact to restore
effective governance. On 2 June, a delegation fro m the Inter-Parliamentary
Committee of the West African Economic and Monetary Union completed a six -day
visit to Bissau to assist national stakeholders to resolve the political impasse. At the
end of their mission, they called upon national actors to respe ct the Constitution and
to use dialogue to resolve the crisis. On the same day, the Cabinet of Prime Minister
Djá, which consists of 19 Ministers and 12 State Secretaries, including 4 women,
was sworn in by President Vaz. On 3 June, PAIGC petitioned the Su preme Court of
Justice to request the enforcement of its ruling on 8 September 2015 against the
appointment of Mr. Djá.
19. On 4 June, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government held its
forty-ninth ordinary session in Dakar. Prime Minister Djá attended the summit on
behalf of President Vaz. The ECOWAS Authority decided to extend the mandate of
the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) by one year and committed to
sending a high-level delegation consisting of the Presidents of Guinea, Senegal and
Sierra Leone to mediate the crisis in Guinea -Bissau. In addition, the Authority
requested the ECOWAS Commission to consult with the Community of Portuguese speaking Countries to convene a meeting of the International Contact Group on
Guinea-Bissau in their capacities as co-chairs of the Group.
20. On 9 June, following intense overnight negotiations involving religious
leaders, ECOMIB and UNIOGBIS, the remaining members of the dismissed Cabinet
and their supporters voluntarily and peacefully vacated go vernment offices, ending
a 14-day stand-off. Earlier that day, international partners in Guinea -Bissau issued a
joint communiqué expressing their support for a peaceful solution to the impasse.
21. Also on 9 June, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
considered the situation in Guinea-Bissau during its 604th meeting. In a statement
issued after the meeting, the Peace and Security Council recalled its mission to the
country in March and noted that, notwithstanding numerous mediation efforts,
divisions among the main political authorities had deepened. It appealed to
President Vaz to promote adherence to the Constitution.

4/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

22. On 15 July, the Supreme Court issued a decision declaring that the
appointment of Prime Minister Djá and his Cabinet was not unconstitutional. The
decision was reached by a majority of seven against three judges. During a press
conference on 16 July, PAIGC expressed its strong disappointment but stated that it
would respect the decision.
23. From 23 to 25 July, my Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs visited
Bissau. He met with the President, the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Prime
Minister and the President of the Supreme Court, as well as with representatives of
political parties and civil society. He conveyed my message to all political
stakeholders to put aside their differences and to focus on inclusive political
dialogue and reaching a consensual solution.

B.

Security situation
24. The overall security situation in Guinea-Bissau remained calm despite the
tense political climate, with few reported incidents. On 3 March, during a military
ceremony in Bissau attended by senior officers and international partners, the Chief
of General Staff of the Armed Forces, Lieutenant-General Biaguê Na N’Tan, stated
that he was aware of attempts to co-opt military personnel to overthrow the
Government. He warned that any military officer involved in such attempts would
be severely punished and reaffirmed the military’s zero tolerance for
insubordination and interference in political affairs.
25. On 25 May, about 250 military personnel representing the army, the air force
and the navy carried out an unprecedented peaceful march in the streets of the
capital city of Bissau. They were unarmed and dressed in sports clothing. The
marchers carried large banners with slogans pledging non -interference in the
political affairs of the country.

C.

Human rights situation
26. The human rights situation in Guinea-Bissau remained largely unchanged,
with no gross human rights violations reported. However, there was no substantial
progress in addressing serious violations from the past. Reported human rights
violations and abuses included multiple instances of gender-based violence, limited
access to health and education services and arbitrary and illegal arrest and detention.
27. Human rights violations perpetrated by the police continued. On 4 May, four
police officers were convicted by the Bissorã Regional Court for beating to death a
detainee who had been found dead on 5 July 2015 at the Bissorã police station in the
Oio region.
28. As a result of the political crisis, efforts to implement the recommendations of
the universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council of 23 January 2015 and
of the National Conference on Impunity, Justice and Human Rights held in July
2013 were delayed.
29. In a positive development, on 16 May, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs formally
notified UNIOGBIS that Guinea-Bissau had acceded to the 1954 Convention relating
to the Status of Stateless Persons, the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness and the 1998 Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation
in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters.

16-12793

5/17

S/2016/675

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
30. The prolonged political crisis has resulted in the suspension of crucial reforms,
in particular regarding fiscal sustainability, thereby putting at risk the g ains made in
the immediate post-electoral period. During a mission to Guinea -Bissau from 22 to
28 June, representatives of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) indicated that the
economic growth recovery of 4.8 per cent recorded in 2015 would continue in 2016
if certain conditions were met, including the receipt of much -needed revenues from
the cashew nut harvest. As at June, 137,000 tons of the targeted 200,000 tons had
been harvested and sold at the market price of CFAF 350 per kilo.
31. Financing of the national budget remains a challenge, in particular following the
suspension of budgetary support by the African Development Bank, the European
Union and the World Bank in the first quarter of 2016. The budgetary support
provided by those institutions amounted to an estimated $40 million, or about 30 per
cent of the national budget. The suspension followed the decision by IMF to delay
disbursements to Guinea-Bissau, inter alia, because of the bank bailout undertaken by
the Government in July 2015, which transferred private debt to the State’s accounts.
The resumption of IMF disbursements will depend on progress made in reversing the
bank bailout and the adoption of a national budget for the remainder of 2016. In April
and June, the Government issued treasury bonds amounting to CFAF 13 billion for the
servicing of domestic debts and to cover some operating costs.
32. In this complex situation, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
have continued to work with State institutions and development partner s to support
the delivery of key services, such as maternal and child health care, education and
food security-related activities. Examples include the resumption of education
services, with the support of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), after a
six-week strike by teachers in March and April and the provision of school meals by
the World Food Programme to 118,000 primary schoolchildren in six of the
country’s eight regions.
33. On 17 June, the World Health Organization and UNICEF, in collabora tion with
the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, assisted the Ministry of Health in
launching a nationwide integrated meningitis A, vitamin A and mebendazole
vaccination campaign. Efforts to improve maternal and child health care and to build
local capacity continued, including through a health technicians’ training initiative on
anaesthesiology launched on 9 April by the Ministry of Health and the United Nations
Population Fund. Moreover, in February, the Food and Agriculture Organization of th e
United Nations (FAO) provided emergency assistance to households affected by
drought, in particular those facing acute food insecurity. Going into the lean season
this year, from June to August, around 205,000 people will be food insecure, compared
with more than 530,000 during the same period in 2015.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
A.

Inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation process
34. During the reporting period, the leadership of UNIOGBIS engaged with national
and international partners to assess all stages of the evolving political crisis, explore
options to resolve it and prevent a deterioration in the situation on the ground.

6/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

35. On 27 and 28 April, UNIOGBIS organized a workshop at the National
Assembly in support of national efforts to promote stability in Guinea -Bissau. The
then Prime Minister, Carlos Correia, the Speaker of Parliament, Cipriano Cassamá,
a representative of President Vaz and my previous Special Representative for
Guinea-Bissau, Miguel Trovoada, opened the event. The meeting brought together
approximately 200 participants, including Members of Parliament, representatives
of political parties, civil society organizations, academia and religious and
traditional leaders. The participants identified several recommendations in three
thematic areas: power relations among State institutions; measures to build trust
among political actors and between the citizenry and State institutions; and
mechanisms for monitoring and following up on agreements.
36. My current Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS,
Modibo Ibrahim Touré, who arrived in Bissau in May, has been proactively engaging
the key national actors, notably the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the
Speaker of Parliament and the President of the Supreme Court of Justice. He has also
reached out to leaders of political parties and civil society, including women and youth
organizations, as well as religious and traditional leaders. In his discussions, he
continues to reiterate the full readiness of the United Nations to assist in building
consensus among national stakeholders to arrive at a sustainable solution to the current
political crisis. He also continues to underscore the repeated calls by the Security
Council for a quick resolution to the political stalemate, based on inclusive dialogue
and in compliance with the Constitution. In May and June, he mobilized international
partners and consulted political parties to explore options for a peaceful solution to the
standoff at the government offices.
37. From 7 to 9 May, UNIOGBIS organized a training workshop for the
Organizing Commission for the National Conference and its facilitator s in Bissau.
The training was aimed at building facilitation capacity and transferring experience
from national dialogue processes in other countries. Regional consultations
involving 660 participants from civil society organizations, defence and security
forces and traditional and religious leaders were held between 17 June and 3 July.

B.

Strategic and technical advice and support to national authorities
in implementing the national security sector reform and rule of
law strategies
38. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team
continued to work on the development of a joint United Nations rule of law strategy
for the police, justice and corrections sectors. The process was facilitated by the
Global Focal Point for the Police, Justice and Corrections.
39. From 15 to 24 March, UNIOGBIS assisted the National Defence Institute in
implementing six regional workshops on civil-military relations. The workshops
were attended by approximately 150 representatives of the military, law
enforcement institutions and civil society organizations, including 22 women.
Discussions and recommendations focused on the role of defence and security
forces in national reconciliation, security sector reform and agricultural and
livestock production by the military.
40. In May, in preparation for the planned socioeconomic reintegration of some
693 military and security personnel under a Peacebuilding Fund -supported project

16-12793

7/17

S/2016/675

on security and defence sectors reform, UNIOGBIS, FAO and the Ministry of
Defence conducted assessment missions to five military agricultural fields in the
northern, eastern and southern regions of Guinea-Bissau. The objective of the
assessments was to evaluate needs for the establishment of farming schools.
41. On 16 June, the National Institute of Studies and Research, in partnership with
UNIOGBIS, launched a comprehensive review of the 2006 national security sector
reform strategy, which is expected to be completed by December 2016. The review
involves senior State officials, the military, the police and the judiciary, as well as
international experts on rule of law and security sector reform.

C.

Support to the Government of Guinea-Bissau in the mobilization,
harmonization and coordination of international assistance
42. During the reporting period, my current Special Representative for Guinea Bissau and his predecessor closely coordinated their efforts in support of the
country with international partners on the ground, including the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking countries, ECOWAS, the European Union,
ambassadors representing members of the Security Council and other key bilateral
partners to promote dialogue aimed at finding a political solution.
43. My Special Representative held meetings with former President Olusegun
Obasanjo in Lagos, Nigeria, on 26 May; the Chairperson of the ECOWAS
Commission, Marcel de Souza, in Abuja on 27 May; the ECOWAS Mediator for
Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Condé of Guinea, in Conakry on 31 May; President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita of Mali in Bamako on 2 June; and President Alassane
Dramane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire in Abidjan on 9 June. He also held regular phone
conversations with President Macky Sall of Senegal, in his capacity as ECOWAS
Chairman, and met with representatives of Member States, the African Development
Bank and the World Bank in Dakar on 20 May.
44. In those consultations, my Special Representative advocated for the continued
engagement of the international community to minimize the adverse effects of the
crisis and ensure the continued delivery of basic social services to the population.
He also advocated with regional partners for the extension of the mandate of
ECOMIB beyond 30 June.
45. On 4 June, my Special Representative travelled to Dakar to attend the fortyninth ordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government
as part of the United Nations delegation led by my Special Representative for West
Africa and the Sahel, Mohamed Ibn Chambas. The good offices efforts of my
Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau contributed to the maintenance of
ECOMIB in the country beyond the expiration of its mandate and to commitments
by ECOWAS to send a presidential mission comprising the Heads of State of
Guinea, Senegal and Sierra Leone.

D.

Strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the capacity
of State organs to function effectively and constitutionally
46. From 28 April to 4 August, UNIOGBIS assisted the National Institute of Studies
and Research in holding six conferences to promote discussion and stimulate open
dialogue on the country’s sociopolitical realities. The themes addressed during the

8/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

conferences included the administration of justice, human rights and impunity, and
reforms in the security, economic, education and health sectors. Approximately
80 participants from the civil service, defence and security forces, political parties,
diplomatic corps, academia and the United Nations attended each of the conferences.
47. In May, as part of a United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)-funded
project in support of public finance management oversight institutions, the
Specialized Permanent Commission of Economic Affairs carried out missions in the
regions of Gabu and Cacheu. The missions enabled the Specialized Commission to
gather information on public finance management practices, strengths and
weaknesses in the visited regions.
48. From 23 to 27 May, the Audit Court of Guinea -Bissau, with technical and
financial support from UNDP, conducted a training course on auditing practices,
norms and techniques, which targeted 32 professionals in the Audit Court and the
Ministry of Finance. The training was part of United Nations efforts to strengthen
public finance management.
49. From 10 to 13 June, UNIOGBIS organized a worksho p with civil society
organizations, including youth and women’s organizations, and women leaders, in
support of outreach activities aimed at parliamentarians and preparations for the
National Conference on peace and development in Guinea-Bissau. The workshop
enabled 20 participants from the regions of Quinara and Tombali to discuss issues
affecting their regions, receive training on communication, lobbying and advocacy
and produce a report with recommendations to be submitted to Members of
Parliament and the Organizing Commission for the National Conference. The
initiative will be replicated in other regions throughout 2016.

E.

Strategic and technical advice and support for the establishment of
effective and efficient law enforcement and criminal justice and
penitentiary systems
50. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS continued to provide technical
assistance to national authorities for the development of strategies and plans to
effectively tackle organized crime, counter-terrorism and violent extremism and
strengthen national border management capacity.
51. From 22 February to 15 March, UNIOGBIS provided comprehensive training
on the integration of gender-responsive perspectives into security institutions to
51 law enforcement officers, including 20 women, in the regions of Cacheu, Bafatá,
Bolama and Bissau.
52. From 29 March to 11 April, expanding its community-oriented policing
methodology, UNIOGBIS distributed model police station manuals to Public Order
Police structures and local authorities in every region of Guinea -Bissau. A total of
119 senior Public Order Police officers, including 12 women, were targeted during
the distribution process. On 18 May, the Government of New Zealand agreed to
fund a model police station project in the Quinara region. The project will focus on
demilitarizing policing approaches and expanding community-oriented policing.
53. From March to June, UNIOGBIS assisted national authorities in developing a
five-year strategy for the penitentiary sector. The strategy is expected to provide a

16-12793

9/17

S/2016/675

tool for partnership and resource mobilization for the prison sector and enable better
delivery in the criminal justice system.
54. Between 11 and 15 April, the UNIOGBIS regional office in Buba, Quinara
region, supported the establishment of a regional forum on rule of law and security
governance. The forum was attended by 55 participants, including seven women,
representing local authorities, civil society organizations, defence and security
institutions and community and religious leaders.
55. On 21 and 22 April, UNIOGBIS assisted the Ministry of Internal
Administration and the Secretary of State for International Cooperation and
Communities in organizing a conference on maritime security on Bubaque Island, i n
the Bijagós archipelago in the Bolama region. In the margins of the event, my
former Special Representative officially opened the UNIOGBIS Bubaque regional
office, which will assist national authorities in tackling drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime and in enhancing border and maritime controls.
56. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS continued its work on environmental
crimes and abusive exploitation of natural resources by publishing a compendium of
policy and analytical documents entitled “Reflections on Environmental Criminality
in Guinea-Bissau”. The compendium, which addresses criminal justice priorities in
response to wildlife and forest crime, was distributed at key events, including a
workshop on Bolama Island, in the Quinara region, in May, attended by
60 participants from environmental institutions, the criminal justice system and civil
society.
57. On 30 May, UNIOGBIS conducted capacity-building activities for national law
enforcement officers on support to victims of sexual and gender-based violence. The
activities, which targeted 64 participants, were carried out in the Cacheu, Bafatá,
Bissau and Quinara regions, with the involvement of UNIOGBIS regional offices.
58. During the first quarter of 2016, UNDP provided technical and financial
support to the National Judiciary Training Centre. The Centre provided training on
penitentiary law, human trafficking and border crimes to strengthen the capacity of
judiciary operators.
59. As part of United Nations efforts to contribute to the building of the justice
system in Guinea-Bissau, during the period under review, sector courts were jointly
built by the Ministries of Justice and Public Works in the towns of Mansoa and
Canchungo in the Oio and Cacheu regions, with the assistance of UNDP.

F.

Promotion and protection of human rights and human rights
monitoring and reporting activities
60. During the period under review, notwithstanding intense efforts by UNIOGBIS,
the country’s National Human Rights Commission remained non-compliant with the
Paris Principles, notably the principle of independence of human rights institutions.
That, in turn, has inhibited the effective monitoring of the implementation of the
recommendations of the universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council and
those of other human rights bodies. Additionally, UNIOGBIS has encountered
difficulties in supporting the Government in moving forward with its national human
rights action plan owing to the ongoing political crisis.

10/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

61. UNIOGBIS continued its human rights monitoring activities during the
reporting period. Assessments were conducted in the penitentiary sector, specifically
in the Bissalanca air force base military detention facilities in Bissau and the
detention centres of the Public Order Police and the Judiciary Police in Bissau,
Mansoa and Bafatá in the Bissau, Oio and Bafatá regions. In March, UNIOGBIS
submitted a report with findings and recommendations to the Government, noting
that there had been no improvement in the living conditions of det ainees and
judicial process since 2014. To date, there has been no Government follow -up on
the recommendations.
62. Between 25 February and 17 March, UNIOGBIS conducted human rights
monitoring missions in the most remote regions of the country, including in
Quinara, Tombali and Bolama-Bijagos. The key issues identified were limited
access to basic social services, gender inequality, inadequate protection of children
and gender-based and domestic violence. The mission also found that the lack of
State attention to those regions has resulted in widespread impunity, minimal access
to justice and poor detention facilities for convicted criminals.
63. UNIOGBIS also continued to raise awareness on human rights through
technical advice, advocacy, capacity-building, sensitization and training campaigns,
and the conduct of a radio programme targeting State actors, women, youth and
civil society networks, academic institutions and traditional leaders.
64. From 21 to 23 March, UNIOGBIS carried out human rights sensit ization
campaigns in the Bafatá region, in partnership with the UNDP -supported Centre for
Access to Justice, civil society networks and regional human rights associations.
The campaigns brought together approximately 600 human rights practitioners and
civil society representatives in round-table discussions on the protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular with respect to the issues of female
genital mutilation, discrimination, domestic violence, child exploitation, and rape
and other forms of sexual abuse. The purpose was to improve the human rights
knowledge and skills of the participants to facilitate monitoring and accountability
in the region.
65. UNIOGBIS designed and conducted human rights outreach training on a range
of topics, including land ownership laws; a proposed bill regarding quotas for
political participation of women; and methods for the identification of human rights
violations. On 26 March, UNIOGBIS conducted grass-roots human rights training
for 100 traditional leaders and civil society representatives, including 10 women, in
the Cacheu region. The objective was to encourage compliance with human rights
standards and national laws that enable the political empowerment of women. In
April, training activities were also conducted in the regions of Quinara, Bafatá and
Cacheu, targeting a wide group of local administrators, traditional leaders, security
and defence personnel, journalists and youth representatives, including 34 women.
66. In February and March, UNICEF assisted the Ministry of Tourism and the
Institute for Women and Children to strengthen the national framework for the
protection of children from sexual exploitation, in particular in the tourism sector. A
code of conduct for tourism sector professionals was developed to assist in
preventing, identifying and referring cases of sexual exploitation of children in
hotels and other tourist settings.

16-12793

11/17

S/2016/675

67. From 25 to 29 April, UNIOGBIS, in partnership with the National Judiciary
Training Centre, held a training session on human rights and the administration of
justice for 40 prosecutors, judges, lawyers, security officers, military magistrates
and legal assistants of the Centres for Access to Justice, including eight women, in
Bissau. The training focused on pretrial detention, criminal proceedings and due
process of law.
68. In June, UNIOGBIS, in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, facilitated the first -ever participation of
Guinea-Bissau in a regular session of the Human Rights Council and in the highlevel panel discussion on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Council. A
representative of Guinea-Bissau also had the opportunity to be present in Geneva
during the presentation of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the independence
of judges and lawyers on Guinea-Bissau in June. In the report on her visit
(A/HRC/32/34/Add.1), the first conducted in Guinea-Bissau, the Special Rapporteur
noted the challenges faced by the country in achieving judicial independence, which
include corruption, impunity and limited access to justice. Guinea -Bissau has
expressed its intention to review the recommendations contained in the report.
69. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS finalized three separate human rights
guides, for civil society, persons deprived of their liberty and the armed forces. The
guides will be used to raise awareness and enhance the knowledge of target
populations about international, regional and national human rights protection
mechanisms.

G.

Strategic and technical advice and support to the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to combat drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime
70. The ongoing political crisis has contributed to a further weakening of the
capacity of State institutions to devise and implement effective measures to combat
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. Nonetheless, during the
reporting period, the Judiciary Police was able to detect and report on the presence
of high-level drug traffickers in the country and drug-trafficking activities.
71. As at late April, according to evidence provided to the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, there was a 50 per cent increase in drug seizures by the
Judiciary Police and the Transnational Crime Unit in Bissau compared with 2015.
By May, as a result of proactive investigations, based on intelligence gathered by
the Crime Unit in partnership with the Judiciary Police, 50 cases of drug trafficking
had been investigated, with 63 persons prosecuted and 36.265 kilos of cocaine and
216.96 kilos of marijuana seized. This was also due to the training provided to
airport security personnel by international experts wi th the financial support of the
European Union. The training helped to improve national capacities to detect the
illicit inflow of people and goods through the Bissau airport.
72. Through a European Union-funded project implemented by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, a functional drug laboratory was established in Bissau
in May. The lab has enabled the use of qualitative analysis of cocaine and cannabis
in criminal justice proceedings. On 6 June, one drug trafficker was convicted based
on scientific analysis conducted by the drug laboratory.

12/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

73. During their joint monitoring of criminal investigation reports and court
hearings, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime found that,
although investigations seemed to have been carried out in a proper manner, law
enforcement officers could not always follow through on the outcome of
investigations due to concerns over their personal security.
74. During the reporting period, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
provided operational and logistical support to the Transnational Crime Unit in
Bissau, including vehicles, communications equipment and fuel. The Office
provided training to the Unit, in partnership with UNIOGBIS. Additionally, bilateral
and multilateral partners, including Austria, Japan, Portugal, Spain, the United
States of America, the European Union and the Peacebuilding Fund, contributed to
the functioning of the Unit. Between 21 and 23 March, UNIOGBIS assisted the
Office in delivering anti-terrorism training in Bissau for 25 law enforcement and
internal security officers, including four women. Participants analysed emerging
global, regional and national threats and discussed mainstreaming approaches to
counter-terrorism, including early warning and preventive measures.
75. From 23 to 27 May, UNIOGBIS assisted the Office in delivering a training -oftrainers activity on operational planning and international drug trafficking
investigation. Twenty-four law enforcement officers and magistrates, including
three women, attended the training.
76. On 23 May, UNIOGBIS and the Office finalized plans with the National
Guard to conduct a border assessment in order to strengthen internal security. In
June, the two Offices facilitated the signature of a memorandum of understanding
between the National Guard and the Judiciary Police to establish a common line of
action in preventing and combating crimes.

H.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding, in line with
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
77. From 15 to 17 February, UNIOGBIS organized two workshops, in the regions
of Bafatá and Quinara, on violence against women. Approximately 40 participants
from each region participated. The objective was to raise awareness of the need to
protect women from violence and to encourage gender equality. The workshops also
enabled the dissemination of a report on political participation by women in
decision-making processes.
78. On 8 March, as part of the International Women’s Day celebrations,
UNIOGBIS assisted the Government in organizing a ceremony chaired by the
Minister of Women, Family and Social Cohesion in Bissau. The event brought
together more than100 participants, primarily women, including members of the
Government, leaders of civil society organizations and international partners. In her
speech, the Minister stressed that Bissau-Guinean women continued to face many
structural inequalities owing to cultural and social barriers. She also unde rlined that,
without lasting stability, governmental efforts to eliminate discrimination against
women would not result in significant progress.
79. From 15 to 17 March, in collaboration with the European Union, UNIOGBIS
supported the National Network against Gender-Based Violence in preparing for an
international conference on gender-based violence. Some 150 participants from all

16-12793

13/17

S/2016/675

the regions of the country, including representatives of the Ministry of Women,
Family and Social Cohesion, members of civil society organizations and women
leaders, attended the conference, which raised awareness on the importance of
adopting mechanisms for the promotion of women’s rights and gender equality and
the combating of gender-based violence.
80. From 29 to 31 March, UNIOGBIS provided technical and financial support to
the Association of Women Journalists for the organization of a three-day training
workshop on gender equity in the media, which targeted 35 women media
professionals. One of the objectives of the workshop was to design a
communications plan to promote peace in Guinea-Bissau. Its main
recommendations included the need to reinforce the capacities of journalists to
report upon violations of women’s rights and give more visibility to gender equality
and women’s rights in the local media and on the Internet.
81. On 25 and 26 April, UNIOGBIS trained 40 members of the Association of
Women Journalists as well as journalists and security and defence officers on the
content of the national law on domestic violence in t he Cacheu region. Participants
recommended the dissemination of the law in all regions, the strengthening of the
capacity of law enforcement officials and magistrates, the development of
community radio programmes, the reopening of courts in the country’s sectors and
the creation of a guest house for victims of domestic violence.
82. In May and June, UNIOGBIS organized training workshops for women ’s civil
society organizations and women leaders on communication, advocacy and lobbying
in the regions of Bolama, Gabú and Biombo. The workshop, which gathered
40 participants in each location, was designed to enhance their capacity to interact
with State institutions and promote the adoption and implementation of the draft bill
on quotas for political participation by women.
83. By the first quarter of 2016, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) had contributed to the strengthening of
the capacity of 97 women on conflict resolution in the country’s regions, in
collaboration with the Government and civil society organizations. Additionally,
UN-Women provided technical advisory services and financial support to civil
society organizations to improve their contribution to the prevention and eradication
of violence against women and advocacy for national dialogue and social cohesion.

I.

Work with the Peacebuilding Commission in support of the
peacebuilding priorities of Guinea-Bissau
84. On 12 February and 11 March, the Executive Commission of the Peacebuilding
Fund in Guinea-Bissau, co-chaired by my former Special Representative and the
Minister of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Affairs,
approved seven projects developed within the framework of the Peacebuilding Priority
Plan 2015-2017, in partnership with UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team.
They include projects aimed at supporting political dialogue and reconciliation and
addressing inter-party and intra-party divisions. The implementation of three of the
projects, amounting to $ 2.1 million, has already begun.
85. On 16 May, the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission issued a statement expressing concern about the continuing p olitical

14/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

crisis in the country, acknowledging the role of the defence and security forces in
respecting the rule of law and distancing themselves from the political arena and
taking note of the effective, preventive and deterrent role of ECOMIB. The
Commission also called upon the President and all other political actors in Guinea Bissau to reflect on the consequences of the current political crisis on the country ’s
economic and social development, and on the opportunities that Guinea -Bissau
would miss if the current stalemate was not resolved swiftly.
86. On 9 June, my Special Representative provided an update to the Guinea Bissau configuration on political developments and their implications for
peacebuilding priorities. In a statement issued following the meeting, the
Commission underscored its readiness to work closely with international partners
and national stakeholders to refocus political and financial support for the country
and facilitate the maintenance of international support to the most vulnerab le
populations.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
87. On 28 April, the Government and my former Special Representative signed the
Guinea-Bissau United Nations Partnership Framework for the period 2016 -2020, in
support of the implementation of the national strategic and operational plan for
2015-2020 (“Terra Ranka”).
88. On 2 June, my Special Representative convened a meeting of the Strategic
Policy Group, which comprises UNIOGBIS and United Nations agencies, fun ds and
programmes. Participants analysed and reviewed challenges and opportunities for
United Nations assistance in the provision of basic services to the population in the
light of the difficult political context.
89. The current situation in Guinea-Bissau demands innovative approaches,
leveraging the resources and capacity of the United Nations system. The senior
leadership of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team is working to
increase synergies and complementarity in addressing the country’s political,
security and development challenges.
90. Within the framework of the Global Focal Point for Rule of Law, UNIOGBIS
and the United Nations country team are developing a joint programme to support
reforms in the justice and security sectors, including their modernization. From 6 to
23 February, a mission from UNDP on behalf of the Global Focal Point worked with
the country team to develop a draft strategic vision. As a result, a United Nations
joint programme is being finalized for implementation to be gin by the end of the
year.
91. In order to better respond to the current situation, the United Nations country
team and UNIOGBIS, through their joint coordination mechanisms, are preparing a
priority strategy to ensure that the United Nations Partnership Framework workplan
contributes to the continued delivery of basic services, build resilience at the local
level, and promote initiatives towards sustainable development.

16-12793

15/17

S/2016/675

B.

Public information
92. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS continued to dis seminate information
on the good offices of my Special Representatives and United Nations activities
through various channels, including social media and the mission ’s website. In
addition, UNIOGBIS produced and broadcasted 20 radio programmes on the
national radio station and 27 community radio stations across the country. The
programmatic themes included political dialogue, conflict prevention,
reconciliation, human rights, environmental sustainability, the Sustainable
Development Goals, the United Nations Partnership Framework, the mandate of
UNIOGBIS, the rule of law and security sector reform.
93. In May, UNIOGBIS strengthened its field presence by deploying specialized
media expertise and equipment to its regional offices in Bafatá, Buba and
São Domingos, in the Bafatá, Quinara and Cacheu regions.

C.

Staff safety and security
94. During the period under review, the overall security situation in Guinea -Bissau
remained calm but politically tense owing to the persistent political crisis.
Moreover, in keeping with trends in the West Africa region, terrorist threats
increased in Guinea-Bissau.
95. Only a few incidents involving or affecting United Nations staff members
were reported, including one house burglary, the theft of an official laptop and one
minor road traffic accident. In response to continued reports of terrorist threats in
the subregion, preventive measures were put in place at United Nations premises
and staff members were reminded to remain cautious and vigilant.

V. Observations
96. I remain deeply concerned about the prolonged political crisis in the country,
which is affecting the functioning of State institutions, the implementation of key
reforms outlined in the country’s strategic and operational plan for 2015-2020 and
the delivery of basic services to the population. The people of Guinea -Bissau
deserve better for their future than a repeat of past setbacks.
97. I strongly urge all political stakeholders, including the President, the Speaker of
Parliament, the Prime Minister, PAIGC, PRS and other political parties to resolutely
work to break the vicious cycle of instability and find a lasting and consensual
solution to the current stalemate, through inclusive dialogue and in accordance with
the Constitution and national laws. Continued respect for compliance with judicial
decisions is essential and the interests of the people and the nation as a whole should
be preserved and protected by all parties in legal disputes.
98. I welcome the professionalism of the armed forces and security institutions in
the fulfilment of their duties and urge them to continue to act r esponsibly and within
the law. I also encourage international partners to support national plans for the
demobilization and rejuvenation of the armed forces.

16/17

16-12793

S/2016/675

99. I am encouraged by the coordinated and harmonized approach among
international partners working towards a stable and prosperous Guinea-Bissau and
call upon them to consider devising innovative strategies towards the delivery of
social services to the people of Guinea-Bissau, whose living conditions have been
greatly affected by the political impasse.
100. I commend all partners, including the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the European Union and regional leaders,
for their continuous engagement in support of the country’s peacebuilding challenges
and encourage them to persist with their efforts to achieve peace and stability at this
particularly delicate time. In that connection, I welcome the latest decisions of the
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government on 4 June, in particular with respect to the
extension of the mandate of ECOMIB for one year and the commitment to deploy a
presidential-level mission to the country. I equally welcome the readiness of the
European Union to provide financial support for ECOMIB operations.
101. I remain concerned about the continued fragility of the country’s criminal justice
system and the lack of progress made in investigating past gross human rights
violations and creating related accountability mechanisms. I encourage national
authorities to finalize the ratification of pending human rights instruments and
reiterate my calls to implement the recommendations of human rights mechanisms,
including the recommendations of the universal periodic review (2015), the
concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child ( 2013) and the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights
(2015) and the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers (2016).
102. The national reconciliation process is seeing some progress at the grass -roots
level in response to persistent calls for truth and justice. I strongly urge the leaders
of Guinea-Bissau to provide the necessary support to that process. I commend
members of the international community who have already lent their assistance and
encourage others to follow suit.
103. The threats posed by the continued presence of perpetrators of transnational
organized crime, drug traffickers and terrorist organizations in the country are real
and require increased and coordinated efforts by the Unite d Nations and other
international partners to assist national authorities in developing effective
countermeasures. Those efforts should also be geared towards tackling drug
trafficking as a source of funding for terrorism in the subregion and beyond.
104. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to my new Special
Representative, Modibo Ibrahim Touré, and the staff of UNIOGBIS and the United
Nations country team under his leadership, for their commitment and hard work. I
am grateful to my former Special Representative, Miguel Trovoada, for his
leadership and dedication to Guinea-Bissau, which helped to keep the country on
the international agenda and mobilize political and financial support. I also express
my appreciation to bilateral, regional and international partners for their continuing
contributions to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

16-12793

17/17
