General Aellelllbl:,-Thirteenth Session

42

advance of the financial and administrative considerations involved;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that no
effort is spared within the Secretariat to maintain the
progress achieved and to extend it in all ways possible,
taking into account the guiding principles set forth in
paragraph 10 of the report of the Committee ;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General, within
the existing establishment, to extend the editorial control services ;
7. Urges the representatives of Member States as
well as all other members of commissions, committees
and similar bodies to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in carrying out the policy laid down by the
General Assembly, particularly in resolutions 593 (VI)
of 4 February 1952, 789 (VIII) of 9 December 1953
and 1203 (XII) of 13 December 1957;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to report on the operation of the preseat resolution to
the General Assembly at its fifteenth session or earlier.
781st plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions informed of developments in 1959 and to
present a progress report on this project to the General
Assembly at its fourteenth session.
781st plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

1273 (XIII). Construction of the United Nations

1293 (XIII), Appointments to fill vacancies in the

1292 (XIII). Appointments to fill vacancies in the
memhership of the Committee on Contributions

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of the
Committee on Contributions:
Mr. Raymond T. Bowman,
Mr. F. Nouredin Kia,
Mr. J erzy Michalowski;
2. Declares Mr. Bowman, Mr. Kia and Mr. Michalowski to be appointed for a three-year term to commence on 1 January 1959.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.

membership of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee

building in Santiago, Chile

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1224 (XII) of 14 December
1957, in accordance with which the Secretary-General
accepted the generous offer by the Government of Chile
of a plot of land for the construction of a building to
house the United Nations offices in Chile,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General1 5
in which financial proposals for the construction of the
building, based on resolution 147 (AC. 41) adopted on
3 October 1958 by the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America, are presented,
Taking not•e of the thirteenth report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to the thirteenth session of the General Assembly,16
I. Authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with
the preparation of plans and with the construction of
the United Nations building in Santiago, Chile, at a
cost not to exceed $850,000;
2. Decides to appropriate in the regular United Nations budget for 1959 the sum of $50,000 for initial
preparatory and construction expenses for the building ;
3. Decides, in principle, that the balance of the building cost shall be included in the regular United Nations
budget in annual instalments of $200,000 for each of the
ensuing four years ;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to initiate negotiations, if he finds it necessary, with the Governments
of States members of the Economic Commission for
Latin America with a view to their making reimbursable interest-free advances to the United N atie,.is to meet
cash requirements for the construction;
5. Aut-horizes the Secretary-General to advance out
of the Working Capital Fund the moneys required for
building costs for which no cash is available;
1
•

1
•

Ibid., agenda item 52, document A/3952.
Ibid., document A/3972.

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members and
alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension
Committee:
Members:
Mr. A. H. M. Hillis,
Mr. Rigoberto Torres Astorga,
Mr. Albert S. Watson;
Alternate members:
Mr. Bahman Ahaneen,
Mr. Johan Kaufmann,
Mr. Arthur C. Liveran;
2. Declares these members and alternate members to
be appointed for a three-year term to commence on 1
January 1959.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.

1294 (XIII). Geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General regarding the geographical distribution of the staff
of the Secretariat of the United Nations, 17
Noting that some progress has been made towards the
implementation of its resolutions 1097 (XI) of 27 February 1957 and 1226 (XII) of 14 December 1957,

I. Recommends that:
(a) The Secretary-General should continue his efforts to achieve a better geographical distribution of the
staff of the United Nations Secretariat at all levels,
giving particular regard to posts at the top level;
11

Ibid., agenda item 53, document A/C.5/750.

4,3

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

( b) More interchange of personnel between Headquarters and the field offices of the United Nations
should be carried out whenever possible;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report more
fully to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session
on the progress which has been made in this regard,
including an analysis of the problems arising in this
matter.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.

1295 (XIII). Amendments to the Staff Regulations
of the United Nations
The General Assembly
Resolves that the Staff Regulations of the United Nations shall be modified by the amendments annexed to
the present resolution, with effect from 1 January 1959.
782nd plenary mee.t-ing,
5 December 1958.
ANNEX

Regulation 3.4 (Dependency benefits)
Replace the present text of paragraph ( c) by the following:
"With a view to avoiding duplication of benefits and in
order to achieve equality between staff members who receive
dependency benefits under applicable laws in the form of
governmental grants and staff members who do not receive
such dependency benefits, the Secretary-General shall prescribe conditions under which the dependency allowance for
a child specified in (a) (i) above shall be payable only to the
extent that the dependency benefits enjoyed by the staff member or his spouse under applicable laws amount to less than
such a dependency allowance."
Annex IV, paragraph 2 (Service benefit}
Replace the present text of paragraph ( b) by the following:
"Should such a staff member be granted a probationary
or permanent appointment, or complete five ye:irs of qualifying service and remain on a contract providing for further
service of at least one year, or remain in employment for
more than one year thereafter, he shall lose entitlement to
the service benefit."

1296 (XIII). Report of the Negotiating Committee
for Extra-Budgetary Funds
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Negotiating
Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds18 appointed at
the twelfth session of the General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of determining the financial resources for activities and programmes to be financed by voluntary contributions before the reports on
such activities and programmes are considered and
acted upon by the General Assembly,
Decides that:
1. An ad hoe Committee of the whole Assembly, under the chairmanship of the President of the session,
shall be convened as soon as practicable after the opening of the fourteenth session, where pledges of voluntary contributions for the two refugee programmes for
the following year would be announced, with separate
meetings dedicated to each programme;
"'Ibid., agenda item 46, documents A/3944 and Add.1.

2. States not Members of the United Nations, but
members of one or more of the specialized agencies,
shall be invited to attend the meetings of the ad hoe
Committee for the purpose of announcing their pledges
to the two refugee programmes ;
3. In order to ensure maximum attendance, dS great
advance publicity as possible shall be given to the meetings of the ad hoe Committee and they shall be so scheduled that no other meetings are held at the same time.
782nd plenary mee.t,i,ng,
5 December 1958.

B
The General Assembly
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds consisting of not more than ten members,
with the same terms of reference as those laid down in
Assembly resolution 693 (VII) of 25 October 1952, to
serve from the close of the thirteenth session to the close
of the fourteenth session of the Assembly;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fourteenth session the item entitled "Report of the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds".
782nd plenary mee.t-ing,
5 December 1958.

•

•

•

At the 782nd plenary meeting on 5 December 1958, the President of the General Assembly appointed a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds to serve until the close of
the fourteenth session of the Assembly. The Committee is composed as follows: ARGENTINA, BRAZIL, CANADA, FRANCE, LEBANON, NEW ZEALAND, PAKISTAN, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.

1297 (XIII). United Nations International School
The General Assembly,
Having considered the progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations International
School19 as well as the report by the Board of Trustees
of the School, 20
Recalling its earlier resolutions on this subject,
namely resolutions 1102 (XI) of 27 February 1957 and
1228 A (XII) of 14 December 1957,
Noting wi,th satisfaction that steps taken by the Secretary-General have resulted in the acquisition, for a
period of up to three years, of premises for the School
in Manhattan, and that the School has been in operation
at these premises since the beginning of the present
academic year,
Noting further the continued need of the School for
suitable permanent premises as near as practicable to
United Nations Headquarters,
Noting also that the Board of Trustees, in furthering
the desired development of the School in Manhattan, is
faced with a consequential deficit of up to $54,000 in
regard to the current academic year,
1. Reaffirms the belief that the provision of adequate
accommodation for the United Nations International
School is in the best interest of the Organization;
10
Ibid., agenda item 54, document A/3911.
• Ibid., document A/C.5/754.
