General Aasembly-Twenty-sixth Session

40

( b) The liberation of all persons imprisoned or
detained for their opposition to apartheid;
( c) The removal of orders against those banned
or banished for their opposition to apartheid;
3. Appeals to national and international associations of jurists to take all appropriate steps in support
of the purposes of the present resolution;
4. Urges all religious organizations . t~ c~mtinue
and intensify their efforts for the ebmmatlon of
apartheid and racial discrimination;
5. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid to
prepare a special report on all known cases of maltreatment and torture of prisoners in South Africa, together
with any other information pertinent to those cases;
6. Invites all organizations and individuals that may
have knowledge of such cases to provide all available
information to the Special Committee on Apartheid;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To bring the present resolution to the attention
of Governments national and international organizations and anti-apartheid movements, including religious
organizations and associations of jurists;
(b) To publicize, through the Unit on Apartheid
and the Office of Public Information, all available
information on the maltreatment and torture of prisoners and detainees in South Africa and the persecution
of opponents of apartheid, including religious leaders;
( c) To provide necessary services and assistance
to the Special Committee on Apartheid in the preparation of the report requested in paragraph 5 above and
to publicize the report as widely as possible.
1981st plenary meeting,
9 November 1971.

3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue
its work, including its co-ordinating activities, to increase
knowledge of levels and effects of atomic radiation
from all sources;
4. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committee
to hold its twenty-second session in March 1972;
5. Expresses its appreciation for the valuable response to the Scientific Committee's request for data
on releases of radio-activity into the environment from
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and radio-isotopes;
6. Draws attention to the Scientific Committee's
statement that further information of the same nature,
if received before the end of the year, would be of great
value in the preparation of its report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;4
7. Welcomes the continuing collaboration between
the Scientific Committee and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the specialized agencies and the nongovernmental organizations concerned, which is essential to the Committee's work;
8. Commends the Scientific Committee for its contribution to the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, takes note of the basic paper
that on its behalf has been prepared for, and submitted to, the secretariat of the Conferenc.e,6 and recommends that the relevant experience of the Committee
should be fully utilized in the further preparations for
the Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and for the
dissemination of its findings to the public.
1997th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.

2773 (XXVI). Effects of atomic radiation

277 4 (XXVI). United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December
1955 which established the United Nations Scientific
Co~ittee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and
its subsequent resolutions,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling information about atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
Noting the intention of the Scientific Committee to
include in its report to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-seventh session, the subjects of genetic effects
of radiation, induction of cancer by radiation, effects
of radiation on the immune response, population doses
from medical and occupational exposure and environmental radiation,
1. Notes with appreciation the report adopted by
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation at its twenty-first session;3
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for the
valuable contributions it has made since its inception
to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels
and effects of atomic radiation;
3 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, document A/8334.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2671 E (XXV) of 8 December 1970 concerning the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, 6 to which is annexed the report of
the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust
Fund for South Africa,
Conscious of the continuing need for humanitarian
assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and
discriminatory legislation in South Africa, as well as
in Namibia and Southern Rhodesia, and to their
families,
Concerned at the actions of the South African Government in persecuting persons engaged in providing
humanitarian assistance to victims of apartheid,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
2. Again appeals to all States, to governmental or
non-governmental organizations and to individuals for
generous contributions to the Trust Fund in order to
enable it to meet the increasing needs;
3. Further appeals for generous direct contributions
to voluntary organizations engaged in providing relief
4 Ibid.,

para. 4.
6.

5 / bid .. para.
6 A/8468.
