S/2005/707

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 November 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 3 November 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I would like to refer to Security Council resolution 1603 (2005) by which the
Council requested me to designate, as an exceptional arrangement, a High
Representative for the elections in Côte d’Ivoire, autonomous from the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (ONUCI), to assist in the work of the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Constitutional Council. In the same
resolution, the Security Council called upon the donor community to provide all the
necessary financial resources to the High Representative to support the full
implementation of his mission.
As you are aware, in July 2005, I appointed Antonio Monteiro as the High
Representative. Since taking up his post, Mr. Monteiro has significantly contributed
to the resolution of some key issues pertaining to the organization of open, free, fair
and transparent elections in Côte d’Ivoire. On 12 October 2005, he briefed the
Security Council on those issues and on his activities.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) put in place a project to
receive contributions from donors to support the work of the High Representative
and his office. In addition, UNDP made an advance payment of 600,000 United
States dollars to that project against future contributions from the donor community,
thus enabling the High Representative to perform his mandated functions up to now.
I wish, however, to inform the Council that the anticipated contributions have
yet to materialize. The lack of funding for the High Representative’s activities is
particularly worrying, considering that preparations for the elections are a crucial
component of the post-30 October arrangements put in place by the African Union
decision of 6 October 2005 and endorsed by the Security Council through its
resolution 1633 (2005).
While UNDP and the Secretariat will continue to work with the donor
community, I also wish to strongly appeal to members of the Security Council, in
particular, to take the lead in fulfilling their responsibilities emanating from their
own decision by contributing to this very important project.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-59545 (E) 091105

*0559545*
