United Nations

A/RES/60/128

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 39

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/499)]

60/128. Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/172 of 20 December 2004,
Recalling also the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the
specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa of 1969 1 and the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights, 2
Reaffirming that the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, 3
together with the 1967 Protocol thereto, 4 as complemented by the Organization of
African Unity Convention of 1969, remains the foundation of the international
refugee protection regime in Africa,
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General 5 and the United
1.
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; 6
2.
Notes the need for African States to address resolutely the root causes of
all forms of forced displacement in Africa and to foster peace, stability and
prosperity throughout the African continent so as to forestall refugee flows;
Notes with great concern that, despite all of the efforts made so far by the
3.
United Nations, the African Union and others, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons in Africa remains precarious, and calls upon States and other
parties to armed conflict to observe scrupulously the letter and spirit of international
humanitarian law, bearing in mind that armed conflict is one of the principal causes
of forced displacement in Africa;

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14691.
Ibid., vol. 1520, No. 26363.
3
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
4
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
5
A/60/293.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/60/12).
2

05-49528

A/RES/60/128

4.
Welcomes decision EX.CL/Dec.197 (VII) on the situation of refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa adopted by the Executive Council of the
African Union at its seventh ordinary session, held at Sirte, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
from 28 June to 2 July 2005; 7
5.
Expresses its appreciation for the leadership shown by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and commends the Office for its
ongoing efforts, with the support of the international community, to assist African
countries of asylum and to respond to the protection and assistance needs of
refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa;
Recognizes that, among refugees, returnees and internally displaced
6.
persons, women and children are the majority of the population affected by conflict
and bear the brunt of atrocities and other consequences of conflict, and calls upon
States to promote and protect the human rights of all refugees and other persons of
concern, paying special attention to those with specific needs, and to tailor their
protection responses appropriately;
Reiterates the importance of the full and effective implementation of
7.
standards and procedures, including the monitoring and reporting mechanism
outlined in Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005, to better
address the specific protection needs of refugee children and adolescents and to
safeguard rights and, in particular, to ensure adequate attention to unaccompanied
and separated children and children affected by armed conflict, including former
child soldiers in refugee settings, as well as in the context of voluntary repatriation
and reintegration measures;
Recognizes the importance of early registration and effective registration
8.
systems and censuses as a tool of protection and as a means to enable the
quantification and assessment of needs for the provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance and to implement appropriate durable solutions;
Recalls the conclusion on registration of refugees and asylum-seekers
9.
adopted by the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees at its fifty-second session, 8 notes the many forms of
harassment faced by refugees and asylum-seekers who remain without any form of
documentation attesting to their status, recalls the responsibility of States to register
refugees on their territories, reiterates in this context the central role which early
and effective registration and documentation can play, guided by protection
considerations, in enhancing protection and supporting efforts to find durable
solutions, and calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, as appropriate, to
help States to conduct this procedure should they be unable to register refugees on
their territory;
10. Calls upon the international community, including States and the Office
of the High Commissioner and other relevant United Nations organizations, within
their respective mandates, to take concrete action to meet the protection and
assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to contribute
generously to projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight and
facilitating durable solutions for refugees and displaced persons;

_______________
7

See African Union, document EX.CL/Dec.192–235 (VII).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth-sixth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/56/12/Add.1),
chap. III, sect. B.

8

2

A/RES/60/128

11. Reaffirms the importance of timely and adequate assistance and
protection for refugees, also reaffirms that assistance and protection are mutually
reinforcing and that inadequate material assistance and food shortages undermine
protection, notes the importance of a rights- and community-based approach in
engaging constructively with individual refugees and their communities to achieve
fair and equitable access to food and other forms of material assistance, and
expresses concern in regard to situations in which minimum standards of assistance
are not met, including those in which adequate needs assessments have yet to be
undertaken;
12. Also reaffirms that respect by States for their protection responsibilities
towards refugees is strengthened by international solidarity involving all members
of the international community and that the refugee protection regime is enhanced
through committed international cooperation in a spirit of solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing among all States;
13. Further reaffirms that host States have the primary responsibility to
ensure the civilian and humanitarian character of asylum, and calls upon States, in
cooperation with international organizations, within their mandates, to take all
necessary measures to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection and, in
particular, to ensure that the civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps is
not compromised by the presence or the activities of armed elements or used for
purposes that are incompatible with their civilian character;
14. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and
well-being of refugees and asylum-seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion
and physical attacks, calls upon States of refuge, in cooperation with international
organizations, where appropriate, to take all necessary measures to ensure respect
for the principles of refugee protection, including the humane treatment of
asylum-seekers, notes with interest that the High Commissioner has continued to
take steps to encourage the development of measures to better ensure the civilian
and humanitarian character of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to
continue those efforts, in consultation with States and other relevant actors;
15. Deplores the continuing violence and insecurity which constitute an
ongoing threat to the safety and security of staff members of the Office of the High
Commissioner and other humanitarian organizations and an obstacle to the effective
fulfilment of the mandate of the Office and the ability of its implementing partners
and other humanitarian personnel to discharge their respective humanitarian
functions, urges States, parties to conflict and all other relevant actors to take all
necessary measures to protect activities related to humanitarian assistance, prevent
attacks on and kidnapping of national and international humanitarian workers and
ensure the safety and security of the personnel and property of the Office and that of
all humanitarian organizations discharging functions mandated by the Office, and
calls upon States to investigate fully any crime committed against humanitarian
personnel and bring to justice the persons responsible for such crimes;
16. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the African Union,
subregional organizations and all African States, in conjunction with agencies of the
United Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
the international community, to strengthen and revitalize existing partnerships and
forge new ones in support of the international refugee protection system, notes with

3

A/RES/60/128

interest the result of the Humanitarian Response Review, 9 welcomes the proposals
made by the Secretary-General and the General Assembly to strengthen the United
Nations humanitarian system, and takes note of deliberations by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee aimed at following up on the Humanitarian Response Review
and bringing about greater consistency in the response to humanitarian emergencies;
17. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the international
community and other concerned entities to intensify their support to African
Governments through appropriate capacity-building activities, including training of
relevant officers, disseminating information about refugee instruments and
principles, providing financial, technical and advisory services to accelerate the
enactment or amendment and implementation of legislation relating to refugees,
strengthening emergency response and enhancing capacities for the coordination of
humanitarian activities;
18. Reaffirms the right of return and the principle of voluntary repatriation,
appeals to countries of origin and countries of asylum to create conditions that are
conducive to voluntary repatriation, recognizes that, while voluntary repatriation
remains the pre-eminent solution, local integration and third-country resettlement,
where appropriate and feasible, are also viable options for dealing with the situation
of African refugees who, owing to prevailing circumstances in their respective
countries of origin, are unable to return home, and welcomes in this regard the
conclusion on local integration adopted by the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at its fifty-sixth
session; 10
19. Also reaffirms that voluntary repatriation should not necessarily be
conditioned on the accomplishment of political solutions in the country of origin in
order not to impede the exercise of the refugees’ right to return, and recognizes that
the voluntary repatriation and reintegration process is normally guided by the
conditions in the country of origin, in particular that voluntary repatriation can be
accomplished in conditions of safety and dignity;
20. Welcomes the development by the High Commissioner, in cooperation
with other United Nations agencies and development actors, of the framework for
durable solutions, aimed at promoting lasting solutions, particularly in protracted
refugee situations, including the “4Rs” approach (repatriation, reintegration,
rehabilitation and reconstruction) to sustainable return;
21. Calls upon the international donor community to provide financial and
material assistance that allows for the implementation of community-based
development programmes that benefit both refugees and host communities, as
appropriate, in agreement with host countries and consistent with humanitarian
objectives, and recognizes that promoting the self-reliance of refugees from the
outset will contribute towards enhancing the ability of refugee communities to
become self-reliant, as and when appropriate, with adequate support from the
international community for the host country and the refugees living there;
22. Appeals to the international community to respond positively, in the
spirit of solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to the third-country
_______________
9
See Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Response Review (New York and
Geneva, 2005).
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/60/12/Add.1),
chap. III, sect. C.

4

A/RES/60/128

resettlement needs of African refugees, notes in this regard the importance of using
resettlement strategically, as part of situation-specific comprehensive responses to
refugee situations, and to this end encourages interested States, the Office of the
High Commissioner and other relevant partners to make full use of the Multilateral
Framework of Understandings on Resettlement, 11 where appropriate;
23. Calls upon the international donor community to provide material and
financial assistance for the implementation of programmes intended for the
rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure affected by refugees in countries
of asylum;
24. Urges the international community, in the spirit of international solidarity
and burden-sharing, to continue to fund generously the refugee programmes of the
Office of the High Commissioner and, taking into account the substantially
increased needs of programmes in Africa, inter alia, as a result of repatriation
possibilities, to ensure that Africa receives a fair and equitable share of the
resources designated for refugees;
25. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner and interested States to
identify protracted refugee situations which might lend themselves to resolution
through the development of specific, multilateral, comprehensive and practical
approaches to resolving such refugee situations, including improvement of
international burden- and responsibility-sharing and realization of durable solutions,
within a multilateral context;
26. Expresses grave concern about the plight of internally displaced persons
in Africa, calls upon States to take concrete action to pre-empt internal displacement
and to meet the protection and assistance needs of internally displaced persons,
recalls in that regard the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, 12 and
encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to explore, with other
relevant actors, the feasibility of taking on coordination responsibilities for clusters
related to the protection of internally displaced persons, camp management and
shelter in conflict situations as part of a broader United Nations coordination effort
in support of United Nations humanitarian coordinators, without prejudice to its
core mandate of refugee protection and assistance;
27. Invites the Representative of the Secretary-General on the human rights
of internally displaced persons to continue his ongoing dialogue with Member States
and the intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, in
accordance with his mandate, and to include information thereon in his reports to
the Commission on Human Rights and the General Assembly;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on
assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session, taking fully into account the efforts expended by
countries of asylum, under the item entitled “Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, and to present an oral report to the Economic
and Social Council at its substantive session of 2006.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005
_______________
11
12

Available from www.unhcr.org.
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

5
