S/PV.8551

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8551st meeting

Monday, 17 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ntsoane
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 10 June 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/485)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-17917 (E)
*1917917*

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 10 June 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/485)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme.
Mr. Griffiths is joining today’s meeting via video
tele-conference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/485, which contains the text of a
letter dated 10 June 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the latest developments
in the Yemeni peace process. With the Council’s
steadfast support, I have continued to work with both
the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah on the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
way forward to a comprehensive political solution to
the conflict based on the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
National Dialogue Conference outcomes and all the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015) in particular.
In Hudaydah, despite reports earlier today, in
general the parties have sustained the reduction in
violence across the governorate for the six full months
2/26

17/06/2019

since the Agreement entered into force in the middle of
last December. That has continued despite the delays in
the implementation of the Agreement due to a number
of challenges and the frustrations associated with those
challenges, which we have all experienced. During the
five months prior to the ceasefire, the fighting resulted
in more than 1,300 civilian casualties in the governorate.
In the five months following the ceasefire, the number
of civilian casualties was reduced by 68 per cent.
Nevertheless, of course, I remain deeply concerned by
continued violence and civilian casualties. However,
it is clear that the overall de-escalation continues to
benefit the people of the city and the opportunities for
effective humanitarian response.
The Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC), set up by the Agreement, and its members
from both parties continued over the past months to
engage constructively with my colleague Lieutenant
General Michael Lollesgaard on the plans for the
first and second phases of the redeployments. He
remains positive that an agreement on both phases
of the redeployments can be achieved in line with
what the parties agreed in Stockholm, including in
particular with regard to the tripartite monitoring
mechanism. Once outstanding issues are resolved, joint
implementation can commence. Joint implementation
will allow for the parties to fully verify all elements of
the redeployments, including those previously executed.
I commend Lieutenant General Lollesgaard for his
relentless efforts to build relationships and confidence
between the parties throughout his engagements to
ensure the effectiveness of the RCC, amid challenging
logistical and political circumstances.
The economic aspects of the Hudaydah Agreement
regarding the revenues of the ports are also at the
forefront of our attention. I hope that achieving
consensus on those aspects will enable the payment of
public sector salaries in Al-Hudaydah governorate and
across all of Yemen. That would be a significant step
forward for the benefit of the Yemeni people. We have
had very positive exchanges with the Government of
Yemen on the matter, and I hope to build on last month’s
Amman meeting and convene further discussions with
both parties in the near future.
I thank the Council for its continued support,
which has been instrumental for the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement ever since its inception.
Parties should take the necessary next steps to ensure
the full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
19-17917

17/06/2019

S/PV. 8551

The situation in the Middle East

in its entirety, while ensuring full respect for Yemen’s
sovereignty. I note the Government of Yemen’s
flexibility and continued support to the Agreement in
its entirety and its continued constructive engagement
in that regard. I look forward to continuing my
close engagement with President Hadi Mansour, the
Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah to advance
the implementation of the Agreement. If I may, allow
me to brief members on where the parties stand on
the remaining aspects of the agreements reached in
Stockholm last December.
We all hoped that the statement of understanding on
Taiz agreed in Stockholm would open the door for the
parties to work together on a way forward for the city and
alleviate the suffering of its citizens. The military and
political situation in the city is extremely complex and
fragile, to the detriment of the population. I continue to
work with the parties to convene a meeting of the joint
committee agreed in Stockholm to identify a way out
of the current situation. The benefits of a de-escalation
of tensions and improved access for humanitarian aid
would be tangible, immediate and visible.
I am also disappointed by the lack of progress on
the implementation of the exchanges of prisoners and
detainees as agreed before the Stockholm meetings. That
is in essence a humanitarian issue that would provide
relief for the prisoners and detainees and reunite them
with their families and loved ones. As I have informed
the Council previously, the parties have held productive
sessions on the details on the exchanges in recent
months. With greater political flexibility, I believe that
they can translate those discussions into actions on the
ground. I believe passionately that, more than any other
issue, tangible progress on the exchange of prisoners
would indicate the seriousness of the parties to build
confidence and a significant humanitarian gesture of
good faith. That has yet to happen, despite the continued
efforts of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, with which my Office works very closely. I call
on the parties to prioritize the implementation of the
exchange of prisoners in good faith and to demonstrate
the flexibility required to make it a reality, for the sake
of peace and, perhaps even more importantly, for the
sake of thousands of Yemeni families that long to be
reunited and are extremely disappointed that this has
not yet happened.
The Council has recently expressed concern at
re-escalating violence across Yemen and at attacks on
civilian infrastructure in southern Saudi Arabia. I must

echo these concerns, including the recent drone attacks
on Abha airport. I have repeatedly warned that war can
take peace off the table, and in the context of wider
regional tensions, the risks to the political process have
never looked more stark. Naturally, I call for steps to
be taken to de-escalate tensions for the benefit of the
Yemeni people and regional security.
The Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah have
consistently affirmed to me, and continue to do so, that
a political solution is the only solution to this conflict.
The longer the conflict goes on, the more challenges
and the greater difficulties we will face in resolving
it and reversing its terrible effects on the people of
Yemen. The continued dialogue between the parties to
implement the Stockholm Agreement is significant, but
it is not enough for the Yemeni people. They want their
suffering to end now and not tomorrow.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity, if I
may, to reaffirm my personal commitment and that of the
United Nations to pursuing an impartial and inclusive
political process based on national ownership and in full
respect for Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, as underscored by the Council
on numerous occasions. Ending the conflict in Yemen
can be achieved only through a comprehensive political
solution. Opportunities for compromise are still readily
available to the parties and, with the support of the
Council, I remain confident that the parties can yet
reach a comprehensive and peaceful settlement to the
conflict in Yemen.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Every month, I update the Security
Council on the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
Today marks my fifteenth briefing and the thirty-sixth
members will have heard since 2015. My experience is
just like that of the main character in the hit Hollywood
movie Groundhog Day. Many in the Chamber will have
seen it. He finds himself trapped in a time loop, repeating
the same day over and over. He tries to escape in many
different ways — to no avail. Every morning, he wakes
up back where he started. Just as in Groundhog Day,
the details in my briefings to the Council change from
month to month. The larger picture, however, does not.
Today I want to step back and consider the time
loop we seem to be experiencing in Yemen. How has

19-179173/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

this war evolved in the past four or five years? What
has it wrought? What can we expect if it continues?
What are we doing about it? And what is needed to help
Yemen break this cycle for good? Let me begin with the
nature of the war.
From the start, it has been brutal. One independent
monitoring group, the Armed Conflict Location and
Event Data Project (ACLED), estimates that more
than 70,000 people have been killed just since 2016.
Violence has also been remarkably consistent. Fighting
may decrease in one area — as we have seen recently in
Al-Hudaydah with the Stockholm Agreement — only
to mushroom elsewhere, as we are seeing right now in
Al-Dhale’e, Hajjah and Taiz.
Today there are more than 30 active front lines
in Yemen — more than enough to absorb fighters
redeploying from quieter areas. In fact, ACLED data
indicate that conflict incidents across the country have
been mostly increasing since 2016. Yemen is getting
more violent, not less. The conflict is getting worse,
not better. Fighting this year has displaced more than
250,000 people. The number of incidents killing
or injuring children more than trebled between the
last quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of this year.
In recent days, we have also seen a dangerous and
reprehensible increase in attacks on Saudi Arabia, as
well as air strikes in Sana’a and other areas.
All the fighting has, however, led to relatively few
major shifts in control. Today, the large majority of
Yemenis live in areas controlled by Ansar Allah and
its allies. After tens of thousands of air strikes, shells,
mortars and ground clashes, this has changed only
marginally since 2016. So the war is not only brutal; it
is unwinnable. Everyone agrees on that, at least in their
public statements, and yet the fighting continues. So the
next question is: If all the fighting has not materially
changed the military facts on the ground, what has
it achieved?
We give the Security Council the figures every
month. Eighty per cent of the population — more than
24 million people — need assistance and protection,
including 10 million who rely on food aid to survive.
Some 600 incidents per month damage or destroy
civilian infrastructure. More than 100 hospitals,
health facilities and schools were hit just last year. A
quarter of Yemeni children are out of school. More than
3.3 million people remain displaced. The economy has
been devastated, shrinking by 40 per cent or more.
4/26

17/06/2019

Some may suggest that the war is not solely to
blame for this tragedy. Four years ago, Yemen was
already the region’s poorest country and millions of
people were receiving aid. That is true. But there was
also a functioning economy. Public institutions were
providing essential services and basic infrastructure
reached across the country. Yemen was even seeing
improvements in food security and nutrition.
All that has now been undone. Today, the number
of people who need assistance is 50 per cent higher
than it was before the war. For the first time this year,
assessments confirm pockets of famine-like conditions
in dozens of places across Yemen. So when people ask
about what the effect of all the fighting has been, the
answer is clear: untold death, damage and destruction;
the immiseration of a nation; and the fracturing and
fragmentation of its society — all amounting, in sum,
to the world’s worst humanitarian tragedy.
Let me turn now to the question of what will happen
if the war continues. There are two immediate answers.
First, many more people will die and conditions will
get much worse for those who survive. An independent
study by the University of Denver, commissioned by
the United Nations Development Programme, recently
used a global model to forecast the impact of continuing
conflict in Yemen. If fighting lasts until 2022, we can
expect close to half a million total deaths, including
more than 300,000 people who will die from hunger,
lack of health care and related causes. That is twice as
many people dying as the model predicts if the war were
to stop this year. We would also see a profound decline
in the status of survivors throughout the country. A
quarter of all children would be malnourished, and
nearly 40 per cent would be out of school. Council
members can imagine better than I can what the
implications of this might be for security and stability
in the wider region.
That brings me to the second answer. We will
need an even larger and an even more expensive relief
operation. At $4.2 billion, this year’s response plan is
already the world’s largest. It is also three times more
than we needed in 2015, but if the fighting does not
stop, today’s requirements will be a fraction of what we
will need to keep people alive a few years from now.
Some Yemeni activists have rightly asked why the
international community is spending so much money
in Yemen but things keep getting worse. Unfortunately,
humanitarian organizations cannot do much more
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

than keep people alive, and we have been reasonably
successful at that. In early 2017, we were providing aid
to about 3 million people every month. Two years later,
we are now reaching more than 10 million a month.
Working with local institutions, we have rolled back
the risk of famine in some areas, stemmed the world’s
largest cholera outbreak and greatly increased the
number of malnourished children who are being
treated and cured. But as conflict continues, underlying
conditions keep deteriorating.
How do we get out of this deadly loop? What needs
to change to break the cycle altogether? Last October,
I set out five priority actions to avert catastrophe in
Yemen. At the time, I emphasized that all five steps
needed to be taken together to bring about real change.
It is worth reviewing where we stand with those
priorities today.
First, I said that we needed an immediate ceasefire
across the country and to silence the guns and ground
the war planes. There has been a reduction in violence
in Al-Hudaydah since December, but that has been
essentially offset by escalating conflict elsewhere.
Enough is enough. The parties must also respect
international humanitarian law, sparing civilians and
civilian infrastructure at all times, whether or not there
is a ceasefire.
Secondly, we need all parties to facilitate rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access, as again required
under international humanitarian law. More than
5 million people who need help, including 3.8 million
people in acute need, live in 75 districts that are
hard to reach because of bureaucratic impediments,
insecurity or logistical constraints. In April and May,
access constraints prevented or delayed humanitarian
assistance for more than 1.5 million people. That is half
a million more people than in the previous two months.
Bureaucratic impediments remain a major problem,
costing lives and increasing suffering.
So far this year, Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities
have prevented or delayed 55 United Nations field
missions, which is an average of three per week.
Monitoring restrictions, issues with beneficiary
targeting and other interference all require
constant engagement.
Despite those challenges, we have seen some
progress recently. For example, it is encouraging that
Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities have issued more
entry permits for aid workers recently. And last week,

S/PV. 8551

Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities told us that they
wanted us to proceed with a technical assessment to
assess the decaying FSO SAFER oil tanker, which is
storing an estimated 1.1 million barrels of oil off the
coast of Al-Hudaydah.
I have repeatedly alerted the Council to the risks
in that regard. If the tanker ruptures or explodes, we
could see the coastline polluted all along the Red Sea.
Depending on the time of year and water currents, the
spill could reach from the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait to
the Suez Canal and potentially as far as the Strait of
Hormuz. I leave it to Council members to imagine the
effect of such a disaster on the environment, shipping
lanes and the global economy. If a major spill occurs,
the world will surely demand answers from anyone who
could have prevented the catastrophe but chose not to.
Provided Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities continue
to facilitate this work, the assessment team should be
able to deploy to the FSO SAFER tanker within the next
two weeks.
The other major concern about interference and
access relates to the diversion of food aid. I will leave
it to David Beasley to update Council members on that.
The third priority that I outlined in October
(see S/PV.8379) is full funding for the humanitarian
operation. This year, as I said, we require $4.2 billion.
We have so far received only $1.15 billion, or 27 per
cent. In February, we heard very generous pledges in
Geneva, amounting to $2.6 billion. We thank all our
donors for their generosity, and we understand that this
money comes from voluntary contributions. But when
pledges are made, they must be fulfilled. It has now
been four months since the Geneva conference. The
World Health Organization has already had to suspend
payments to health workers and the procurement of
medicine and other supplies. Vaccination programmes
will also soon start winding down. That means that
people are almost certainly already dying as a result
of those funding gaps. Other critical programmes,
including malnutrition treatment, cholera prevention
and support for displaced people, could start closing in
the next few weeks.
Fourthly, in October, I emphasized the need for
sustainable measures to strengthen the Yemeni economy.
We have seen some important progress on economic
issues over the past six months. The Government
recently published its first budget since 2015, and I
strongly support its efforts to get it fully financed. I

19-179175/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

hope donors will do the same. The Government has
paid salaries across the country for health workers and
some other civil servants for several successive months,
and the Ansar Allah authorities have also made salary
payments in some areas. In May, commercial food
imports through Al-Hudaydah and Saleef were the
highest in three years, and fuel imports have largely
recovered from the fuel crisis in the previous month.
With salary payments rising and increasing
imports, many Yemenis should have more money in
their pockets and find more goods to purchase in the
market. But — and this is the point to focus on — like the
war itself, progress on one issue can obscure the bigger
picture. Commercial imports through Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef rose in May but they also fluctuate greatly from
month to month. As I have said before, we frequently
see that in months in which food imports increase, fuel
imports drop, and vice versa. And the trend line, which
is what really matters, points sharply downwards. Since
the conflict began, food imports have declined by more
than 40 per cent, fuel imports by 70 per cent and the
import of medicines by 50 per cent.
Almost no containerized commercial cargo has
entered Al-Hudaydah or Saleef since late 2017. That
means that everything that is not food or fuel, such
as medicine, clothing or shelter materials, must go
elsewhere. Food, fuel and other goods are able enter
Aden and other ports, but moving them north, where
most people live, is increasingly difficult and pushes
prices even further out of reach for many people. And
while it is true that civil servant salaries are being paid
more often, the currency is also losing value again. One
United States dollar now costs about 560 Yemeni rial as
compared to 400 rial at the end of last year and 215 rial
before the crisis. Any extra money in Yemeni pockets is
therefore now worth much less, especially since nearly
all goods must be imported.
A growing number of families are also getting less
help from friends and family overseas. According to the
World Bank, Yemenis working abroad, almost entirely
in Gulf countries, send home more than $3.3 billion a
year. Remittances are a lifeline for their families. Some
experts estimate that those payments make up nearly
a quarter of Yemen’s gross domestic product and pay
for more than half of commercial imports. But stricter
labour policies are sending thousands of Yemeni
workers home every month, effectively cutting off
family incomes. There therefore remains an essential,
indeed growing, requirement for a predictable and
6/26

17/06/2019

regular flow of foreign exchange into Yemen at a scale
that allows the Government to continue to pay salaries
and to keep the exchange rate stable.
The fifth priority is the most important: meaningful
progress towards peace. The Stockholm Agreement is
a crucial step in the right direction. But as Council
members just heard from Martin Griffiths, we are in
danger of losing that momentum. I hope that everyone
will do everything they can to work with Martin and
his team to keep moving towards peace. I have already
again today explained the consequences of failing to
do so.
After almost endless repetition, there is a happy
ending to Groundhog Day. The main character
eventually breaks out of his time loop but only by
completely changing his behaviour. The film ends as
he embarks on a peaceful, satisfying future. There is a
lesson here for our own time loop as well. Nothing will
change in Yemen unless everyone is ready to do things
very differently. The steps I have outlined are the way
to start. Otherwise, Council members can expect more
of what they have been hearing for the past four years:
more fighting; more death; more destruction; more
hunger; more disease; more appeals; more pledging
conferences; and more briefings like this one.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Beasley.
Mr. Beasley: I offer very special thanks for the
opportunity to be here with Council today. I also thank
Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock, who are literally
on ground, working all over the world. Mr. Griffiths is
working in a particularly difficult situation in Yemen.
We interface, collaborate and coordinate literally on a
day-to-day basis.
I hope some day I can come here to brief the
Council on some great news with respect to the conflict
ending or well-fed and healthy children. Regrettably,
today is not that day. The humanitarian situation in
Yemen is dire, and despite the immense suffering of the
20 million Yemenis who do not have enough to eat, we
continue to face fierce resistance to simply just doing
our job to keep people alive.
Council members may recall that, in November
2017, I spoke out very vocally and critically about
the coalition’s blockade of Al-Hudaydah and the lack
of humanitarian funds and support in response to the
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

consequences of war. At that time, the Houthis told me
how grateful they were that I spoke out. I told them
then: “This has nothing to do with you.” I said that
it had everything to do with what was right and with
the World Food Programme’s humanitarian obligation
and mandate to do everything within our power to
reach those in need and to be neutral, impartial and
independent. And I told them: “If one day you cross the
line, I will speak out about you. So do what is right.”
Today, I am sad to report that the World Food
Programme (WFP) is being prevented from feeding the
hungriest people in Yemen. Food assistance provided by
the United Nations is being diverted in areas controlled
by Ansar Allah at the expense of hungry children,
women and men.
Let me take a step back just a moment to
describe one of our main jobs at the World Food
Programme — that is, to determine who has the
greatest need of our assistance. No matter where we
operate, we must be able to independently identify
and verify those who need assistance. We also have to
put in place monitoring systems to ensure that those
people truly get the food they need. That is another
of our obligations. These systems help to ensure that
others cannot deprive people of the food they need to
stay alive and that our food does not support political
agendas. These systems protect the people we feed and
ensure that basic humanitarian principles are met and
that we are accountable to our donors and the world.
In the past two years, like in the film Groundhog
Day, we have been telling Ansar Allah over and
over that we had concerns about its resistance to our
neutral, independent operations. It was not just a
matter of registration that we were talking about. As
Mr. Lowcock remembers, we were also having trouble
getting equipment imported, getting visas approved for
staff and many other issues. We kept raising these issues
repeatedly, day in and day out. In December 2017, we
started formal negotiations with the Sana’a authorities
to allow us to identify the hungriest and put them on
a biometric system. Months and months of talks did
not yield any results, and while we kept talking and
talking and talking, in late 2018 we uncovered serious
evidence that food was being diverted and going to the
wrong people.
As I told the Security Council in November last
year (see S/PV.8404), the situation in Yemen was and
is catastrophic. Livelihoods have been destroyed; the

S/PV. 8551

economy is in shambles. We are now feeding more than
10 million people a month. But as the head of the World
Food Programme, I cannot assure the Council that all the
assistance is going to those who need it the most. Why?
Because we are not allowed to operate independently
and because aid is being diverted for profit and/or other
purposes. The bottom line is this — food is being taken
from the mouths of hungry little girls and little boys
who need it just to survive. Let me sight just a few
examples of the evidence we have gathered.
In Sana’a city, a number of beneficiaries told us
that they had not received any food assistance. But the
distribution list contained their thumbprints, as if they
had. Who took their food? We interviewed beneficiaries
at seven centres in Sana’a city. As much as 60 per cent
of beneficiaries confirmed that they had not received
any assistance. Where did their food go?
While we saw an initial improvement in early
2019, through the hard work of Martin Griffiths,
Mark Lowcock, Lisa Grande and others, concerning
information has emerged and continues to emerge.
For example, in Saada, 33 per cent of the respondents
of our survey did not receive food in April 2019. In
just the past 60 days, our hotline and monitoring
system have detected more than 30 cases of possible
misappropriation of food in parts of Yemen controlled
by the authorities in Sana’a. On top of this, in Saada,
overall 79 per cent of third-party monitors and 66 per
cent of WFP staff monitoring visits were blocked. Let me
be clear — diversion, while mostly in areas controlled
by Ansar Allah, is not limited only to Houthi-controlled
areas, but when we face challenges in areas controlled
by the Government, we have received cooperation to
address the issues on an ongoing basis.
Our food assistance is being manipulated, and we
are being blocked from fixing it. If we do nothing, does
that mean we condone it? Are we a party to it? Are we
no longer neutral? Humanity is the reason we are in
Yemen in the first place. It is why the world and many
nations represented in this Chamber today are providing
the World Food Programme with over $150 million per
month to feed hungry Yemenis. When food assistance
goes to the wrong people, when it fails to reach the
neediest, have we failed humankind?
We cannot let this stand. We have tried every
possible option to resolve this issue over the past 18
months. We have been dialoguing and negotiating with
the Ansar Allah leadership to simply let us do our job

19-179177/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

and reach the most vulnerable people in Yemen. It is not
any more complicated than that.
I have personally appealed to Abdul-Malik
Al-Houthi, the leader of Ansar Allah. In December and
January, he responded in a most favourable way and
we made some progress. On 28 December 2018 and
15 January of this year, we signed agreements with
the Sana’a authorities on beneficiary registration,
beneficiary targeting and biometrics. It was a
tremendous breakthrough. It seemed as if we might
be able to move forward. But every time we got close
to actually putting those agreements into place, there
would be a new roadblock.
After extensive dialogue, I again wrote to the
authorities, asking not for words but for action. I asked
them to honour the agreements they had signed. I told
them that if we did not receive these assurances, then
we would begin a phased suspension of food assistance,
most likely towards the end of the week. If and when we
do initiate suspension, we will continue our nutrition
programme for malnourished children, pregnant women
and new mothers, and we will also keep pushing and
pushing to get an agreement.
We want to resolve this quickly so that the people
can get the help they need and the help they deserve.
Then we can go back to doing our regular work, which
we do all over the world with more than 80 or 90 million
people in the most difficult places on Earth. And we can
do beneficiary targeting and the biometric registration,
as needed, to make sure that the right beneficiaries get
the support that they need. If not, then we are looking
at expanding the suspension to others areas where the
risk of diversion is high. We do not want to do that; it
goes against every fibre of our being. All we are asking
is to let us do what we do everywhere else, all over
the world. Our humanitarian principles — the very
tool that allows us to do our job in the most complex
places — are compromised if we are not allowed to
independently determine who needs our help the most.
We have the expertise, and, fortunately, we have the
funds to keep suffering Yemenis alive.
Let me be crystal clear here: children are dying
right now as we speak because of that interference and
our lack of access. I believe that there are elements of
the Ansar Allah leadership who want to move forward
and do what is right. I really do believe that. But, like in
every war, there are those who stand to make a profit,
and they will do everything to obstruct and delay. They
8/26

17/06/2019

know that children are dying. They know that families
are suffering because they are not getting the food that
they need. No one associated with the United Nations
should stand idly by while that happens. It is not just
about Yemen. It is about the integrity of the entire
United Nations and the humanitarian system around the
world. That is what is at stake. We are not giving up.
I still have hope that we will prevail on what is right,
and that the Houthi leadership will do what is good. We
are not asking the Ansar Allah movement for anything
other than to let us do our job.
Let me end with a short story. I do not know how
many of those present saw the 60 Minutes special
exposé on starving children about a year and a half ago,
which was very tough and implicated all sides. Scott
Pelley held an extensive interview with many people,
including me personally. At the end, as he was turning
the microphone off, he looked at me. I had known Scott
from the past, from politics. He said,
“Governor, you have got the greatest job on Earth,
keeping people alive”.
I said,
“Scott, I do. I really do have the best job on Earth.
But I want to say something to you that you have
not thought of and it is going to bother you. Sadly,
I do not go to bed every night thinking about the
children we saved; I go to bed at night thinking
about the children we could not save. When we do
not have the access or the money that we need, my
team has to choose which children eat and which do
not eat, and which children live and which children
die. Scott, how would you like that job?”
Scott looked at me and said,
“Oh, my God, I never thought about that”.
I said,
“Scott, unfortunately, I have to think about that
every day and every night.
In Yemen we are fortunate enough to have the
money that we need, we just do not have the access.
We do not make this decision lightly. I am begging the
Houthis and all those concerned to do everything within
their power to let us do what we do best — save lives.
The President (spoke
Mr. Beasley for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the
first time that I personally take the floor during your
presidency, Mr. President, I would like to welcome
you to the position and pledge the United Kingdom’s
support for Kuwait during this month. I would also like
to thank your predecessor.
This is a very difficult set of issues, as we heard
very graphically today. I want to start by making it
crystal clear how much we support the United Nations.
We support Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard, the Head of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Head
of the World Food Programme. I think that I speak for
all the Security Council when I say that, based on our
discussions so far.
When things do not happen on the ground that
ought to happen on the ground, the people responsible
for that — those responsible for not moving forward,
blocking access and preventing aid getting through
to starving people — need to know that they are not
just acting against the people of Yemen and against the
United Nations, but they are acting against the Security
Council and its manifestation in New York, given the
fact that the Council is charged by the membership with
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
therefore call on all the parties to redouble their efforts
to work with those representatives on the ground, on
behalf of all of us and the United Nations. I would like
to draw the audience’s attention to the fact that the
Council was able to speak with one voice to that effect
in its press statement (SC/13834) issued on 10 June. I
therefore repeat that all parties have a duty to cooperate
with the manifestations of the United Nations on the
ground. I will come back to the aid question and
diversion later, if I may.
I want to talk about the military escalation. At one
level, it is remarkable that the Al-Hudaydah agreement
has held as long as it has, and we need it to continue
to hold. We need Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard to be able to continue their very important
work because, whatever the problems in Yemen are, the
fact that the agreement holds is very important to us.
But the recent escalation in tension is extremely
worrisome. I want to condemn the Houthi attack on
Abha airport. Twenty six civilians were injured. I want
to express concern about the seeming link between the

S/PV. 8551

Houthis and Iran. I would also like to use this occasion
to urge all parties to show restraint from retaliatory
military actions. Escalations are not in the long-term
interests of any of the parties. It is not in the interest of
regional stability and security. And it is certainly not in
the interest of the people of Yemen.
On Al-Hudaydah, the initial redeployment of
Houthi forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa is very welcome, but we need the Houthis to
complete the process by clearing mines and removing
military manifestations. We need both parties to engage
constructively with the United Nations, as I said earlier,
on expediting the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement. A return to military operations really would
be catastrophic for the Yemeni people.
We all know — I think that the Council has been
very clear — that a political settlement is the only way
to bring long-term stability to Yemen. We must not lose
sight of how to enable those broader political efforts. I
think that we all know that a resumption of the political
process needs to take place in parallel to further the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement.
I was very interested in what Mr. Griffiths had to
say about the prisoner and detainee exchanges. Given
the importance of that single issue to overall progress,
I have to say I am slightly mystified as to why more
progress cannot be made. I therefore hope that we can
pick that up in consultations.
On the economy, the United Nations mediated a
meeting in Amman between the Central Bank of Aden
and Sana’a, that is, both branches of it, on enacting
the revenue-management elements of the Stockholm
Agreement. I want to endorse what the Special Envoy
said about the importance of improving Yemen’s
economy and ensuring the payment of public-sector
salaries across the country. We encourage both parties
to continue to engage with the Special Envoy on the
issue and to meet again to pursue an agreement. I also
want to reinforce the importance of donor countries
being able to support the United Nations in that regard,
both in terms of foreign exchange and, as we heard
from Mr. Lowcock, in terms of humanitarian aid and
its disbursement. There is a cruel irony in the fact
that Yemen is enduring what is currently the worst
humanitarian disaster in the world while the appeals for
it are underfunded. Between us, and appealing also to
the wider United Nations membership, that is something
we have to put right. For its part, the United Kingdom

19-179179/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

has made available more than half of its $300 million
in support, and we are going to bring forward further
funds where we can.
To turn to the humanitarian arena, I think that
the figures we heard from Mr. Lowcock are shocking.
If this war continues until 2022, I do not think there
are enough superlatives to describe how awful the
human cost will be, and it is already awful enough. I
think we Council members must redouble our efforts
to help support humanitarian access. The issue that
Mr. Beasley raised about the manipulation of aid
is cynical, and in a way evil. When it is all over, the
Yemeni people will remember who it was that tried
to starve them of assistance. Not only for the sake of
the people, but for the sake of the future stability of
Yemen, it is therefore extremely important that this gets
sorted out, and quickly. We should also consider what
Mr. Beasley said about the existence of factions within
factions as to who supports the impartial delivery of aid
and who does not.
I hope that other Council members will be able to
join me in supporting the World Food Programme’s
efforts and calling on the Houthis to comply with
resolution 2451 (2018) and facilitate unhindered
humanitarian access. It is extremely important to
convey that message strongly today. I note that not all the
problems are coming from Houthi-controlled areas, and
it is important to point that out, but if I have understood
Mr. Beasley correctly, there is a way to resolve those
other issues on the ground, meaning that the Houthi
problem is the biggest obstacle overall. I therefore
appeal to anyone with any humanitarian instinct on the
ground to work with the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Food Programme to get this sorted, because as we have
all heard, the people of Yemen cannot take much more.
Mr. Cohen (United States): I want to thank Special
Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Executive Director Beasley for their briefings and
for their teams’ tireless efforts.
The United States acknowledges the tragedy of
this human-made crisis in Yemen, which continues to
deteriorate as the conflict continues for a fifth year. We
strongly condemn the reported Houthi missile attack
on Abha airport on 12 June, which injured numerous
innocent civilians. The Houthis should be implementing
the commitments they made in Sweden instead of
launching such attacks. As we repeatedly hear in the
10/26

17/06/2019

Council, there is no military solution to this conflict.
The Houthis must demonstrate good faith in the political
process and cease their unmanned aerial vehicle and
other attacks on their fellow citizens and neighbours.
Iran must stop supplying them with the weapons to do
so. Attacks on Yemen’s neighbours threaten to derail
the progress made by the United Nations and the parties
to the conflict and do not serve the greater interests of
the people of Yemen.
The goal of the United States in Yemen remains
consistent. It is to work with our international partners
to bring peace, prosperity and stability to Yemen. That
is our focus, and we will continue to support Special
Envoy Griffiths, Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive
Director Beasley. Since December the Council has
been urging the Houthis to finish the first phase of
redeployments initiated on 11 May, demonstrating their
commitment to a political settlement and to the terms
of the Stockholm Agreement. It is imperative that the
Yemeni Government and the Houthis work in good faith
with Mr. Griffiths and General Lollesgaard to achieve
the full implementation of the redeployments as soon
as possible. That means addressing the contentious
issues preventing further progress on the ground while
continuing to exercise restraint so that fighting does not
threaten the ceasefire.
We were pleased to hear of initial progress with
regard to positioning additional United Nations
monitors, should redeployments proceed as planned.
We must all seize the momentum of that progress. The
Council should continue to demonstrate full support for
the efforts of the Special Envoy and the Redeployment
Coordination Committee on the ground. The parties
must facilitate the United Nations monitors’ arrival in
Yemen by providing permits and safe passage.
The ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah is one of the
Stockholm Agreement’s most important outcomes. It
was meant to encourage a nationwide de-escalation of
hostilities, but as we have heard, it has instead led to
the redeployment of forces from Al-Hudaydah to other
battlegrounds. The escalation in Al-Dhale’e and Hajjah
threatens humanitarian access and is forcing residents
to flee for their lives. Fighting all over the country, not
just in Al-Hudaydah, has to end.
Apart from Al-Hudaydah, in the rest of Yemen
civilians are living in desperation, as today’s briefings
repeatedly underscored. The Yemeni Government
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

has demonstrated a clear commitment to the United
Nations-led process. We call on the Houthis to
demonstrate to the international community that they
too are serious about the United Nations process by
removing all Houthi-affiliated personnel from the ports
of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa so that the first
phase of redeployments can be completed.
We reiterate our deep concern about the rise
in suspected cholera cases this year and call on all
parties to provide humanitarian support, including by
providing the funding that was pledged in Geneva in
February. We further call on the parties to allow access
to food, medical care and safe shelter for displaced
people throughout the country. The United States
supports the World Food Programme’s efforts to ensure
that critical humanitarian aid is delivered throughout
Yemen to those who need it and in accordance with the
international humanitarian principles of impartiality,
neutrality and independence. We call on the Houthi
authorities to respect those principles and work with the
World Food Programme to achieve a swift resolution.
With some 20 million people in need of emergency food
assistance and more than 24 million requiring some
type of humanitarian assistance, it is critical to ensure
that aid gets to those who need it immediately.

S/PV. 8551

stoking the situation and jumping to conclusions
and accusations are not conducive to an impartial
international investigation but rather politicize and
undermine trust in it. We call on all parties to engage
in dialogue and assess the situation judiciously. In
that connection we would like to remind the Council
of resolution 598 (1987), which requested that the
Secretary-General work together with States of the
region to develop a security architecture for the region.
We once again point to Russia’s proposal to launch
a process for developing confidence-building and
security measures in the Persian Gulf and eventually
the whole of the Middle East. That has a direct bearing
on the conflict in Yemen, among other things. The
escalation of aggressive, accusatory rhetoric and the
artificial incitement of anti-Iranian sentiments are
having a destabilizing effect on the tense situation in
the entire region and could undermine our collective
diplomacy and undo the gains made on the Yemen issue
under the auspices of the United Nations, however
small they may be.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank today’s briefers, whose work we
also support, for their comprehensive overview of the
situation in Yemen. The briefings we have just heard
reaffirm the need for united international efforts to
advance the political settlement, end the conflict and
alleviate the humanitarian situation in the country.

It is our collective responsibility to support
the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, who are doing
painstaking work to induce the Yemenis to implement
the Stockholm Agreement. The parties have begun to
implement the first phase of the redeployment of forces
from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, and
Ansar Allah’s unilateral withdrawal of forces was an
important step towards implementing the broader plan
for the disengagement of the opposing parties. We note
the growing role in that context of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement and call
for its full deployment as soon as possible, which will
make it possible to closely monitor the steps being
taken to implement the agreements regarding the Red
Sea ports. The progress in Al-Hudaydah is making it
possible to move forward with the achievement of other
aspects of the Stockholm Agreement, including the
exchange of prisoners and the de-escalation of tensions
in Taiz, as well as discussions on a framework for a
political settlement.

Before moving on to considering the conflict in
Yemen directly, we would like to express our concern
about the rise of tensions in the Persian Gulf. We expect
all the incidents that have taken place in the area to be
duly investigated. Russia condemns the attacks on oil
tankers, and their organizers must be identified and held
accountable. However, we emphasize that artificially

Russia will continue to provide assistance to the
United Nations mediation efforts to resolve the Yemenis’
differences. We would like to note the support that
the Special Envoy is receiving from the Ambassadors
accredited in Yemen from the five permanent members
of the Council, and we call on all who are interested
in the speedy restoration of peace in Yemen to work

In conclusion, United States support for Special
Envoy Griffiths and General Lollesgaard remains
steadfast. Along with their staff and the international
humanitarian community, they are working tirelessly to
help the parties reach a peaceful, enduring resolution to
the conflict and to save Yemeni lives. The United States
applauds the Yemeni Government for joining them in
this effort and calls on the Houthis to do so without
further delay.

19-1791711/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

actively with the parties to the conflict on whom they
have influence to convince them of the futility of a
military solution.
As we have heard from our briefers, against the
background of the lack of progress towards a political
settlement in Yemen, the humanitarian situation
continues to worsen every day. Two thirds of the
country’s population are suffering from hunger and
lack access to essential medicines and basic social
protective services. The civilian infrastructure is in
ruins and the national economy is collapsing. The
longer the war lasts the more difficult post-conflict
reconstruction becomes. Like other Member States
of the United Nations, including Yemen’s immediate
neighbours, Russia will continue to do its part to assist
the Yemeni people through bilateral channels and by
contributing to the activities of the major humanitarian
organizations. We stress that emergency humanitarian
assistance to the population of Yemen must be provided
regardless of who controls what territory. We call on
all parties to the Yemeni conflict to ensure unimpeded
access for humanitarian personnel, comply with
international humanitarian law and refrain from the
indiscriminate use of force and intentional damage to
civilian infrastructure, especially oil production and air
transportation facilities.
Alleviating the humanitarian situation in Yemen is
vital not only right now but also with regard to future
national reconciliation issues. However, humanitarian
efforts are not and cannot be a panacea. The solution is
exclusively in the political arena, and in that connection
we have great hopes for the mediation efforts of the
United Nations. We will support and actively assist
Mr. Griffiths in that regard.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
want to express our thanks for the convening of this
meeting and the important briefings given by Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley,
who from different perspectives have described a bleak
scenario that requires urgent support on the part of the
international community and concerted action on the
part of the Council.
Peru notes with deep concern the worsening
violence and suffering in various parts of Yemen,
which have resulted in new fatalities among the civilian
population, most of them women and children. We
strongly condemn the attacks by the Houthis, which
have intensified in recent weeks and have included
12/26

17/06/2019

the use of drones and missiles in populated areas of
Saudi Arabia. We hope that those reprehensible acts,
which may qualify as war crimes, will be subject to
exhaustive investigations leading to the identification
and punishment of those responsible. However, any
response must comply with international law. We must
reiterate that there can be no military solution, and that
any indiscriminate action would risk aggravating an
already catastrophic humanitarian situation and work
to the advantage of terrorist groups, especially when
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights are being committed throughout the conflict.
We are particularly concerned about the fact that
the upsurge in violence coincides with the positive
initial progress that has been made in the process of
redeploying the forces in the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa and is a threat to the possibility
of reaching a political solution. In that context, Peru
reaffirms its gratitude and support for the efforts
that Mr. Griffiths is making with all parties to the
conflict in Yemen to bring them closer to an inclusive
political solution. We also welcome the fact that his
work has received the firm and unanimous support
of the international community and the members
of the Council in particular. We must stress that the
agreements reached in Sweden constituted a turning
point in the bloody and prolonged conflict in Yemen,
and that no circumstance can serve as a justification to
abandon the commitments agreed there. In that regard,
we urge the parties to reaffirm their commitment to
the political solution promoted by the United Nations
and to tackle the difficulties that will arise throughout
that complex process in prudence and good faith,
avoiding unilateral actions that further undermine
trust. The renewed commitment demanded of them
must be translated into new and tangible progress in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, both in
relation to the redeployment of forces from the crucial
port of Al-Hudaydah and to the exchange of prisoners
and the commitment to de-escalation in Taiz.
We also want to highlight the professionalism and
sense of duty of the staff of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA), and
to underline the importance of ensuring that the Houthi
authorities provide the necessary facilities for their
deployment, which include the timely issuance of visas
for Mission personnel and guarantees for their freedom
of movement and safety. In that regard, Peru supports
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the renewal of the mandate of UNMHA, whose presence
and effective stabilizing role are much appreciated.
All those efforts at the political level are even
more imperative when the humanitarian crisis seems
to be worsening on the ground, as Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley reminded us. That is reflected in the
imminence of widespread famine that could affect 80 per
cent of the Yemeni population, as well as the more than
360,000 new cases of cholera reported so far this year,
which indicate a major spread of that scourge. We must
therefore be consistent in our responsibility to protect
the most vulnerable people. That means eliminating all
barriers to assistance, ensuring that aid is not diverted
or misused, guaranteeing humanitarian personnel a safe
space to do their work and establishing conditions for
the place, form and beneficiaries of that assistance. It
also demands that the international community step up
its contributions aimed at stabilizing and reactivating
the local economy, since factors such as inflation and
currency devaluation significantly increase the risk
of famine.
My delegation will continue to work and speak out
to end the suffering of civilians and support all efforts
to promote the easing of tensions required to achieve
peace and reconciliation in Yemen.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be brief. Germany
supports what was said, in particular by my colleague
of the United Kingdom at the beginning of the meeting.
Having listened to the earlier statements, I must say
that there is unity in the Council with regard to Yemen.
I believe that we must our utmost to gain traction on
the subject and try to ensure that we make progress on
the ground.
First, I would like to tell Martin Griffiths that
Germany fully supports his efforts. We have full
confidence and trust in his work. I recall what Mark
Lowcock said at the end of his intervention when he
mentioned the film Groundhog Day and said that
everything had to change in order to achieve a result.
Therefore, we also support his ideas and initiatives so
long as he stays within the mandate and the rules-based
international order. Germany fully supports the work
of Mr. Griffiths.
It is always very depressing to listen to
Mr. Lowcock’s briefings — approximately 15 times
now — as the situation continues to worsen. I do
not wish to repeat what I said the last time around.
Germany fully supports Mr. Lowcock and will honour

S/PV. 8551

the pledges we made at the pledging conference. We
have met our pledge of €100 million — equivalent to
approximately $115 million — and we have more in the
pipeline. I would appeal to everyone who participated
in that conference to honour the pledges made. That
also goes for the members of the coalition.
It is good to see David Beasley here in the
Chamber. Germany fully supports his work. Germany
has also been a very reliable partner of the World Food
Programme. We are increasingly worried about what
he told us with regard to the situation on the ground.
Concerning the faction of Ansar Allah impeding his
work, how brutal, cynical and selfish can you be to
do what he has described, to the extent that he is even
forced to consider stopping his work? I do not want to
talk about the wider region; I will focus on Yemen. I
can only repeat what has been said before and appeal to
all those with influence on the parties to do everything
they can to stop the conflict.
As Mr. Cohen, along with several others, said
in his intervention, there is no military solution to
the problem. Instead of realizing that, resuming
negotiations and allowing humanitarian aid, we hear
that there is military escalation. Therefore, we must
be united in condemning such escalation. That also
holds true with regard to attacks on the airport in Saudi
Arabia. Military engagement has not changed anything
on the ground, which is yet another reason to stop the
military escalation.
With regard to the coalition, we are concerned about
reports regarding air attacks on Sana’a and beyond, with
several civilian casualties. As in most humanitarian
situations, women and children are the victims. We
make an appeal to allow access to all humanitarian
actors so that they can do their job. All actors on the
ground must respect international humanitarian law, in
particular with regard to children and women.
I would like to highlight one aspect, which was
mentioned by my Russian colleague, who spoke about
accountability for the attacks perpetrated in the Gulf
of Oman. We condemn those attacks. With respect
to developments in Yemen, we must highlight the
issue of accountability. Such crimes committed in
violation of international humanitarian law should not
go unpunished.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by warmly thanking Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General

19-1791713/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme,
for their important briefings. We fully support them.
I would like to firmly reiterate France’s full support
for the tireless efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. We all pledged
our support in the Council’s latest press statement
concerning Yemen (SC/13834). Mr. Griffiths has our
full support and trust.
It is clear today that progress is slow — too
slow — and that much remains to be done. The initial
redeployment of forces in the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa began last month. It is imperative
that all parties pursue and accelerate their efforts.
Lieutenant General Lollesgaard was recently on site to
verify the redeployment. We again call on the parties to
fully implement the Stockholm Agreement, in particular
both phases of the planned redeployment and remain
fully engaged, in good faith, in the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and with the Special Envoy.
That is obviously a crucial point. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement, whose presence
on the ground is key for observing and facilitating
redeployment, in line with resolution 2452 (2019).
Strengthening United Nations presence on the
ground is vital. It is important in particular for all
observers provided for in the Mission mandate to be
on the ground as soon as possible and for the various
agencies of the United Nations concerned to intensify
their efforts, in line with the Stockholm Agreement. As
has been mentioned, it is up to the parties to ensure
their safety and free movement.
The efforts of the Special Envoy are even more vital
in the context of the recent deterioration of the regional
security situation. Yemen is both a reflection of and one
of the factors of the particularly worrisome regional
instability. The recent attack for which the Houthis
claimed responsibility, targeting the Abha airport
in Saudi Arabia and injuring more than 20 civilians,
including children, is unacceptable. We firmly condemn
that attack. Since then, the Houthis have also claimed
responsibility for other drone strikes, some of which
were intercepted by Saudi Arabia. Such attacks must
end, as must the transfer of weapons, including ballistic
weapons, to State and non-State actors in the region.
14/26

17/06/2019

Parties must refrain from any escalation that serves
only to jeopardize the Stockholm Agreement, threaten
the resumptions of talks that would lead to a political
solution and further destabilize the region.
The relative respect for the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah
should not make us lose sight of the extreme gravity
of the humanitarian situation, as Mark Lowcock and
David Beasley just recalled. We are deeply concerned
about the deterioration of the humanitarian and security
situation. As tensions continue to rise in Yemen and
the region, it is crucial now more than ever to protect
civilians, including women and children, who are
particularly vulnerable. More than 2 million children
suffer from acute malnutrition. We call on all parties to
do their utmost to protect children and ensure that they
receive the assistance they so urgently need.
Echoing what previous speakers have underlined,
especially my colleagues from the United Kingdom
and Germany, I would like to reaffirm France’s full
support to humanitarian actors for their outstanding
and essential efforts in this particularly difficult
context. They too must be protected. Commercial
and humanitarian access, which must be ensured, has
been further complicated and hampered by the closure
of the road between Aden and Sana’a. The floods
have also required an urgent humanitarian response,
and we welcome the work undertaken in that regard.
At a time when, as Mr. Beasley described, the entire
country is at risk of starvation, the parties must do
everything possible to facilitate the implementation of
the humanitarian response plan.
Finally, given the immense challenges and
difficulties that lie ahead, it is important not to forget
the priority objective to be achieved, namely, the
relaunching of the political process as soon as possible.
We all know that that is the only way forward. The initial
results obtained in Al-Hudaydah can help to recreate a
positive momentum towards a political solution. The
military solution cannot, and must not, be an option.
Resuming the talks on a comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement that takes into account
the various Yemeni actors, including women and civil
society representatives, is the only real prospect for
putting an end to the conflict and the humanitarian
crisis. At a time when the situation in Yemen is
clearly very alarming, the Council must put its full
weight behind bringing an end to this terrible war and
maintaining the momentum initiated in Stockholm. Our
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

mobilization and unity are our best asset for moving
forward on this difficult path, which is the only way to
restore the peace to which the Yemenis aspire.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, for
their detailed and particularly moving briefings on the
latest developments in the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. They have our full support.
Four years since the beginning of the conflict
in Yemen, the quest for peace and stability in the
country seems remote due to the many security and
humanitarian challenges and, above all, the lack of
willingness of the belligerents to translate into concrete
action commitments freely entered into in order to
overcome the serious crisis facing the country. The lack
of progress in implementing the Stockholm Agreement
of 13 December 2018 with a view to definitively
resolving the issue of the control of Al-Hudaydah port
is a perfect illustration of that.
Today it is undeniable that the international
community’s efforts to resolve the crisis in Yemen
peacefully are hampered by the climate of mistrust
between the Government and the Houthi rebels. The
many artificial obstacles that they are putting in the
way of implementing their commitments can also delay
the full and comprehensive implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. That climate of mutual mistrust
is counterproductive and contributes to the ongoing
deterioration of the security situation in a country
where 10 million people are facing the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis, according to the United Nations
specialized agencies.
However, a successful process to restore lasting
peace in Yemen clearly depends not only on the ongoing
and multidimensional engagement of the United
Nations but also, above all, on the cooperation in good
faith of all stakeholders with all United Nations actors
on the ground. My country therefore reiterates its full
support to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, as well as
its ongoing support for the United Nations efforts. That
is also why we urge the Yemeni parties to maintain a
constructive dialogue with the Special Envoy in order to
jointly address all issues related to the implementation

S/PV. 8551

of the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Stockholm Agreement.
It is therefore absolutely crucial to continue the
partial redeployment of military forces. It is especially
urgent to ensure the withdrawal of the Houthis from the
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, in accordance
with the first phase of the ceasefire agreement signed
in Stockholm. As highlighted by Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, those
redeployments should allow the United Nations to
dispatch teams from the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism so as to help the port authorities
increase the port capacities and undertake inspections
in line with the Al-Hudaydah agreement.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls on the parties to the
conflict to fully respect the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah
city and to help complete the mutual redeployment of
forces outside the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and
Ras Isa. We also urge them to implement the statement
of understanding on the city of Taiz for the opening
of humanitarian corridors and to promote the effective
implementation of the agreement on the exchange of
15,000 prisoners with a view to strengthening trust
between the parties.
My country also notes with deep concern the
warning signals from specialized agencies, pointing
to the continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and the resurgence of endemic diseases in
Yemen as a result of the ongoing ceasefire violations.
In a context where United Nations agencies report that
there are more than 3.3 million displaced persons and
more than 24 million in a situation of humanitarian
emergency, Côte d’Ivoire can only strongly condemn
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We therefore call on the Yemeni parties to cooperate
with the humanitarian agencies in full respect for the
spirit and letter of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
In that regard, my country welcomes access for the
World Food Programme (WFP) to the warehouses of
the Red Sea Mills, where approximately 51,000 tons of
cereals intended for 3.5 million people had been blocked
for months. We can now hope that that food reaches
those in need, in particular women and children. We
also urge the Council to support the WFP initiatives to
bridge its budget deficit of $700 million for the period
from April to September.

19-1791715/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

Côte d’Ivoire is also deeply concerned about reports
of the recruitment of child soldiers in the Yemeni
conflict, which is facilitated in particular by the fact
that more than 2 million children are out of school and
the irregular payment of teachers’ salaries.
Moreover, the recent drone attacks on airport
infrastructure in Saudi Arabia are another matter of
concern for my country. Those attacks, claimed by the
Houthi rebels, represent a factor in and a preliminary
sign of a possible regionalization of the Yemeni conflict
with potential consequences for regional stability. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore calls for the international community,
including regional actors, to step up their efforts
towards a rapid settlement of the Yemeni conflict.
As my country has often underlined in the
Council, peace is a long-term process that requires
both the ongoing commitment of the United Nations,
in particular the Security Council, which is entrusted
with the noble mission of maintaining international
peace and security. It must above all be supported
by the unwavering will of all parties to a conflict to
work towards the peaceful resolution of their dispute,
however complex it is. At a time when the conflict in
Yemen is regrettably entering its fifth year of stalemate,
the Government and the rebels must acknowledge that
there is no military option and that only dialogue will
enable bold compromises for a peaceful and lasting way
out of the crisis.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the information
provided by the briefers. At the outset, we would like to
commend Mr. Griffiths for the leadership he has shown
in this very delicate phase in the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement and extend him our full support
in calling on the parties to cooperate constructively, in
good faith and without preconditions for the benefit of
their people.
In his statement, Mr. Lowcock once again spoke of
the crux of this conflict — the humanitarian situation
affecting millions of people after years of war and
economic and institutional debacle. We have noted how
restrictions on the movement of assets and personnel
due to continued fighting and bureaucracy constitute
one of the greatest obstacles facing humanitarian
agencies, with areas declared as military zones by the
parties to the conflict. The movement of goods from
the port of Al-Hudaydah to the rest of the country must
be accelerated in order to alleviate the suffering of the
16/26

17/06/2019

population and to make it possible to use port revenues
to pay the salaries of civil servants, which would
boost the economy. Above all, the promised financial
resources must be disbursed in order to comply with
the humanitarian response plan for Yemen in order to
implement without delay the comprehensive response
aimed at saving the lives of millions of people.
We have listened with great attention and concern
to the information Mr. Beasley presented today.
We reiterate that humanitarian access must not be
politicized or used as a weapon of war. All parties
must facilitate the collection of objective data in order
to produce reliable assessments of people’s needs. The
international community must continue to influence
all parties to conflict in order to allow timely, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access.
We note with concern and condemn the growing
hostilities between the parties, as evidenced by attacks
carried out by both sides. The parties and the States
that support them must do more to protect civilians. We
recall that all military action directed against civilians,
public spaces, residences or medical and educational
facilities, as well as the launching of missiles and the
deployment of anti-personnel mines, are contrary to
international law and international humanitarian law.
Such actions could constitute crimes against humanity to
be investigated and punished by international tribunals.
With regard to the situation of children in this
conflict, we recognize the efforts of the Government
of Yemen to identify 90 focal points within the Yemeni
armed forces to be trained in the identification and
documentation of children within their ranks. While
some measures have been put in place by the parties
to mitigate grave violations against children, the
number of cases continues to rise, due primarily to
children being recruited in recent months, which is
unacceptable. We therefore call on the parties to the
conflict to prioritize the protection of children and to
ensure that all incidents are duly investigated.
Despite the conflict and fear of reprisals,
young people remain hopeful and involved in their
communities, and aspire to lasting peace. We therefore
reiterate that the key to the permanence of a political
solution is the meaningful participation of women and
young people in conflict resolution processes.
Finally, we pay tribute to the humanitarian workers
who daily face the human face of this war. The Council
remains united in the face of this situation afflicting the
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

people of Yemen, as it recognizes that there can only
be a political solution that, once and for all, will lay the
foundations for ending one of the worst and most tragic
humanitarian crises of all time.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive
Director Beasley for their briefings. China supports
the work of Special Envoy Griffiths in advancing the
political process in Yemen and commends the United
Nations, including the World Food Programme and
other relevant agencies for their tireless efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
The Stockholm Agreement is an important step
towards the political settlement of the Yemeni issue.
After the Agreement was reached, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2451 (2018) to endorse it.
The Stockholm Agreement should be implemented
in earnest. Of course, since the Agreement is only a
framework, it is inevitable that we will encounter
difficulties and challenges during its implementation.
We must build confidence and overcome difficulties to
push for its early implementation.
We have seen that, thanks to the efforts of the
parties to the conflict, notable progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement, the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah is largely holding and redeployment
has also advanced. However, we should also realize that
differences remain between the parties on outstanding
issues, such as the composition of local security forces
and prisoner exchange. We hope that the Special Envoy,
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA) and the Redeployment
Coordination Committee will strengthen coordination
and enhance synergies to resolve those issues.
The Yemeni parties must support and cooperate
with those efforts. The Security Council should remain
united and provide political support, in accordance
with the relevant Council resolutions. China condemns
all attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Recently, the Secretary-General submitted a review
of UNMHA, as requested by the Council in resolution
2452 (2019). Since the deployment of the Mission, the
overall violence in Al-Hudaydah has declined and the
Mission’s operations have been effective, on the whole.
The Yemeni parties need to strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations in order to assist with and facilitate
the Mission’s deployment.

S/PV. 8551

China supports the Yemeni parties on the basis
of relevant Council resolutions, including resolution
2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, and the outcome
of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference
in returning to the track of dialogue and resolving
the conflict through political means. The sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Yemen must be safeguarded. In the long run, it is
essential to resume political talks for peace and seek a
comprehensive solution.
China is deeply concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Yemen. The people of Yemen
have suffered immensely from conflict, hunger, disease
and displacement. The international community must
increase assistance and honour its commitments in a
timely manner. The relevant parties need to ensure
humanitarian access in Yemen so that humanitarian
assistance can reach all people in need in all regions.
China has been closely following the food prices
in Yemen. Since July 2017, China has sent seven
shipments of rice to Yemen, totalling 7,600 tons. China
will continue providing humanitarian assistance to
Yemen to the best of its ability.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We would first like to express our gratitude
to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock and the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, Mr. Beasley, for the very
detailed briefings they just delivered and the ongoing
efforts of their teams in Yemen. Equatorial Guinea
supports and commends such efforts.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has closely
followed the developments in Yemen. The signing
of the Stockholm Agreement last December, under
the sponsorship and auspices of the United Nations,
was an unusual event since the conflict broke out,
which has been going on for almost five years now.
My delegation welcomes the momentum being
spearheaded by the United Nations in that new process,
as evidenced by the early deployment in Yemen of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA), as well as the various calls for
its implementation.
It gives us more hope to hear that, since
18 December 2018, the relative ceasefire has been
maintained in the governorate of Al-Hudaydah, given
that none of the parties seems to have attempted any

19-1791717/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

17/06/2019

major offensive actions to seize new territory. In
the context of the progress needed to implement the
Stockholm Agreement, we cannot overlook the fact
that the Houthi movement ordered the withdrawal of
its uniformed elements from the ports of Saleef and
Ras Isa and the strategic city and port of Al-Hudaydah
last May. In that regard, we commend the Office of the
Special Envoy and UNMHA on those very significant
strides, which we consider to be the fruit of successful
cooperation between the two offices. At the same time,
we would like to encourage them to continue working
with the parties in that direction, so as to ensure that
the process proceeds.

encourage the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen and all intermediaries in Yemen to continue
working towards a political solution to the conflict. The
countries with influence in the region must participate
unambiguously in that process. The unity of the Council
is similarly key.

Despite the improvements observed so far this year,
we cannot fail to be concerned, bearing in mind that
the very reports that we take up indicate that there are
places that should have enjoyed the progress achieved
up to this point but, unfortunately, continue to be the
subject of serious, violent incidents, such as direct
exchanges of fire and the use of snipers. Attacks with
drones and other such acts must cease.

Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Griffiths;
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock; and the Executive Director of the
World Food Programme, Mr. David Beasley, for their
briefings. We wish to express our full support for the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Yemen and to
commend him on all the efforts that he is undertaking
to find a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen.

We believe that the Yemeni parties to the conflict
must ensure full compliance with all the commitments
set out in the Al-Hudaydah agreement, as that is the key
to unblocking and advancing this delicate process. They
must take into account the strategic importance of that
enclave in guaranteeing the delivery of humanitarian
and commercial supplies to the population. However,
we are confident that the active presence of UNMHA,
through its monitoring patrols, can defuse such tension
and create a climate worthy of praise.
Millions of people continue to face serious and
significant difficulties in accessing basic supplies, such
as is the case with the lack of food and drinking water,
which exposes the people, particularly children, to the
threat of diseases such as cholera, among others. To
all that we must add the enormous difficulties faced
by humanitarian agencies in trying to reach the people
most in need; the panorama is bleak and chaotic. We
therefore hope that the Government of Yemen and the
Houthi leaders will take note of that serious concern
and that they will remove the protocols that hinder and
obstruct that process.
Finally, as we have said before, Equatorial Guinea
expresses its full support for the efforts of the United
Nations in Yemen, with the hope that the gains made
in Stockholm will be increasingly productive and serve
as a reference for future meetings. In that regard, we
18/26

Equatorial Guinea reiterates that this conflict
has no military solution, which is why the parties to
the conflict, namely, the Government of Yemen and
the Houthis, must continue to work together with
the United Nations in the quest for the only possible
solution, which is a political one, and that must lead to
reconciliation in Yemen.

We further urge all parties involved in the war in
Yemen to cease hostilities. Progress on the political
process is hampered by the continued fighting, which
is not conducive to building trust as the first step
in creating a negotiated settlement. My delegation
would like to address the following three points in its
intervention today, namely, the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement, the humanitarian situation and
the impact of the conflict on women, and particularly
children, in Yemen.
First, on the Stockholm Agreement, we believe
that, in order to achieve sustainable peace in Yemen,
differences among the parties cannot be solved
militarily and will only be further aggravated by
military activities. In that regard, we call on all parties
to carry out their respective obligations as per their
undertakings under the Stockholm Agreement. The
implementation of the Agreement is of paramount
importance, as it would assist in building confidence
among the parties and improve the chances of reaching
a broader political agreement. It is vital that both sides
withdraw their forces from Al-Hudaydah and enforce
the Stockholm Agreement. The steps that have already
been taken in that regard are encouraging.
Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, South
Africa calls for the full implementation of resolution
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

2451 (2018), which deals with the need for the unhindered
flow of humanitarian supplies and humanitarian
personnel into and across the country. It also addresses
the need for all parties to the conflict to comply with
applicable international law and fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including to
respect and protect medical facilities and personnel and
allow and facilitate the safe, rapid and unhindered access
of humanitarian and medical personnel to all those in
need. To assist in alleviating the humanitarian plight of
the Yemini people, it is important for the international
community to pledge adequate funding for the United
Nation’s Yemen humanitarian response programme.
South Africa wishes to reiterate that it is critical
that the United Nation Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement be fully capacitated and its
mandate conducted swiftly. We also note with concern
that many Yemenis do not receive the aid that they so
desperately need, as it remains very difficult for aid
organizations and actors to get permission to provide
humanitarian assistance in some areas. In that regard,
we support the World Food Programme’s efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to those affected by
the conflict.
Thirdly, on the impact of the conflict on women
and children, we note with regret the escalation of
violence over the past few weeks, which is imperilling
the Stockholm Agreement. We continue to call on all
the parties to refrain from the excessive use of force
in civilian areas and to spare the lives of women and
children. Recent reports paint a bleak picture of the
humanitarian situation in the country. The rate of
deaths and injuries caused by land mines has doubled,
with the average number of civilians wounded or being
killed each day rising by one third, which totals more
than 500 people killed.
The Council must support Yemen to ensure that it
is safe to inhabit again when the conflict is resolved.
Statistics from the Office of the United Nations High
Commission for Refugees indicate that Yemen is one
of the worst humanitarian catastrophes in the world,
with 3 million people having been forced to flee
their homes because of the increased violence in the
country and more than 20 million vulnerable Yemenis
being in immediate need of humanitarian assistance,
as Mr. Beasley indicated in his briefing. Those figures
include women and children as those who are mostly
affected by the conflict.

S/PV. 8551

We call on the parties to sign and implement
a time-bound action plan to end and prevent grave
violations, pursuant to resolution 1460 (2003), as the
formal and only path for de-listing from the annexes
to the Secretary-General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict. Furthermore, we encourage the
Secretary-General to list all parties based on credible and
United Nations-verified patterns of relevant violations
in section A of the annexes to his annual report.
In conclusion, South Africa continues to call for a
cessation of hostilities and the de-escalation of tensions,
which will bring lasting peace and stability to Yemen
and the broader region.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank all
the briefers for their comprehensive reports. We very
much appreciate the work they are doing. We also want
to commend the Secretary-General’s commitment to
continuing to seek a political solution in order to achieve
peace in Yemen. Ms. DiCarlo’s recent visit to Riyadh
to meet with the Government of Yemen to convey the
Secretary-General’s assurance that the United Nations
remains committed to the Stockholm Agreement, and
particularly the Al-Hudaydah agreement, is a testament
to that commitment. We would also like to express
our wholehearted support for the work undertaken
by Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard.
I would like to underline what Mr. Griffiths said
about a political solution being the only possible one
for this conflict. We must keep the dialogue going
with all parties while at the same time pushing for
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement.
In response to the briefing, Indonesia would like to
underscore three points.
First, we are very concerned about the tensions
in the region, and we especially condemn the attacks
on Abha airport in Saudi Arabia on 12 and 16 June.
They are a threat to security and stability in the region
and jeopardize the fragile ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah.
Moreover, any provocative actions may escalate further
violence in other parts of Yemen. The humanitarian
cost is already far too high, and the Yemeni people
have suffered far too much. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s assessment that an open conflict
in Al-Hudaydah will result in a humanitarian disaster
for the entire people of Yemen, as well as the region.
We must all join the consensus on preventing an open
conflict in Al-Hudaydah, as it is a vital lifeline for
humanitarian corridors.

19-1791719/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, Indonesia remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. As the German
Ambassador mentioned, every report we hear from
Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley paints a picture of
sadness and grimness. I think that this has gone on
for far too long. We also noted that the World Food
Programme has considered suspending aid in Houthicontrolled areas of Yemen due to the obstacles that have
been introduced and that have meant that humanitarian
workers have not been given the access and freedom
to decide who receives their vital assistance. It is
very saddening that humanitarian assistance is being
used and manipulated by the party controlling the
area. Indonesia calls for unhindered access for World
Food Programme personnel to deliver assistance
to the most needy. It is important that the parties
responsible cooperate fully with the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies. We cannot accept
any obstruction of the efforts to bring food to boys and
girls dying of hunger. As Mr. Beasley mentioned in his
statement, no one should be in a position to decide who
gets to eat or not. This is a tragic situation.
Thirdly, we would like to reiterate our support
for the Special Envoy and the full implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, as well as for all
efforts to continue seeking a political solution to the
conflict in Yemen. We also urge all stakeholders to
remain committed to the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah,
as well as to the finalization of arrangements for the
prisoner-exchange agreement and the memorandum
of understanding on Taiz. I would like to stress once
again that there is no way to end and resolve the crisis
in Yemen other than through a political solution. War
is never a desired option for anyone in the world, and
the people of Yemen have been hoping for what must
seem an elusive dream of peace for almost five years
now, which is already far too long. As the SecretaryGeneral said in his review (S/2019/485) of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement
(UNMHA), the Mission is a key priority
“for the people of Yemen themselves, who see
UNMHA as a ray of hope in the process of reaching
a wider peace in the country”.
We are hopeful that we can establish a wider United
Nations mission beyond Al-Hudaydah to bring more
hope to more Yemeni people once a political solution
has been reached. Peace is attainable if there is political
will from us all.
20/26

17/06/2019

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank all of today’s briefers
for their presentations. It is indeed really depressing to
hear about the sufferings of the Yemeni people again
and again in this Chamber. I would also add that it is
becoming increasingly frustrating, because what is
really at stake here are human lives that will be lost if
this conflict is not stopped. The numbers presented by
Mr. Mark Lowcock speak for themselves. That is why
we have to do our utmost to redouble our efforts to break
this deadly cycle of violence, suffering and ongoing
hostilities. In that regard, the United Nations continues
to play a crucial role. I therefore want to echo the words
of other delegations — in fact, every delegation that
has taken the floor so far today — by expressing our
full and unwavering support, first to Special Envoy
Griffiths but also to Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and the World Food Programme. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation
to all the United Nations workers providing life-saving
assistance on the ground in Yemen.
During the previous briefing on the situation in
Yemen (see S/PV.8525) we welcomed the initial progress
towards the first phase of the redeployment of forces
in Al-Hudaydah. We strongly believe that this positive
development must be swiftly followed by the fulfilment
of the remaining stages of redeployment. We urge
the parties to engage constructively with Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard to finalize the outstanding
negotiations and enable the full implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement. It is time for the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to the outcomes of the
talks in Stockholm by delivering on their obligations
and then advancing the redeployment of forces.
In our view, as we await further progress in
Al-Hudaydah it is of the utmost importance to increase
the efforts to find a comprehensive political solution
to the conflict in Yemen, and as we understand it,
the Stockholm Agreement is a step towards that. The
resumption of consultations with the participation of
all sectors of Yemeni society, including women and
young people, is the only way to bring about an end
to the crisis. I want to repeat that we strongly support
Special Envoy Griffiths in his efforts to pave the way
for the resumption of formal negotiations, and we call
on the parties to engage constructively with him. We
are also very encouraged by the Security Council’s
continued unity in supporting the Special Envoy, as has
been clearly highlighted during today’s meeting. In that
context, we urge all the parties to refrain from taking
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

any action that threatens to undermine the United
Nations-led political process. Poland strongly condemns
all attacks on the territory of Saudi Arabia, which pose
a serious national security threat to the Kingdom and
have a negative impact on broader regional stability.
Advancing the political process in Yemen and
finding a broad political solution are particularly
pressing and necessary if we are to finally put an end to
the extreme suffering of the Yemeni people. The security
situation across the Yemeni governorates continues to
deteriorate due to the widespread escalation of military
operations, which are causing mass displacement and
high numbers of casualties among civilians. As the
humanitarian situation remains catastrophic, the lives
of millions of Yemenis, including millions of children,
depend upon the accessibility of humanitarian
assistance. Therefore, we urge, and reiterate our
call to, all parties to allow and facilitate the flow of
humanitarian and commercial imports, including
in-country shipments of fuel, and lift all bureaucratic
restrictions, in order to ensure free, unimpeded access
for humanitarian assistance and personnel to all parts of
the country. Any form of denial of humanitarian access,
diversion of resources or interference in humanitarian
operations is unacceptable.
We are also very troubled by Mr. Beasley’s
statement that food assistance does not go to the
neediest people but is instead diverted by some parties.
That is unacceptable and must stop. It violates both
international law and the resolutions of the Council,
which also constitute international law. To echo other
delegations, all people responsible for such violations
should be identified and held accountable.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that all parties must
first and foremost ensure the protection of civilians,
including the most vulnerable groups, such as children
and persons with disabilities, and fully comply with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would first like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the World Food Programme, for their briefings.
As mentioned in last week’s Security Council
press statement (SC/13834), we take positive note that

S/PV. 8551

the redeployment of Houthi troops from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa has begun, and we
call on the Houthis to dismantle all military structures
at the ports. In addition, we call on all parties to
fully implement the withdrawal agreement, respect
the ceasefire in full and resolve outstanding points
of contention, including the issue of local security
forces. In addition, we continue to call on all parties
to implement the Stockholm Agreement in its entirety,
including the prisoner-exchange agreement and the
memorandum of understanding on Taiz.
Although we are seeing just the beginning of
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement,
Belgium encourages the Special Envoy to continue to
prepare for the next steps in the political process. We
stress the importance of an inclusive process in which
women and youth participate meaningfully, thereby
reflecting the ethnic, geographical and political diversity
of the people of Yemen. The Al-Hudaydah agreement is
of particular importance to the humanitarian situation,
but of course the resolution of the conflict requires a
durable and inclusive political solution. In that regard,
we reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths.
Violence in the rest of the country continues and is
increasing distrust among the parties. The violence also
has an impact on access to humanitarian aid. We call on
all parties to exercise restraint. In addition, we condemn
the continued targeting of civilians in this devastating
war, including the recent attack on Abha International
Airport, in the Houthi-claimed Asir province of Saudi
Arabia. Belgium is deeply concerned by the increasing
tensions in the region. We emphasize that the path of
dialogue is the only one likely to lead to lasting peace
and security in the region. Belgium believes that the
United Nations has a role to play in supporting such
a dialogue.
Efforts are needed to improve the humanitarian
situation, which, as we heard this morning, remains
catastrophic. We commend humanitarian agencies
for their outstanding work despite the difficulties.
It is essential that all parties facilitate access to
humanitarian assistance and respect international
humanitarian law. In particular, we strongly condemn
any misuse of assistance, which must be provided to
those who need it. What Executive Director Beasley
just described is unacceptable.

19-1791721/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

We also heard the call of Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock to disburse as soon as possible the pledges
made at the pledging conference held last February in
Geneva. Belgium’s contribution has been disbursed in
full. We call on other contributors to do the same.
Children are the main victims of this conflict. As
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, we convened a meeting of the Working Group
last Friday in the presence of the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Yemen, during which Mrs. Gamba
de Potgieter, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, introduced
the report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict in Yemen. On the basis of the report, we
will now facilitate negotiations on the conclusions of
the Working Group. We reiterate our request to Special
Envoy Griffiths to include measures for the protection
of children in any peace process.
Finally, we would like to urge all parties to
the armed conflict to respect their obligations and
commitments under international human rights law
and extend to the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen, established by the Human
Rights Council, their full cooperation and all the
access necessary to make an effective and independent
investigation possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.
At the outset, I would like very much to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Mr. David Beasley for their respective briefings, as
well as to emphasize our full support for their efforts.
I shall focus my statement on two main topics, namely,
the political and security developments and the
humanitarian developments.
The Security Council took action to promote a
political solution based on dialogue sponsored by the
United Nations by unanimously adopting resolutions
2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019), which endorsed the
Stockholm Agreement in its three dimensions — the
Hudaydah agreement, the agreement on an exchange of
prisoners and detainees, and the Taiz understandings.
However, anyone who follows the political developments
in the Yemeni crisis will realize that the process reached
a point of stalemate over the past six months, with slow
and spotty implementation of the commitments and
pledges made.
22/26

17/06/2019

Despite the time that has elapsed, there have
not been any constructive efforts towards achieving
the objectives of the Stockholm Agreement. Taiz
continues to suffer from an imposed blockade, which
has now lasted for four years and daily illustrates for
the international community the increased suffering
of civilians in Taiz, including women and children,
while no tangible processes have been put in place
for the implementation — or even the beginning of
the implementation — of the Taiz understandings.
And, notwithstanding the agreement on an exchange
of prisoners and detainees, and despite the series of
meetings of the committee tasked with supervising the
agreement, the committee faced many challenges that
led to the slow pace in convening its meetings and the
release of all detainees, prisoners, kidnapped persons
and those who have been forcibly disappeared.
The Hudaydah agreement, which covers
humanitarian aspects based on understandings and
agreements endorsed by the Redeployment Coordination
Committee (RCC) during its many meetings, has led to
a phased implementation of the redeployment of forces
outside Hudaydah city in a manner that guarantees
the supervision and monitoring of the tripartite RCC.
We would like to emphasize that what was achieved
between 11 and 13 May with regard to the unilateral
withdrawal from the ports of Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa, as part of the first phase of implementation, must
take into consideration the pivotal role of the RCC in
a way that allows the Yemeni Government to perform
its sovereign function of overseeing the redeployment
from the city of Hudaydah.
We reiterate our belief and conviction that there
can be no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
We underscore that all three aspects of the Stockholm
Agreement must be fully implemented. That is the
best way towards the resumption of another round of
negotiations focused on a comprehensive solution to
the crisis.
With regard to security developments, the State of
Kuwait condemns in the strongest terms the continued
attacks against civilian and vital facilities in the
sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the most recent
being the Houthi’s targeting of the passenger lounge
at Abha International Airport, which left 26 injured,
including women and children. We extend our sincere
sympathy to the victims and to the Government of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and wish the injured a
speedy recovery. We stress our full support to the
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8551

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and support all measures
taken to maintain its security, stability and territorial
integrity. The continued attacks by the Houthis against
Saudi territory constitute a blatant and direct threat to
security and regional stability, as well as a reason to
operationalize the arms embargo set out in the relevant
Council resolutions. In that regard, we will work with
the members of the Council to issue a statement that
condemns that attack.

General to continue efforts towards reaching a political
solution, based on the three agreed terms of reference,
that is, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216
(2015). That is the means to end the crisis and safeguard
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Yemen, free from interference in its internal affairs.

On the humanitarian situation, we stress once
again the humanitarian dimension of the Stockholm
Agreement to alleviate the suffering of the brotherly
Yemeni people, such as the opening of safe corridors
for humanitarian assistance in order to reach all those
affected and the areas most in need. The United Nations
and its relevant agencies must be allowed to reach the
Red Sea Mills, whose silos hold enough grain to feed
3.7 million people for 30 days. Since the inception of
the Stockholm Agreement, the Yemeni Government
has expressed its willingness to facilitate access to
the Red Sea Mills and open roads for humanitarian
assistance, despite the major security challenges faced
by the Government.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

With respect to the dire humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which has deteriorated following the coup
against the legitimate Government, and despite the
considerable reaction from the international community
to support the humanitarian response plan — to which
the State of Kuwait pledged $250 million — we are
deeply concerned about the content of Mr. Beasley’s
briefing, which pointed to serious challenges in areas
under Houthi control, leading to the hampering of
his operations on the ground, including the possible
suspension of operations in those areas. We underscore
that the Security Council must take action to put an
end to the chronic violations that impede access to
humanitarian assistance.
We commend the efforts of all humanitarian
workers and the positive role of the Government of
Yemen, which continues to pay salaries to publicsector workers and retirees, in addition to the continued
efforts of its economic committee to facilitate the flow
of fuel into the country.
In conclusion, we call once again upon all Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on Hudaydah and its three ports, the exchange of
prisoners’ agreement and the Taiz understandings.
That would allow the Special Envoy of the Secretary-

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you and the sisterly State
of Kuwait every success. I would also like to congratulate
the State of Kuwait for successfully presiding over the
Security Council high-level meeting this month — led
by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait (see S/PV.8548) — during which the
Council unanimously adopted a presidential statement
on cooperation between the Council and the League of
Arab States (S/PRST/2019/5).
The Government of Yemen has expressed its full
commitment to positively cooperate with the SecretaryGeneral through his Special Envoy for Yemen. We have
made many concessions and demonstrated greater
flexibility, openness, credibility and transparency in
order to achieve comprehensive and lasting peace in
Yemen, based on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
Our efforts are also geared towards easing the
suffering of the patient Yemeni people and starting
the reconstruction process in the new federal State
of Yemen, so as to meet the aspirations of our people
and build a modern, democratic, civilian State based
on justice, equality, national partnership, the peaceful
transfer of power and respect for the rule of law and
State institutions. To that end, the Government of
Yemen participated in all the peace talks with the
putschists, under the auspices of the United Nations,
although we know that the rebel armed groups do not
believe in dialogue or peace.

19-1791723/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

Iran supported and instructed them to take part
in the talks in order to buy time and take advantage
of the suffering of the Yemeni people, while at the
same time carrying out their die-hard sectarian plans,
fanning the flames of conflict, sectarian division
and discrimination, rendering the social and cultural
fabric of Yemeni society and destroying our economic
capabilities. The aim is to carry out Iran’s agenda for
Yemen and the region and destabilize the situation at
the regional and international levels. The gravity of the
violations and practices committed by the militias is
such that we cannot overlook it or remain silent.
The militias are violating every agreement and
ignoring all the concessions made by the Government of
Yemen, prolonging the war, hampering peace efforts and
using erroneous and narrow-minded interpretations of
the various agreements, while also ignoring the efforts
of the Security Council and the United Nations. The
aim is to seize the ports and the city of Al-Hudaydah,
contrary to the letter and spirit of the Stockholm
Agreement and the relevant Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). As the United
Nations strives to implement the Hudaydah agreement,
the Government of Yemen stresses the importance of
implementing all aspects of the Stockholm Agreement,
specifically with regard to prisoners, detainees and
forcibly kidnapped or disappeared persons, as well as
those still under house arrest, in addition to lifting the
blockade on the city of Taiz.
Since the beginning of the talks, the Government
of Yemen has extended all possible assistance to the
Special Envoys of the Secretary-General, with the goal
of allowing them to succeed in their efforts towards
reaching a comprehensive political solution. We have
sought to cooperate with and fully support Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths in his efforts to make headway on all
tracks regarding the implementation of the Hudaydah
agreement and the Stockholm Agreement. We continue
to do so despite the intransigence of the rebellious
Houthi militias, which disregard the provisions of the
Stockholm Agreement and whose actions, including
their feigned withdrawals, clearly contravene the spirit
and letter of the various agreements and the statements
of understanding, including the Stockholm Agreement.
The Yemeni Government once again underlines
its commitment to peace and its determination to end
the conflict in Yemen, based on the agreed terms of
reference, despite all the obstacles put in our way by
the armed Houthi militias. It is essential that we comply
24/26

17/06/2019

with the agreed terms of reference, agreements and
the implementation of the concept of operations that
governs the redeployment phases, while promoting
the tripartite Verification and Inspection Mechanism,
as emphasized by His Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour, the President of the Republic, in order to
address security issues. That has been welcomed by the
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard, Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee (RCC). The aim is to verify
and monitor the levels of redeployment by all parties.
Any step that ignores this tripartite mechanism does
not help to build confidence or ensure the peace
process, and also fails to respect the legal tracks and
remove all obstacles and impediments to the security
and administrative institutions performing their tasks
in accordance with the Yemeni law, the spirit and letter
of the Stockholm Agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216
(2015), on the situation in Yemen.
We welcome the visit by Ms. DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, who met with the President of the Republic
on 10 June. We also welcome the commitment of the
Secretary-General to a political solution in Yemen and
to fully implementing the Stockholm Agreement before
the next consultations. He also underlined the need to
support the work of the tripartite mechanism regarding
all the redeployment operations and to ensure that it
can fully play its role. Any upcoming consultations
will be meaningless and futile unless all provisions of
the Stockholm Agreement are implemented. Therefore,
any upcoming consultation must be linked to the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, which
will help to build confidence.
The unilateral withdrawal of the armed Houthi
militias will be unrealistic if it is not in line with the
spirit and letter of the Stockholm Agreement. Those
militias have affirmed the presence of their forces in
the ports, which is contrary to their claims before the
Security Council’s meeting of 15 May (see S/PV.8525).
The militia leaders have strengthened their military
positions in the three ports of Saleef, Ras Isa and
Al-Hudaydah in order to control the ports, deceive the
international community and the Council, undermine
the peace process, gain time and prolong the suffering of
the Yemeni people. Those who work in the ports and the
militia supporters there repeat the Houthi and Iranian
slogans. We underscore the importance of putting
19-17917

17/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

pressure on the Houthi militias to open the city roads
and remove obstacles in order to facilitate the work of
the RCC. Any wrongdoing will lead to a wrong outcome,
and any unilateral action that does not comply with the
tripartite mechanism and include the participation of
the Yemeni Government is not acceptable and will not
lead to peace or build confidence.
Since the Special Envoy’s mandate was first
entrusted to him, his priority has always been to build
trust among the parties to the Stockholm Agreement.
However, the Houthis have failed to implement the
Agreement for more than six months. Peace and the
implementation of agreements are not a priority of
the Houthi militias, which seek only to kill or control
Yemenis, achieve their own sectarian agenda and
implement the Iranian plan to destabilize the region.
The Yemeni Government is making every effort
to revitalize the economic situation, improve the
livelihoods of the Yemeni people and provide them
with the necessary support and services, despite the
many obstacles facing it as a result of the coup by the
armed Houthi militias. The Government is committed
to paying the salaries and pensions of all civil servants
across the country, including in Houthi-controlled
areas and in Al-Hudaydah. The Houthi militias refuse
to hand over the income from areas they control to the
Central Bank in Aden or its branch in Al-Hudaydah.
We call on the international community, sisterly
and friendly countries and international organizations
to provide the necessary support to the Yemeni people
in these dire circumstances so that they can rebuild
their State and restore their legitimate institutions.
The insurgent Houthi rebels insist on exploiting the
economic situation and the people’s needs in the areas
under their control to destroy the national economy
and to put pressure on all financial institutions and
professional associations by using arms. That has led
to the further depreciation of the national currency and
paved the way for speculative practices, which further
undermine the economy and the currency. They blame
the Government for that while they are responsible
for the suffering of the Yemeni people. They impede
humanitarian workers and humanitarian convoys. We
call on the international community and the Security
Council to put an end to those violations so as to enable
humanitarian organizations to identify and reach
those in need by providing them with the necessary
food assistance. The international community and the
Security Council must also take steps to ensure that

S/PV. 8551

international standards for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance are respected.
The Yemeni Government supports the World Food
Programme, but we are concerned about the painful
message that the Executive Director of the World Food
Programme shared with us earlier this morning, which
speaks volumes about the inhumane practices of the
Houthi militias and the suffering that they inflict. What
can one expect from militias that steal food intended for
women and children? What can one expect from rebels
who are prepared to divert humanitarian assistance,
resulting in the subjugation or death of Yemenis?
Those militias do not believe in dialogue but pursue
their own sectarian agenda. They want to sow division
within Yemeni society. We must send strong and clear
messages calling for an end to such violations and
despicable endeavours. There must be no ambiguous
messages, which are liable to be misinterpreted by the
Houthis and strengthen their practices in violation of
the resolutions of the international community and the
Security Council.
The violations and crimes perpetrated by the
Houthi militias, supported by Iran, continue to target
civilians, including women and children, which is a
blatant breach of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. This is taking place
against the backdrop of silence on the part of the
international community, which is not shouldering its
legal and moral responsibilities to protect civilians.
More robust measures must be taken by the international
community to put an end to the violations and heinous
crimes perpetrated by the Houthi militias against the
Yemeni people.
The Yemeni government renews its call for the
necessary measures to be taken against the practices
of those militias that target residential neighbourhoods
and defenceless civilians, including women and
children. The people of Yemen are suffering not only
from a humanitarian disaster and crisis as a result of the
Houthi’s coup, but also from a hidden disaster of which
the international community and the Security Council
may not be aware. That disaster has been caused by the
laying of more than 1 million landmines and explosive
devises by the Houthi militias since the beginning of
their coup d’état, and has killed and will kill hundreds
of civilians, including women and children, while
thousands of civilians will be permanently disabled.
This disaster will also pose a dangerous threat to the

19-1791725/26

S/PV.8551

The situation in the Middle East

lives of Yemenis for decades to come before demining
is undertaken, with the cooperation of the international
community. This is a disaster that has not been seen in
any country since Second World War.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker off the
coast of Al-Hudaydah, the Yemeni Government has
sent an urgent letter to the Secretary-General and
to the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, drawing their attention to the decay of that
vessel and the potential risk of a humanitarian and
environmental disaster as a result of an oil leak. The
Yemeni Government has already expressed its full
support and determination to cooperate in assessing the
situation of the tanker and how it can be maintained. It
is the Houthis themselves who are hindering access to
the tanker.
The Houthis continue to target civilian facilities in
the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the latest of which
is Abha International Airport, as well as international
navigation routes. They are doing so with the support
and instruction of the Iranian regime, which reflects
the scale of the threat posed by these extremist militias.
Those terrorist acts constitute a blatant challenge to

26/26

17/06/2019

the international community and a clear message to the
world that the militias do not believe in peace and have
no interest in peace. The Yemeni Government calls
on the Security Council to take the necessary robust
measures against those militants and the forces that
support them.
In conclusion, it is time for the Security Council
to live up to its responsibilities and implement its
resolutions on the conflict in Yemen. It should compel
the Houthi militias to fully implement the provisions of
these resolutions with the aim of achieving sustained
peace, end the coup and its consequences and alleviate
the suffering inflicted on the Yemeni people as a result
of the war waged by those armed and rebellious militias.
The Security Council should also maintain regional and
international security and stability.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

19-17917
