A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/172
24 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 99
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/609)]
49/172.

Assistance to unaccompanied refugee minors

The General Assembly,
Having considered the note 1/ and the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 2/ and the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, 3/
Aware that the majority of the refugee population are children and
women,
Bearing in mind that unaccompanied refugee minors are among the most
vulnerable refugees and require special assistance and care,
Mindful of the fact that the ultimate solution to the plight of those
unaccompanied minors is their return to and reunification with their families,
Noting with satisfaction that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has developed revised Guidelines on Refugee
Children, issued in May 1994,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the High Commissioner to ensure
the protection and assistance of refugees, including refugee children and
unaccompanied minors,

1/

A/49/411.

2/

A/49/643.

3/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 12 (A/49/12 and Add.1).
95-77011

/...

A/RES/49/172
Page 2

Recalling the provisions concerning the protection of refugee minors of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child 4/ and the 1951 Convention 5/
and the 1967 Protocol 6/ relating to the Status of Refugees,
1.
Expresses its deep concern at the plight of unaccompanied refugee
minors and emphasizes the need for their early identification and for timely,
detailed and accurate information on their number and whereabouts;
2.
Calls upon all Governments, the Secretary-General, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and all other United Nations
organizations and non-governmental organizations concerned to exert the
maximum effort to assist and protect refugee minors and to expedite the return
to and reunification with their families of unaccompanied refugee minors;
3.
Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other United Nations organizations concerned to take appropriate
steps to mobilize resources commensurate to the needs and interests of the
unaccompanied refugee minors and for their reunification with their families;
4.
Condemns all acts of exploitation of the unaccompanied refugee
minors, including their use as soldiers or human shields in armed conflict and
their recruitment in military forces, and any other acts that endanger their
safety and personal security;
5.
Calls upon the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner, the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and other United Nations organizations to mobilize, within
existing resources, adequate assistance to unaccompanied minors in the areas
of relief, education, health and psychological rehabilitation;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

4/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

5/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

6/

Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
