VI.

Hesolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Urges United Nations organs, specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to strengthen and enlarge the scope of their
activities in support of the objectives of the Programme
for the Decade, in particular by:
(a)
lntensifying their educational and infonm.tion
campaigns;
( b) Increasing their material and moral support to
the national liberation movements and the victims of
racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
(e) Offering all assistance to and co-operating with
the Secretary-General to ensure the success of the
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to do his utmost
to give the Programme for the Decade the fullest publicity, having regard to the need to focus international
attention on the struggle against racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
8. Renews its call for adequatc resources to be
made available to the Secretary-General to enable him
to undertake the activities entrusted to him under paragraph 18 (g) of the Programme for the Decade;
9. Appeals once again to Governments and prívate
organizations to make voluntary contributions in support of the activities envisaged in the Programme for
the Decade;
10. Decides to consider at its thirty-third session,
as a matter of high priority, an item entitled "lmplementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
60th plenary meeting
7 November 1977
32/11.

Status of the lnternational Convention
on the Elimination of All F orms of Racial
Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVlll) of 14 December 1973,
3225 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of
10 N ovember 1975 and 31 /79 of 13 December I 97 6,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General2 on the status of the International Convention on
the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination;3

2. Expresses its satisfaet ion with the in crease in
the number of States which have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal
basis and implementation of its provisions are necessary
for the realization of the objectives of the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Appeals to States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of making the declaration provided
for in article 14 of the Convention;
2 A/32/186.
3 Resolution

2106 A (XX), annex.

131

6. Requests the Secretary-General to continuc to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports conccrning the status of the Convention, in accordance
with Assembly rcsolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 Dccember 1965.
60th p!enary meeting
7 November I 977
32/12.

Status of the International Convention
on the Suppression ami Punishment of
the Crime of Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for
signature and ratification the lnternational Convcntion
on thc Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, and its resolutions 3380 (XXX) of JO November 1975 and 31.180 of 13 December 1976,
Reaffirming its conviction that apartheid constitutes
a total negation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and is a crime against
humanitv and that its continued intensification and
expansión seriously disturb and threaten intcrnational
peace and sccurity,
Convinced that ratification of and accession to thc
Convention on a universal basis and implementatio!1
of its provisions without delay are nccessary for the
achievement of the goals of the Decadc for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimin~:ticn. 1
Convinced that the proclamation of 1978 as International Anti-Apartheid Year 5 will contribute to thc
aims of the Convention,
Bearing in mind thc Maputo Declaration in Support
of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibiaü adopted by
the lnternational Conferencc in Support of the Peoples
of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to
21 May 1977, and the Lagos Declaration for Action
against Apartheid• adopted by thc World Conference
for Action against Apartheid, hcld at Lagos from 22 to
26 August 1977,
Taking note of the document referring to the General Declaration and the Programmc of Action adopted
by the World Conference against Apartheid, Racism
and Colonialism in Southern Africa, hcld at Lishon
from l 6 to 19 June 1977,'
Convinced that the lcgitimate struggle of the oppresscd peoples in southern Africa against apartheid,
colonialism and racial discrimination and the dTectivc
implementation of their inalienable and legitim,1te rights,
including their right to self-determination, demand al!
nccessary support by the international community.
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-Gencral on the status of the International Convention on
the Sur,pression and Punishmcnt of the Crime of Apartheid/'
4 S,~

resolution 3057 (XXVIII).
Ofjicia/ Record.1· of the General Assemblv, Thirtvsecond Session, Supp/emen! No. 22A (A/32/22Í Add.1-3),
document A/32/22/ Ad<l.2.
li A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V, sect. IJ. For
the printed text, see O{fícial Rr-cords of the Securitv Co1111cil
Thirty-sccond Year. S11rplement for Ju/y, Aug11s1· and Sep:
tember 1977.
i A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication. Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum). sect. X.
s A/ AC.115/L.467.
"An2/187.
~ Sce

132

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

2. Expresses its satisfaction with the in crease in
the number of States which have ratified the Convention
or acceded thereto;
3. Requests all States which have not yet becomc
parties to the Convention to accede thereto as soon
as possible;
4. Welcomes the establishment by the Chairman of
the thirty-third session of the Commission on Human
Rights of a group as provided for by article IX of the
Convention; 10
5. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to
continue its efforts to undertake thc functions set out
in article X of the Convcntion;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include in
his next annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380 (XXX) a special section conccrning the
implementation of the Convention.
60th plenary meeting
7 November 1977
32/13.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 32/10 of 7 November 1977 on the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, resolution 31/81 of 13 December 1976
on the reports of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination and resolution 32/11 of
7 November 1977 on the status of the lnternational
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its fifteenth
and sixteenth sessions 11 submitted under article 9,
paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the
Elimination of Al! Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Noting with appreciation the decisions taken by the
Committee at its sixteenth session about its contribution
to the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination by preparing a document on the Convention and a relevant study on the acceptance and
implementation of the Convention,
Stressing the importance of the undertaking of States
parties to the Convention to engage in no act or practice
of racial discrimination against any person, groups of
persons ar national or ethnic minorities, and to ensure
that all public authorities and public institutions, national and local, shaH act in conformity with this obligation, in accordance with relevant provisions of the
Convention,
Noting the decisions adopted by the Committee at
its fifteenth and sixteenth sessions,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Eliminatiori of Racial Discrimination;
2. Takes note also of the part of the report relating
to Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and to
10 The Workíng Group on the Implementatíon of the Internatíonal Conventíon on the Suppression and Punishment of
the Críme of Apartheid consists of the following members:
Cuba, Nigeria and Syrian Arab Republic.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplemcnt No. 18 (A/32/18).

all other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applics, draws
the artention of the relevant United Nations bodies to
the opinions and recommendations of the Committec
relating to those Territories and stresses the necessity
of providing thc Committee with sufficient information
in order to enab!c it to discharge fully its rcsponsibilities
under article 15 of the International Convention on thc
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
3. Commends the Committec for furthering the
implemcntation of the Convention by rcquesting thc
States parties to thc Convention to include in their
reports under article 9 information on the measures
which they have adopted to give effect to article 7 of
the Convention in the fields of teaching, education,
culture and information with a view to combating prejudices which lcad to racial discrimination, promoting
understanding, tolerance and friendship among nations
and racial ar ethnic groups, and propagating the purposes and principies of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
United N ations Declaration on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention;
4. Welcomes decision 2 (XVI) of 9 August 1977
in which the Committee decided in principle to give
general distribution to the reports of States parties to
the Convention and other official documents of the
Committee which would bring about greater awareness
by world public opinion of the problem of racial discrimination and mobilize it on the realization of the
goals and principies contained in the Convention;
5. Welcomes all efforts by the Committee to focus
the grcatest attention on the just cause of the peoples
struggling against the oppression of the colonialist and
racist régimes in southern Africa;
6. Invites States parties to the Convention to provide necessary information to the Committee in accordance with article 9 of the Convention, taking into
account in particular:
(a)
General recommendation III of 18 August
1972 and decision 2 (XI) of 7 April 1975 on the
status of their relations with the racist régimes in southern Africa;
(b) General recommendation IV of 16 August
1973 on the demographic composition of their population;
(e) General recommendation V of 13 April 1977
on measures adopted to give effect to article 7 of thc
Convention;
7. Expresses its grave concern that sorne States
parties to the Convention, for reasons beyond their
control, are prevented from fulfilling their obligation
undcr the Convcntion in parts of thcir respective territories, endorses the relevant decisions of the Committee and recalls General Assembly resolution 2784
(XXVI) of 6 December 1971 and Assembly resolution 3266 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 concerning
the situation in the Golan Heights;
8. Invites the States parties to the Convention to
observe fully the provisions of the Convention and
other international instruments and agreements to which
they are parties concerning the elimination of ali forms
of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin;
9. Invites al! Sta tes which are not yet parties tn
the Convcntion to ratify or accede to it and, pending
