S/PRST/2011/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 June 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6564th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 June 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia. It reaffirms its support
for the Djibouti Agreement and peace process as the basis for the resolution of
the conflict in Somalia. It also reiterates the need for a comprehensive strategy
to encourage the establishment of peace and stability in Somalia through the
collaborative efforts of all stakeholders.
“The Security Council welcomes the signing of the Kampala Accord on 9
June, and commends the leadership shown by President Museveni and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr Augustine P. Mahiga in facilitating
this agreement.
“The Security Council calls on the signatories of the Kampala Accord to
honour their obligations. It takes note of the appointment of the new Prime
Minister of Transitional Federal Government and looks forward to the prompt
appointment of a new Cabinet. It calls on the signatories to ensure cohesion,
unity and focus on the completion of the transitional tasks set out by the
Djibouti Agreement and the Transitional Charter. It calls on the Transitional
Federal Institutions (TFIs) to build broad-based representative institutions
through a political process ultimately inclusive of all, taking into account the
need to ensure the participation of women in public life.
“In this regard, and recalling the Security Council’s meetings with
Somali parties in Nairobi on 25 May, the Security Council calls on the TFIs to
consult widely with other Somali Groups, including local and regional
administrations and to work closely with the countries of the region, regional
organisations and the wider international community. It welcomes the
upcoming consultative meeting, with the participation of the TFIs and all
Somali stakeholders, which should agree on a roadmap of key tasks and
priorities to be delivered over the next 12 months, with clear timelines and
benchmarks, to be implemented by the TFIs. The Security Council notes that
future support to the TFIs will be contingent upon completion of these key
tasks. The Security Council urges all Somali stakeholders to participate
constructively and responsibly in this meeting.
11-38755 (E) 240611

*1138755*

S/PRST/2011/13

“The Security Council reiterates the primary responsibility of Somalis to
achieve peace, security and reconciliation in Somalia. It recalls that targeted
measures can be imposed on those that engage in or provide support for acts
that threaten the peace, security or stability of Somalia, including acts that
threaten the Djibouti Agreement or the political process or threaten the TFIs or
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) by force, violate the arms
embargo, or obstruct the delivery of or access to humanitarian assistance in
Somalia.
“The Security Council commends the progress made by the AMISOM
and the Somali security forces in consolidating security and stability on
Mogadishu, and recognises the significant sacrifices made by these forces.”

2

11-38755
