X
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
AD HOC POLITICAL COMMITTEE
CONTENTS

Page

508 (VI). Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of Greece
(7 December 1951) (item 19 (a)) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . .
509 (VI). Complaint of hostile activities of the Government of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary,
Romania and Albania, as well as the Governments of Czechoslovakia and
Poland, against Y1,goslavia (14 December 1951) (item 68)...............
510 (VI). Appointnwnt of an impartial international commission under United
Nations supervisit,E to carry out a simultaneous investigation in the Federal
Republic of Gerrc,a1,y, in Berlin, and in the Soviet Zone of Germany in order
to determine whetf:er existing conditions there make it possible lo hold
~enuinely free ekctions throughout these areas ( 20 December 1951)
(item 65) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
511 (VI). Treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa
(12 January 1952) (item 25) . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .
512 (VI). Report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine
(26 January 1952) (item 24) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
513 (VI). Assistance to Palestine refugees: reports of the Director and the
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (26 January 1952) (item 24).........
514 (VI). Report of the Security Council (1 February 1952) (item 10).......
515 (VI). Libya: annual report of the United Nations Commissioner in Libya:
ai:inual reports of the Administering Powers in Libya ( 1 February 1952)
( item 20) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
516 (VI). The appropriate adjustment of the frontiers between Egypt and the
United Kingdom of Libya, with particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3
of annex XI of the Treaty of Peace with Italy ( 1 February 1952) (item 22)
517 (VI). Repatriation of Greek children (2 February 1952) (item 19 (b))...
508 (VI). Threats to the political independence
and territorial integrity of Greece

9

10

10
11

11
12
13
13
13
14

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 377A(V) ("Uniting for
peace"), section B, establishing a Peace Observation
Commission which could observe and report on the
situation in any area where there exists international
tension, the continuance of which is likely to endanger
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Considering that the situation in the Balkans mav require prompt establishment of observations as contemplated in resolution 377A(V), section B,
Resolves to request the Peace Observation Commission to establish a Balkan sub-commission composed of
not less than three nor more than five members, with
its seat at the United Nations Headquarters, with
authority:
(a.) To dispatch such observers as it may deem
necessary to any area of international tension in the
Balkans on the request of any State or States concerned, but only to the territory of States consenting
thereto;

A

The General Assembly,
Havi.ng considered the report 1 of the United Nations
Special Committee on the Balkans,
1. Approves the said report;
2. Expresses its deep appreciation of the invaluable
services rendered for the preservation of peace and security in the Balkans by the members of the Special
Committee;
3. Expresses its warm gratitude for the gallantry
with which the observers of the Special Committee
have carried out their difficult and dangerous task;
4. Decides to discontinue the Special Committee
within sixty days after the adoption of the present
resolution.
351st plenary meeting,
7 December 1951.
'See Official Rerord< of the General Assrmbli: Sixth Session, Supplement No. 11.
-'

9

General Assembly-Sixth Session
To v1s1t, 11 it deems necessary, any area in
which observation requested under sub-paragraph (a)
1s being conducted;
(c) To consider such data as may be submitted to
it by its members or observers and to make such reports
as it deems necessary to tht> Peace Observation Commi£sion and to the Secretar, General for the informa,
tion of Member States.
351st plenary meeting,
7 December 1951.
:,b)

509 (VI). Complaint of hostile activities of the
Government of the Union of Soviet Socia\ist
Republics and the Governments of Bulgaria,
Hungary, Romania and Albania, as well as
the Governments of Czechoslovakia and Poland, against Yugoslavia
The General Assembly,
Having consider,&d the complaint2 submitted to it by
the delegation of the Federal People's Republic of
Yugoslavia concerning the activities of the Government
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and
Albania, as well as the Governments of Czechoslovakia
and Poland, against Yugoslavia,
Viewing with serious concern the tension between
Yugoslavia on the one side, and the other above-mentioned countries on the other side,
Mindful of the purpose of the United Nations "to
develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and to take other appropriate
measures to strengthen universal peace",
Mindful of the authority of the General Assembly to
"recommend measures for the peaceful adjustment of
any situation, regardless of origin, which it deems likely
to impair the general welfare or friendly relations
among nations",
1. Takes note of the declaration of the Yugoslav
delegation that the Government of Yugoslavia for its
part is ready to do all that is necessary for the carrying out of the recommendations of the present resolution;
2. Recommends that the Governments concerned:
(a) Conduct their relations and settle their disputes in accordance with the spirit of the United
Nations Charter ;
( b) Con form in their diplomatic intercourse with
1he rules and practices which are customary in international relations ;
(c) Settle frontier disputes by means of mixed
frontier commissions or other peaceful mean!! of their
choice.
355th plenary meeting,
14 December 1951.

'Ibid., Annexes, agenda item 68, document A/1946.

510 (VI). Appointment of an impartial international commission under United Nations
supervision to carry out a simultaneous in•
vestigation in the Federal Republic of Germany, in Berlin, and in the Soviet Zone of
Germany in order to determine whether existing conditions there make it possible to hold
genuinely free elections throughout these
areas
Whereas the Governments of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Franc'e, acting on a proposal
made by the German Federal Chancellor, have brought
before the General Assembly a request 3 for the appointment of an impartial international commission
under United Nations supervision to carry out a simultaneous investigation in the Federal Republic of Germany, in Berlin, and in the Soviet Zone of Germany
in order to determine whether existing conditions there
make it possible to hold genuinely free elections
throughout these areas,
Whereas the statements 4 ma<le by the representatives
of the Federal Government of Germany, of Berlin, and
of the Soviet Zone of Germany before the Ad H oc
Political Committee reveal differences of opinion with
regard to the conditions existing in these areas, which
make it essential that such an investigation shall be carried out by an impartial body,
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the Purposes and Principles of the
United Nations as set out in the Charter, taking due
account of the responsibilities of the four Powers regarding Germany, and desiring to make its contribution
to the achievement of the unity of Germany in the interests of world peace,

I. Considers it desirable to give effect to the above
request;
2. Resolves to appoint a Commission composed of
representatives of Brazil, Iceland, the Netherlands.
Pakistan and Poland which shall carry out immediately
a simultaneous investigation in the Federal Republic
of Germany, in Berlin, and in the Soviet Zone of Germany to ascertain and report whether conditions in
these areas are such as to make possible the holding of
genuinely free and secret elections throughout these
areas. The Commission shall investigate the following
matters in so far as they affect the holding of free
elections:
(a) The co~itutional provisions in force in these
areas and their application as regards the various aspects of individual freedom, in particular the degree
to which, in practice, the individual enjoys freedom of
movement, freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention, freedom of association and assembly, freedom of
speech, press and broadcasting;
( b) Freedom of political parties to organize and
carry out their activities;

'Ibid., agenda item 65, document A/1938.
'Ibid., Ad Hoe Political Committee, 18th and 20th meetings.
