S/2000/416

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 May 2000
Original: English

Security Council mission visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, 4-8 May 2000
I. Introduction
1.
By his letter dated 24 April 2000 (S/2000/344),
the President of the Security Council informed the
Secretary-General that the Council had decided to send
a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Following consultations among the members, it was
agreed that the composition of the mission was as
follows:
United States of America (Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke – Head of Mission)
France (Ambassador Jean-David Levitte)
Mali (Ambassador Moctar Ouane)
Namibia (Ambassador Martin Andjaba)

and RCD-Kisangani; Congolese members of civil
society, religious leaders and representatives of
political parties; the Political Committee established by
the Lusaka Agreement; and the Joint Military
Commission. Three members of the mission, the
Permanent
Representatives
of
Namibia,
the
Netherlands and the United Kingdom, visited Kananga,
a possible deployment site for the next phase of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

II. Activities of the Security Council
mission
4.
The Security Council mission conducted the
following meetings and activities during its visit.

Netherlands (Ambassador A. Peter van Walsum)
Tunisia (Ambassador Saïd Ben Mustapha)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland (Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock).
2.
The terms of reference of the mission are annexed
to document S/2000/344.
3.
The Security Council mission left New York on 2
May, called on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Belgium in Brussels on 3 May and, from 4 May
onwards, visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Rwanda and Uganda.
During its visit, the mission met with President
Laurent-Désiré Kabila, President Frederick J. T.
Chiluba, President Robert G. Mugabe, President Paul
Kagame and President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, as
well as with the leaders of the two factions of the
Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), RCD-Goma

00-42387 (E) 110500
`````````

Meeting with President Kabila
5.
On 4 May, shortly after their arrival in Kinshasa,
the members of the mission met with President Kabila.
After explaining the purpose of the mission’s visit,
Ambassador Holbrooke noted the progress that had
been made since the Security Council had devoted the
month of January 2000 to the problems of Africa,
including the disengagement agreement signed at
Kampala on 8 April, the mini-summit held at Kinshasa
on 9 April and the mini-summit held at Algiers on 30
April. President Kabila’s attendance during the
Council’s series of meetings in New York had done
much to advance that progress, said Ambassador
Holbrooke.
6.
The ambassadors made the following points in
their interventions to the President. As and if the
Secretary-General, in accordance with paragraph 5 of

S/2000/416

resolution 1291 (2000), determined that the conditions
for deployment existed, the full support and
cooperation of the Government would be needed. The
Security Council would also expect the Government to
offer its full support to the neutral facilitator of the
inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir Ketumile Masire, and to
facilitate United Nations humanitarian efforts to assist
the many tens of thousands of displaced persons and
victims of the fighting. The Security Council mission
urged the President to agree to an exchange of
prisoners of war, to be facilitated by the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). It was time for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to choose
between peace and war, continued the members. If it
chose peace, the international community would render
all possible assistance, but it was up to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to play its
part. Ways in which it could do so included extending
guarantees of security and full freedom of movement
and access to MONUC and making adjustments as
necessary to the official exchange rate and currency
controls.
7.
In his response, President Kabila stated that the
visit of the Security Council team was an event of
unusual importance and significance for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. His Government
was committed to peace, and he promised his full
cooperation with efforts to restore it. Indeed, added the
President, cooperation between his Government and
MONUC was now very good, thanks to his
appointment of a Commissioner responsible for
relations with MONUC. Formerly, there had been a
certain amount of mistrust arising from the appearance
of double standards, since the Council had moved more
swiftly to react to the crisis in East Timor than it had in
Africa, said the Head of State.
8.
President Kabila, expressing concern over the
fragility of the ceasefire, called for the speedy
deployment of the second phase of MONUC. His
Government would interpose no obstacle to that
deployment. His Government would also continue to
facilitate humanitarian access, as long as prior
notification was received.
9.
The President expressed some reservations
concerning the facilitation programme for the national
dialogue which, he said, had been drawn up without
adequate consultation and reference to the timetable
contained in the Lusaka Agreement. President Kabila
stressed that the inter-Congolese dialogue was an

2

exercise designed primarily for the participation of the
Congolese people. Nevertheless, he said he was
prepared to assist the neutral facilitator.
10. On the question of the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, a subject now being considered in the Security
Council, President Kabila criticized the international
community for failing to condemn the presence of
uninvited foreign troops in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and accused Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi
of paying for weapons with diamonds taken from his
country. It was up to the Council to put a stop to this
activity through peaceful means.
11. In response to comments by the mission, the
President also promised to examine the question of the
exchange rate and currency controls in order to ensure
the most effective use of the funds of MONUC and the
United Nations agencies operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The mission stressed the
importance of this issue to the United Nations, citing
its budgetary implications.
Signing of the status-of-forces agreement
12. Immediately following their meeting with
President Kabila, the members of the mission
witnessed the signing of the status-of-forces agreement
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Yerodia Abdoulaye Ndombasi. At the request
of the mission, the ceremony was held at the
presidential palace in the presence of President Kabila.
Luncheon with heads of United Nations
agencies
13. At a luncheon with the heads of United Nations
agencies
operating
in
Kinshasa,
Ambassador
Holbrooke raised a number of points. These included
the need to take precautions against the spread of
HIV/AIDS, the subject of several Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1291 (2000).
Ambassador Holbrooke said he was deeply disturbed
that no steps had been taken to alert MONUC military
personnel to the dangers of AIDS despite the
undeniable
involvement
of
United
Nations
peacekeeping troops in the spread of AIDS. He said
that a plan must be prepared immediately, coordinated
with each troop-contributing country and the

S/2000/416

Department of Peacekeeping Operations and made
public. Ambassador Holbrooke further noted that the
number of internally displaced persons in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo far exceeded the
number of refugees, and that mechanisms must be put
in place to ensure the delivery of assistance to all waraffected populations.
Meeting with Congolese civil society, religious
groups and political parties
14. On 5 May the members of the Security Council
mission met in Kinshasa with representatives of civil
society, religious groups and political parties. The main
points of view that emerged from these discussions
with the Congolese participants included their
insistence on a democratic political structure for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, without privilege
for those who had resorted to armed force; support for
the Lusaka Agreement and the inter-Congolese
dialogue (though varying opinions were expressed as to
the proper venue for the dialogue); the need for the
rapid deployment of phase II of MONUC; deep
concern at the way in which the country’s natural
resources were being exploited; the infringement of the
human rights of members of the unarmed opposition
and innocent civilians; concern over the renewed
fighting in Kisangani between Ugandan and Rwandan
troops; the need to disarm, demobilize, reintegrate and
resettle the armed groups identified in the Lusaka
Agreement; humanitarian concerns; and the prospects
for the future.
Visit to Kananga
15. Three members of the team — Ambassador
Andjaba, Ambassador van Walsum and Ambassador
Greenstock — visited Kananga, which has been
identified as one of four possible sites for the
deployment of a MONUC battalion. The delegation
met with the Governor of the Province of Kasaï
Occidentale,. Claudel André Lubaya, MONUC military
observers, the local UNICEF representative and other
officials for an exchange of views. During their brief
tour of the city, members of the mission were struck by
the great warmth of their reception by the citizens and
by their clear desire for peace.
Meeting with the Joint Military Commission
16. Upon arrival in Lusaka on the evening of 5 May,
the Security Council mission met with the members of

the Joint Military Commission. Despite the
preparations that had been made, including the
provision of air transportation, and the guarantees of
full security that had been provided, the Commission
had not met in Kinshasa as had originally been
proposed.
17. The acting Chairman of the Joint Military
Commission, General T. J. Kazembe, stressed the great
difficulties the Commission had faced since its
inception, including the lack of funding and logistical
support, and reported briefly on its achievements.
Members of the Commission also voiced a number of
complaints concerning the way the Commission had
been depicted in the second report of the SecretaryGeneral to the Security Council on MONUC
(S/2000/330). General Kazembe said the Commission’s
role had been portrayed in a misleading manner. He
cited parts of the report dealing with the development
of the disengagement plan, the role of MONUC in
convening Commission meetings, the proposal for the
convening of meetings once the Commission had
located in Kinshasa and the reference to the absence of
the Chairman, General Lallali. The Joint Military
Commission, he said, hoped for the speedy deployment
of MONUC and the smooth progress of the interCongolese dialogue.
18. Members of the Joint Military Commission
representing Zimbabwe, Uganda, RCD-Goma and
RCD-Kisangani, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Angola then raised points concerning the
mandate of MONUC to intervene in the fighting in
Kisangani; the fact that the acquisition of the resources
to carry out their mandate, rather than location in
Kinshasa, was their first priority; the climate of
hostility to the rebels created by inflammatory
propaganda broadcast on radio by the Government; and
the need for the Congolese parties to discuss their
affairs among themselves “without patrons”.
19. In response, Ambassador Greenstock said that the
resolutions made clear the Council’s overall
responsibility for ensuring that all fighting in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must cease.
Ambassador Levitte said that it was the right and duty
of the United Nations to intervene to help stop the
fighting in Kisangani, not least because it had caused
the deaths of a number of Congolese civilians. The
Security Council mission agreed that MONUC should
bring reports of inflammatory language and hostile

3

S/2000/416

propaganda to the attention of the Government and
seek to end such broadcasts.
Meeting with President Chiluba
20. The Security Council mission met with President
Chiluba on 6 May. The President stated that in addition
to the implementation of the disengagement plan of
8 April, two things were required: the full and
immediate deployment of phase II of MONUC, in
order to ensure that a vacuum of power was not
created, and the success of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. In this connection, the President stated that
the neutral facilitator suffered from a shortage of funds.
21. Ambassador
Holbrooke
praised
President
Chiluba’s leadership which, he hoped, would make
“Lusaka” a synonym for peace in Africa in the same
way that “Dayton” had come to be equated with peace
in Bosnia. Ambassador Holbrooke, speaking on behalf
of the Security Council, expressed his deep concern at
the situation in Sierra Leone, and his hopes for the
swift release of the Zambian soldiers there unharmed.
22. Ambassador Holbrooke said that the deployment
of MONUC and the progress of the inter-Congolese
dialogue went hand in hand. MONUC, an observer
mission, could not succeed unless progress was made
in political reconciliation among the parties.
23. President Chiluba said the fighting in Kisangani
was regrettable, but not strictly a violation of the
ceasefire, in that the countries concerned were
nominally allies. He had called President Kagame and
was still trying to reach President Museveni to prevail
upon them to desist from further fighting.
24. Ambassador Andjaba, Ambassador Ouane and
Ambassador Ben Mustapha affirmed the admiration
they and the Security Council felt for the leadership
shown by President Chiluba in the resolution of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
President Chiluba expressed his appreciation to the
Security Council for focusing attention on the
HIV/AIDS issue in Africa and on peacekeeping in
January 2000.
25. The perfect time to deploy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was now, added the President.
He urged the Security Council team to make a positive
report to the Council and to the Secretary-General.
Without rapid deployment, there was a risk that the
fragile ceasefire would start to unravel. This would
also involve more support for the neutral facilitator.

4

Meeting with the Political Committee
26. On 6 May, the Security Council mission met in
Lusaka with the Political Committee chaired by the
Ugandan Minister of State for Foreign Affairs for
Regional Cooperation, Amama Mbabazi. The
Chairman expressed gratification at the attention the
international community was now devoting to the
problem of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
ceasefire was still holding and the agreement of 8 April
was being implemented. The disengagement plan
should be carried out when MONUC effected its
deployment. The position of the Political Committee
was that MONUC should deploy as soon as possible.
27. The meeting agreed to discuss the interCongolese dialogue, MONUC deployment and, for the
first time, the disarming, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement of the armed groups identified in the
Lusaka Agreement.
28. The members of the mission stressed the need for
progress in political reconciliation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo if the ceasefire was to be
consolidated. The inter-Congolese dialogue alone
represented the views of the Congolese people, who
wanted peace in order to lead a normal life. The task of
the neutral facilitator was to assist the Government and
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to do
so, with the cooperation of the Government. The
mission was actively pursuing the question of funding
for Sir Ketumile Masire, who had made a very positive
impression on the Security Council during his recent
visit to New York.
29. Ambassador Holbrooke then summarized the
three options for the venue of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, namely, Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo outside the capital, or another African
capital.
30. The Congolese parties represented on the
Political Committee then stated their various
preferences on the venue. The Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo (MLC) wished it to be held in
either Gaborone or Nairobi; RCD-Goma requested a
neutral location; RCD-Kisangani said a venue should
be proposed by Sir Ketumile Masire in consultation
with the Congolese parties. Foreign Minister
Ndombasi, while pointing out that there was no
security problem in Kinshasa, and stressing the role of
the recognized Government of the Democratic

S/2000/416

Republic of the Congo, had no objection in principle to
holding the dialogue in Kisangani. (The subsequent
agreement between Rwanda and Uganda to withdraw
their forces from Kisangani and for MONUC to deploy
there has given rise to suggestions that the dialogue
might be held there.)
31. In a discussion of the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement, it
emerged that there was little agreement on the scale of
the problem. A rough provisional figure of some
15,000 members of armed groups existed, but the
members of the groups were very hard to identify
(others put the number as low as 3,000 or as high as
30,000). In the view of Ambassador Holbrooke, the
process was absolutely critical to securing a lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in the east. More accurate data had to be
collected.
32. The Chairman noted that all parties had stated
their readiness to proceed to an exchange of prisoners
of war.
33. Ambassador Levitte stated his intention, subject
to the views of the Security Council as a whole, to
invite the Political Committee to meet in New York
during the French presidency, in the month of June,
probably in the middle of the month.
Meeting with President Mugabe
34. Upon arrival in Harare on 6 May, the Security
Council mission met with President Mugabe.
Ambassador Ouane briefed the President on the
mission’s discussions the previous day with Congolese
civil society, religious leaders and representatives of
political parties in the context of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. On the basis of that meeting, it appeared that
the overwhelming majority of their interlocutors
preferred to hold the dialogue within the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, whether in Kinshasa or not,
rather than in another African capital. Security
conditions were an important factor, however, as was a
high level of support from the international community
for the involvement of the unarmed opposition.
35. Ambassador Ben Mustapha stated that there
appeared to be no consensus on where the interCongolese dialogue should be held. At the meeting of
the Political Committee held in Lusaka that morning,
there had appeared to be agreement on the need to hold

the dialogue as soon as possible, in parallel with
MONUC deployment, and without foreign “patrons”.
36. Ambassadors Levitte, Holbrooke and Greenstock
told President Mugabe their impressions of the
meetings held over the last two days with the
Congolese parties in Kinshasa and Lusaka.
37. In his response, President Mugabe said it was
time for the United Nations to deploy, or else the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would deteriorate. The President then confirmed the
understanding of the Security Council members as to
the origin of the situation in Kisangani. His explanation
for the deterioration in relations between Uganda and
Rwanda paralleled that of President Chiluba.
38. In President Mugabe’s opinion, the political
dialogue was at this juncture less important than
MONUC deployment, since the conflict remained
uppermost in people’s minds and the rebel groups were
essentially the creation of Uganda and Rwanda.
39. Ambassador Andjaba briefed the President on the
meeting with the Joint Military Commission held the
previous night. President Mugabe noted that Rwanda
did not feel safe, and that no security arrangement in
Kinshasa would satisfy them. He raised the possibility
of co-locating the Commission with MONUC within
the Democratic Republic of the Congo but outside
Kinshasa, perhaps in Lubumbashi. The President did
not see why a delay in locating the Commission in
Kinshasa should slow down the deployment of
MONUC.
40. The President also agreed with Ambassador
Andjaba that the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was wrong. In exchange for its support, said the
President, Zimbabwe had entered into an agreement
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to work a mine which had, however, not yet
yielded any diamonds. His Government would extend
its full cooperation to any expert panel created by the
Security Council, including in the areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo under its control.
Meeting with President Kagame (7 May)
41. In his opening remarks, Ambassador Holbrooke
informed President Kagame that the Carlsson report on
the role of the United Nations in the 1994 genocide had
recently been discussed in depth by the Security

5

S/2000/416

Council. All members had accepted the report’s
sobering conclusions. It was also recognized that the
Lusaka Agreement took account of Rwanda’s
legitimate security concerns.
42. Raising the question of the fighting in Kisangani,
Ambassador Holbrooke noted that the United Nations
had publicly attributed responsibility to Uganda. After
relating the background to the situation in Kisangani,
President Kagame proposed that both Rwandan and
Ugandan forces should withdraw from the city under
United Nations supervision, and that MONUC should
at once deploy there in accordance with the concept of
operations approved by the Security Council.
43. The Security Council mission then invited the
Rwandan Head of State to consider withdrawing some
of his forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, pointing out that a large
proportion of the Rwandan Patriotic Army was now
operating beyond its own borders. Its presence caused
resentment in certain parts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which was against Rwanda’s interests.
Some of its members had been accused of serious
human rights violations. Such violations had been
reported throughout the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, noted President Kagame.
44. President Kagame expressed willingness to
consider such a step if all other belligerents did the
same. Discussion then turned to the creation of a
bridging mechanism designed to permit the parties to
reduce their military exposure in a mutually balanced
way, since it had emerged from the talks the mission
had held that all of them wanted to do so. In this
context, President Kagame pointed out the importance
of the inter-Congolese dialogue in building confidence
and strengthening security, and called on the Security
Council to support it.
45. As a result of further discussion, the two sides
agreed to issue a joint declaration of the Government
of Rwanda and the Security Council delegation. In the
declaration, the Government of Rwanda stated that it
was prepared to move quickly to implement a phased
withdrawal in accordance with the disengagement plan
of 8 April as MONUC deployment got under way, and
to discuss the immediate release to the care of ICRC of
all prisoners of war. The Government fully supported
Sir Ketumile Masire. Both the Government and the
Security Council mission agreed on the need to disarm,
demobilize, reintegrate and resettle members of the

6

non-signatory armed groups, particularly the exRwandan Armed Forces and Interahamwe, and to
accelerate regional and international discussions aimed
at resolving this issue. The Government and the
Security Council mission agreed that the recent
fighting in Kisangani, though deplorable, did not
necessarily represent a threat to the Lusaka Agreement.
The two sides agreed on the urgent need to dispatch
military observers to Kisangani to help ensure that no
further such incidents occurred.
Meeting with the Congolese Rally for
Democracy-Goma
46. On 7 May, following its meeting with President
Kagame, the Security Council mission met with
representatives of RCD-Goma. The Security Council
delegation expressed its serious concern over the
fighting in Kisangani between the Uganda People’s
Defence Forces and the Rwandan Patriotic Army.
47. The Council delegation informed the RCD-Goma
representatives of the declared willingness of President
Museveni and President Kagame to end the fighting
and pursue a peaceful resolution, as well as their
request that MONUC should deploy additional military
observers in Kisangani to supervise the cessation of
fighting between the two parties. MONUC was ready
to carry out the required reinforcement and to
contribute to the stabilization of the situation.
48. While concurring with the idea, RCD-Goma
objected to the proposal that MONUC should fly
directly from Kinshasa to Kisangani without transiting
through Goma. The Security Council mission
categorically rejected the conditions posed by RCDGoma in obliging MONUC flights to transit through
Goma. It also referred to the status-of-forces agreement
that had just been signed between MONUC and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and which allows for simple notification of MONUC
flight plans instead of authorization requests as
required previously. RCD-Goma eventually accepted
that notification was sufficient.
49. The meeting also focused on several issues
relating to the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, notably the venue of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, the location of the Joint Military Commission
with MONUC in Kinshasa and the possibility of a
special meeting of the Political Committee to be

S/2000/416

convened around mid-June in New York during the
French presidency of the Security Council.

be reported to the Political Committee at its next
meeting, to be held before the end of May 2000.

50. On the issues of the inter-Congolese dialogue and
location of the Joint Military Commission at Kinshasa,
the RCD-Goma representatives rejected Kinshasa on
security grounds. However, RCD-Goma would agree
with other locations within the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, notably Kisangani, Kananga and MbujiMayi, as possible venues for the inter-Congolese
dialogue or for the Joint Military Commission and
MONUC to be co-located.

55. The Government of Uganda, the Government of
Rwanda and the Security Council mission together
recommended to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that MONUC should deploy at the
earliest possible opportunity to Kisangani, to exercise
neutral control over the demilitarized zone around the
city and airports of Kisangani, once the parties
concerned had withdrawn.

51. Ambassador van Walsum raised the Mwenga
incident, in which 15 women were reportedly buried
alive. Mr. Ilunga’s response was one of the most
astonishing heard by the mission: (a) the allegation was
not true; (b) it only concerned three women; and (c) the
other side did it too (“Kabila tue des dizaines de gens à
Kinshasa tous les jours”). Ambassador van Walsum,
supported by the entire delegation, firmly declared this
response to be unacceptable. Members of the
delegation stated that they would continue to pursue
this issue and demanded more information, warning
that they would ask the Security Council and other
organizations to continue to search for the facts. (Later,
the mission agreed that, while many other incidents of
this sort had been reported, and that they should all be
investigated, this one was so particularly odious that it
demanded their particular attention.)
Meeting with President Museveni
52. Much of the meeting with President Museveni,
which was held outside Kampala on 8 May, was
devoted to following up the discussions the mission
had had with President Kagame the day before in
Kigali concerning the demilitarization of Kisangani.
53. During the talks with President Museveni, the
mission consulted President Kagame about a statement
that was subsequently released at the close of the talks
with President Museveni. Ambassador Holbrooke
subsequently briefed President Kabila and President
Mugabe, who viewed the development favourably.
54. In the statement, the Government of Uganda and
the Government of Rwanda stated that they were ready
to withdraw their forces currently deployed in and
around Kisangani to a distance to be agreed between
them in detailed negotiations to be held without delay
under the auspices of MONUC/the Joint Military
Commission. The results of these negotiations would

56. The Security Council mission reaffirmed its
strong support for the entire Lusaka Agreement and
called the attention of the Lusaka signatories to their
obligation to implement the Lusaka Agreement in all
its aspects, and in this context required all the parties to
respect this agreement of the Governments of Uganda
and Rwanda to demilitarize Kisangani and to take no
action in any circumstances which would violate the
demilitarized zone.
Meeting with the Movement for the Liberation
of the Congo
57. Despite having received an invitation from the
Security Council mission to meet with its members in
Kampala, the leader of MLC, Jean-Pierre Bemba, did
not appear, citing logistical difficulties.
Meeting with the Congolese Rally for
Democracy-Kisangani
58. The mission met with Professor Ernest Wamba
dia Wamba and his delegation at Entebbe airport to
update him on developments. Mr. Wamba dia Wamba
gave his views on the tension in Kisangani and on the
need for urgent progress on the inter-Congolese
dialogue which, in his view, should not be held in
Kinshasa.

III. Principal issues arising during the
visit of the Security Council
mission
Military and security situation
59. The ceasefire agreed by the parties in Kampala as
part of the disengagement plan of 8 April largely
continued to hold during the visit of the Security
Council mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries. However, the visit

7

S/2000/416

was marked by serious outbreaks of fighting at
Kisangani between Rwandan and Ugandan troops,
despite urgent efforts at the highest level to secure a
ceasefire.
60. Although the Council mission noted the
widespread view that, strictly speaking, the fighting in
Kisangani did not represent a direct threat to the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement or the
agreement of 8 April, it was nevertheless a very
disturbing development. Approximately 100 Congolese
civilians had reportedly been killed or injured in the
fighting.
61. The acceptance by President Kagame and
President Museveni of a proposal to withdraw their
forces from Kisangani in a mutual and balanced
manner under United Nations supervision, and for the
rapid deployment of MONUC units in the city, has
helped to ease a significant source of local tension
which hampered the Lusaka peace process and caused
many deaths and injuries among the local population,
as well as extensive property damage. The two Heads
of State are to be commended for their concurrence
with the proposal, and MONUC must move swiftly to
take advantage of the opportunity once they have
implemented it.
62. The Security Council mission accepted that the
disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
resettlement of the armed groups, including the exRwandan Armed Forces and Interahamwe militia, was
an essential element in restoring confidence in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Unless it was resolved, it would be very difficult to
restore the rule of law or ensure the security of borders
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Partly in view of the intractability of the problem, very
little thought had been devoted to its resolution, though
a working group of the Joint Military Commission had
drawn up a preliminary paper. Much more needed to be
done to address this troubling question.
Implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council
63. The signing of the status-of-forces agreement
reflected a major improvement in relations between
MONUC and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially in the light of
personal undertakings made to the mission by the Head

8

of State at their meeting on 4 May. The removal of
administrative obstacles to the expansion of MONUC
should greatly facilitate its speedy deployment. Indeed,
without exception, all the mission’s interlocutors urged
the deployment of phase II of MONUC as soon as
possible.
64. The agreement in principle of the Political
Committee to meet in New York at the invitation of the
Security Council under the presidency of France in
June 2000 could also serve as a stimulus to the peace
process. The Security Council mission appreciated the
contributions the Political Committee was making,
under able chairmanship, to the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, most notably through its
adoption on 8 April of the disengagement plan.
65. Less progress was apparent in the effort to move
the Joint Military Commission to Kinshasa. It was clear
that some members of the Commission had no
intention of meeting in Kinshasa, let alone locating
there, whatever undertakings or arrangements to ensure
security were made. Furthermore, the Commission
continued to be beset by leadership, organizational,
financial and administrative problems, notwithstanding
the significant contributions made by a number of
donor countries, including Zambia, and the energetic
efforts of the acting Chairman, General Kazembe.
There was general consensus, however, subject to the
decision of the Secretary-General, that the deployment
of MONUC could proceed independently of efforts to
secure the location of the Commission in Kinshasa,
much as this remains desirable, and as is called for in
resolution 1291 (2000).
66. With each of its interlocutors, the Security
Council mission brought up the question of the release
of prisoners of war, as called for by the Lusaka
Agreement. All parties expressed themselves in favour
of proceeding with this step, which would build
confidence and serve humanitarian ends. The Security
Council mission looked forward to further practical
progress in this direction with the help of ICRC.
Inter-Congolese dialogue
67. The Security Council mission noted the
reservations expressed by President Kabila in
connection with the programme of work proposed by
Sir Ketumile Masire, but also his undertaking to assist
the neutral facilitator. It had clearly emerged from all
the consultations the mission had conducted that

S/2000/416

progress in the inter-Congolese dialogue, in
conjunction with the deployment of MONUC and the
implementation of the other military aspects of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, represented the two paths
to lasting security in the country.
68. There was no consensus among the Congolese
parties as to the venue of the dialogue, though most
participants expressed a preference for holding it on
Congolese territory, whether in the capital or
elsewhere. The Security Council mission took the view
that this was a matter to be resolved by the Congolese
parties, with the facilitation of Sir Ketumile Masire.
But in view of the overwhelming desire of the
Congolese people for peace, as demonstrated during
the visit of some Security Council members to
Kananga and the meetings held with representatives of
civil society, religious groups and representatives of
political parties, protracted discussions over the venue
of the dialogue should not be allowed to delay the
launching of the talks as expeditiously as possible.

IV. Observations and recommendations
69. The ceasefire inaugurated by the agreement of
8 April, which began on 14 April, though inevitably
fragile, is an important basis for future peacemaking
and must not be given up lightly. The Kisangani
incident and reported violations in Equateur Province
were deplorable, but did not represent breakdowns
between the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Still, urgent follow-up work is
necessary. Since the deployment of phase II of
MONUC, if authorized, would take several further
weeks to exert even a preliminary effect, interim
military observation needs to be reinforced quickly,
including by the establishment of direct communication
between MONUC headquarters and field commanders,
and combined with constant political monitoring and
contacts at high level. Verified disengagement may be
possible in a few areas, but cannot reach a
comprehensive stage until and unless phase II of
MONUC is up to strength on the ground.
70. The requirement for a professional ceasefire
monitoring and verification force as mandated in
resolution 1291 (2000) is self-evident. Each of the five
Presidents consulted on this visit was unequivocal in
his appeal for rapid deployment, and apprehensive
about the sustainability of the ceasefire without it. The
desperation of the Congolese people, whose suffering

the mission could for the most part only imagine,
clearly demands an international response. But the
deployment of MONUC could be executed only in the
most difficult of logistic circumstances, at great
expense and with the goodwill of the belligerent
parties. While the immediate protection of
peacekeepers would have to be assured, MONUC
would not be in a position to exercise any consistent
military control of violations.
71. The Secretary-General’s decision on deployment
will therefore be complex. The mission is acutely
conscious,
in
the
current
circumstances
of
peacekeeping in Africa and elsewhere, of the risks
bound to be faced by those contributing observers and
protection forces. There are lessons to be learned from
the Sierra Leone tragedy about the deployment of
peacekeepers before a conflict has run its course. The
need for security to be assured as deployments begin
and the immediate availability of reinforcements are
two of the most important. Equally, the development of
a culture of stability and economic growth in Africa
cannot be achieved without a partnership between
Africans and the international community on conflict
resolution; and the judgement of the United Nations on
a peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will inevitably be seen in that context.
The developments in Sierra Leone inevitably cast a
shadow over the mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has its own
unique characteristics, and the peacekeeping
operation there must be judged on its own merits.
Sierra Leone should not be allowed to cloud the
international community’s responsibility in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its capacity
to make a real difference there.
72. The leaders of the region have to share the
responsibility for returning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to stability. The mission recommends that
the Secretary-General, before he makes his final
decision, should speak to each of the Lusaka parties at
the highest level, seeking their unequivocal
commitment to assist the proposed deployment of
phase II of MONUC, testing their commitment to the
maintenance of the ceasefire and asking for their firm
undertaking, in writing, to support phase II on the
ground in every way possible. The tensions which exist
among the parties, and between certain of the parties
and the United Nations, as the mission itself observed,

9

S/2000/416

have to be contained by the political leaderships, who
remain ultimately accountable.
73. In the event of a positive decision by the
Secretary-General, it is essential for the Lusaka and
United Nations processes to interact effectively. The
core structure for ceasefire monitoring, as ordained in
resolution 1291 (2000), has to be MONUC and the
Joint Military Commission working jointly from a colocated headquarters. The location of the headquarters
is for those concerned on the ground to establish.
While Kinshasa must remain the natural choice in time,
it may be too early in the process of deconfliction and
reconciliation for the Joint Military Commission to join
MONUC there in the immediate future. One of the
principal regional centres may therefore be a better
temporary choice at this stage. It was evident to the
mission from their contacts that “co-location”, for
several of the parties, meant something quite different
from sharing a combined headquarters building; it
meant going to Kinshasa. The city chosen therefore
requires a decision by the Political Committee.
74. The military activity in and around Kisangani
during the course of the mission’s journey, in clear
breach of the ceasefire of 14 April, has been
condemned by the Security Council. The mission was
pleased to play a role in promoting the joint declaration
on the demilitarization of Kisangani issued by the
Governments of Uganda and Rwanda on 8 May. But
implementation, as always, is the only true test, and
disturbing reports of fresh shelling and apparently
hostile troop movements have already been received.
This agreement needs immediate and forceful followup action by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by MONUC. As one of the most
important of the regional centres of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the city could have a
significant role in the peace process. The mission,
before it left the region, urged the Special
Representative to explore quickly whether a
demilitarized Kisangani, under the temporary authority
of MONUC in the earliest stages of its deployment,
could provide the parties with secure, neutral facilities
for future political and military exchanges. The mission
used its contacts with the parties to promote this
proposal, which will bear fruit if they are committed to
the consolidation of the ceasefire and the step-by-step
implementation of the Lusaka process.
75. The mission was left in no doubt of the
fundamental importance of establishing a national

10

dialogue on the future of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Without a political track, the parties will
inevitably focus on the military track. All the Lusaka
signatories the mission met, but even more
emphatically the representatives of the Congolese civil,
political and religious communities who were not
associated with the use of armed force, placed
emphasis on the need for vigorous and legitimate
political activity. The mission concluded that follow-up
on this central aspect should be urgently pursued. Sir
Ketumile Masire’s facilitation needs immediate access
to funds and the unequivocal support, in particular, of
all the Lusaka signatories. The mission hopes that the
facilitator, with the assistance of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the active
backing of the Security Council, will address the
question of the venue for the first stages of the
dialogue with renewed vigour, especially if the
demilitarization of Kisangani proceeds as planned. The
appointment at an early date of a senior adviser to the
neutral facilitator based in Kinshasa, who should be
francophone, could be helpful in this regard. The
mission believes that a compromise on the venue
question should be reached before the Political
Committee visits New York in June 2000. Kinshasa is
the natural eventual home of the political process; but
the mission recommends that an interim solution,
possibly Kisangani, could be explored and that
Kinshasa could be re-examined at a later date, when
confidence between the parties has grown.
76. The Lusaka requirement for a disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
resettlement
programme, without which no sustained cessation of
the conflict will be possible, has now been broached by
the mission with the parties. The issue should be taken
forward in New York in June, with prior preparation by
the parties and by MONUC. The mission recognizes
the need for time and the most substantial deployment
of peacekeeping forces, beyond phase II of MONUC,
for this purpose, but work must be done now on the
details, so that the parties can be confident that the
whole structure of Lusaka is being given attention.
77. The mission raised the question of the illegal
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in their exchanges and made it
clear that the Security Council would return to
addressing this problem. None of the external parties to
the conflict claimed a long-term interest in remaining
on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the

S/2000/416

Congo in either a military or an economic context. The
mission recommends the early establishment of an
expert panel by the Security Council to take this matter
forward.
78. At the mission’s instigation, particular parties
offered to take steps to exchange prisoners of war. The
Security Council should urge ICRC to renew its
approaches to turn this expressed willingness into
practical results.
79. All the members of the Security Council mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo express their
gratitude to the leaders and Governments in the
countries they visited for their hospitality and
responsiveness. They pay tribute to the determined and
courageous work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamel Morjane, to the
Force Commander, Major General Mountaga Diallo,
and to their military and civilian personnel. They
express their warm appreciation to the United Nations
teams on the ground in each of the locations they
visited for their professional and logistical support and
to the Secretariat staff who accompanied them for their
sustained helpfulness in often difficult circumstances.

11
