General Assembly-Fifteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
!'age

1593 (XV). Appeal to Member States which ha":e particularly clc!se an? continuous relations with the Government of the Umon of South Afnca, with respect
to the situation in the Territory in South West Africa (16 March 1961)
(item 43) ..................................................... • •..

7

1596 (XV). Question of South West Africa (7 April 1%1) (item 43) . . . . . . . .

7

1605 (XV). Question of the future of Ruamla-L'runcli (21 :\pril 1961) (item
45) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

1606 (XV). Land tenure and agrarian reform in Ruanda-Unmdi (21 April 1961)
(item 45) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

1607 (XV). Dissemination of information 011 the United Nations and the International Trusteeship System in Trust Territories (21 April 1961) (item 46)..

10

1608 (XV). The future of the Trust Territory of the Cameroons under United
Kingdom administration (21 April 1961) (item 13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

1609 (XV). The future of Tanganyika (21 April 1%1) (item 13) . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

1610 (XV). Report of the Trusteeship Council (21 April 1961) (item 13) . . . . . .

11

1611 (XV). Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Trust Territories (21 April 1961) ( item 47) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

1593 (XV). Appeal to Member States which have
particularly close and continuous relations
with the Government of the Union of South
Africa, with respect to the situation in the
Territory of South West Africa

Appeals to those Members of the United Nations
which have particularly close and continuous relations
with the Government of the Union of South Africa to
bring, as a matter of urgency, all their influence to bear
on that Government with a view to ensuring that it shall
adjust its conduct to its obligations under the Charter
of the Unit eel Nat ions and shall give effect to the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.

The General .Ass,imbly,
Recalling the many resolutions adopted, since its first
session, on the auestion of South \Vest Africa, and
especially resolution 1568 (XV) of 18 December 1960,

963rd plenary mcctin:J,
16 March 1961.

Noting with concern that up to the present time the
Government of the Union of South Africa has ignored
those resolutions and has, instead, adopted an attitude
contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations,

1596 (XV). Question of South West Africa

The General Assemb[:y,
B caring in mind the provisions of the General Assembly's Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples,1 which declares that
immediate steps shall be taken to transfer all powers to
such peoples, without any conditions or reservations,
in accordance with their freely expressed will and desire. without any distinction as to race, creed or colour,
in order to enable them to enjoy complete independence
and freedom,
Recalling its resolution 1568 (XV) of 18 December
1960 inviting the Committee on South \-Vest Africa to
go to South \~lest Africa immediately, inter alia, to investigate the situation prevailing in the Territory,
Noting urith deep regret, from the preliminary report
of the Committee on South \Vest Africa2 called ior
under the said resolution, that the Government of the
Union of South Africa refuses to co-operate with the

Noting with special concern the refusal of the Mandatory Power to implement resolution 1568 (XV),
Lil?eurise notinq with conccni the continued acts
whereby, since 1950, the Government of the Union of
South Africa has attempted to bring about the assimilation of the Territory of South \Vest Africa, and in particular the so-called referendum of 5 October 1960 in
which only the "European" inhabitants of the Territory
were permitted to take part,
Considering that the conduct of the Government of
the Union of South Africa constitutes a challenge to the
authority of the l,; nited Nations,
Considering that attempts at the assimilation of the
Mandated Territory of South \Vest Africa, culminating
in the so-called referendum of 5 October 1960, are totally unacceptable as having no moral or legal basis and
being repugnant to the letter and spirit of the Mandate,

1

See resolution 1514 (XV).
0 ificial Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session
Ann1·xcs, agenda item 43, document A/4705.
'
2

7

8

General Assembly -

United Nations by facilitating the mission of the Committee on South West Africa,

Convinced that it is both the right and the duty of the
United Nations to discharge fully and effectively its
obligations with respect to the proper implementation,
under its supervision, of the Mandate for South West
Africa conferred upon His Britannic Majesty, to be
exercised on his behalf by the Government of the Union
of South Africa,
Noting with grave concern the continuing deterioration in the situation in South West Africa resulting
from the continued application, in violation of the letter
and spirit of the Mandate, of tyrannical policies and
practices, such as apartheid, of the administration of the
Union of South Africa in South West Africa,
Reiterating its concern that this situation constitutes
a serious threat to international peace and security,
1. Recognizes and supports the passionate yearning
of the people of South \Vest Africa for freedom and the
exercise of national independence and sovereig-nty;

2. Rejects the position taken by the Government of
the Union of South Africa in refusing to co-operate
with the United Nations in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1568 (XV) as well as other
resolutions concerning South \Vest Africa ;
3. Deplores the attempts at the assimilation of the
Mandated Territory of South West Africa, culminating
in the so-called referendum held on 5 October 1960, as
totally unacceptable, having no moral or legal basis and
being repugnant to the letter and spirit of the Mandate;
4. Considers that the full and effective discharge of
the tasks assigned to the Committee on South West
Africa in paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution
1568 (XV) is essential to the protection of the lives and
property of the inhabitants of South West Africa, to
the amelioration of the prevailing conditions in South
West Africa, the continuance of which is likely to endanger international peace and security, and to the
exercise of the right of self-determination by the people
of South West Africa in complete freedom and of their
right of accession to national sovereignty and independence with the least delay ;
5. Requests th~ Committee on South West Africa,
therefore, immediately to proceed to discharge the special and urgent tasks entrusted to it in resolution 1568
(XV) as fully and expeditiously as possible with the
co-operation of the Government of the Union of South
Africa if such co-operation is available, and without it
if necessary ;
6. Requests the States Members of the United Nations to extend to the Committee on South West Africa
such assistance as it may require in the discharge of
these tasks ;
7. Decides to call the attention of the Security Council to the situation in respect of South West Africa
which, if allowed to continue, will in the General Assembly's view endanger international peace and security,
and to the present resolution, the full implementation of
which is necessary to bring that situation to a speedy
end;
8. Takes note with grave concern of reports of the
terrorization of, and armed action against, the indigenous inhabitants, and calls upon the Government of the
Union of South Africa to desist from such acts;

Fifteenth Session

9. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to submit to the General Assembly at its sixteenth session a report on the implementation of resolution 1568
(XV) as well as the present resolution.
979th plenary meeting,
7 April 1961.

1605 (XV). Question of the future of RuandaUrundi
The General Assembly,
B caring in mind the provisions of the General Assembly's Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples, 1
Recalling its resolutions 1579 (XV) and 1580 (XV)
of 20 December 1960 concerning the future of the Trust
Territory of Ruanda-Urundi,
Having received the interim report of the United Nations Commission for Ruanda-G rundi a appointed under
resolution 1579 (XV),
Regretting the failure of the Administering Authority
to implement fully and effectively the terms of resolution
1579 (XV), the resistance to such implementation liy
the local representatives of the Administering ;\llthority
in Ruanda-Urundi and their failure to co-operate fully
and effectively with the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi,
Regretting the de facto recognition by the Administering Authority of governmental bodies in Ruancla
which were established by irregular and unlawful means
and which cannot be regarded as fully representative of
all segments of the population in the absence of free and
fair elections on the basis of direct universal adult
suffrage, as envisaged in resolution 1579 (XV),
Regretting also the setting up of governmental bodies
in Urundi on the basis of communal elections, contrary
to the assurances given by the Administering Authority
that communal elections were purely administrative and
had no political character,
S oting the several statements of the representatives
of the Administering Authority conveying assurances
that it will co-operate fully with the United Nations in
Ruanda-Urnndi,
Having heard the views of the petitioners from
Ruanda-Urundi,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
United Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi for
their conscientious discharge of the duties entrusted
to them under General Assembly resolutions 1579
(XV) and 1580 (XV);
2. Calls upon the Government of Belgium as the
Administering Authority to ensure that the provisions
of resolution 1579 (XV) are fully implemented by its
representatives in Ruanda-Urundi before the legislative
elections;
3. Recogni:::es that the Government of Belgium is
alone responsible for the administration of the Trust
Territory of Ruanda-Unmdi and accountable to the
United Nations, and that its responsibilities as Administering Authority cannot in any way be abdicated to
local political bodies and leaders until after appropriate
democratic institutions have been set up and the Trus• !bid., agenda item 45, addendum, documents A/4706 and
Add.I.
