THIRTY-SECONLJ

YEAR
nd
MEETING:

I

I

NEW

15 SEPTEMBER 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/203 2) . . . . . _ . . . . . . , , . . . . . , . . . _ . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

,..................,....,..,....,....

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387) . . . . . . . . . . ..a..........................._....

1

SJPV.2032

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fulIy operative on that date.

Held in New York on Thursday,
Prc,sident: Mr. Riidigcr von WECHMAR (Federal
Republic of Germany).
Prescrzt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India., Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States uf America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agendn/2032)
t . Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Represcntativc of Cyprus to the llnited Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was (Apted.
The situation in Cypnu:
Letter dated 26 Angnst 1977 from the Permanent
Ikpresent:rtive
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2387)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2026th meeting, J invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to participate, without the right
to vote, in the Council’s discussion under the terms of
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the Prusidcnt, Mr. Christophidcs
Mr. Papottlias (Greece) and Mr. Tiirkmen
KSPS),
(Turkey} took p1~cc.s IU the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the first Speaker, I
should like to draw attention to the text of a draft
resolution which has been prepared in the course of
intensive consultations. It appears in document S/12394.
3. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): Mr. President, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on your assumption of office and also to express
admiration for the excellent manner in which your prede-

15 September

1977, at 3 p.m.

cessor led the Council during the month of August. I am
confident that his work laid a sound basis for carrying the
present debate forward to a positive conclusion under your
own able and distinguished leadership.
4. My delegation has from the beginning of this debate
consistently worked towards an outcome which would
reflect a consensus among the Council members. We are
gratified that in the end this goal appears to have been
achieved. We have been deeply impressed by the tireless and
patient efforts of those delegations which worked so hard
to bridge the gaps separating the parties in order to find a
generally acceptable solution. In this regard, 1 should like
particularly to pay a tribute to our colleague Ambassador
Jaipal, whose thoughtful and constructive approach 1~s
been so helpful to us all.
5. We have listened with great care to the statements of
both sidesin regardto the presentsituation in Cyprus. The
Secretary-Generalhassummarizedfor us/202&h mcetingj
the facts which gave rise to the complaint before the
Council. We have alsoheard a clarifying statement on this
matter by Mr. Celik, speakingon behalf of the Turkish
Cypriot community /202&h meeting]. Mr. Celik‘s assurantes that no resettlementof the newsection of Famagusta
is under way are especiallywelcomein view of the concern
expressedby membersof the Co~m3l
in regard to the
situation there.
G. The fact that the decisionof the Council hasbeen cast
in terms which go beyond this immediate issue reflects
accurately, I believe,the broader concernsof the majority
of the Council. All the statementswe haveheardhere have,
in one way or another, expressedconcern in regard to the
continuing underlying tensionsin the island. Members of
the Council appearto be in generalagreementthat the best
coursefor relieving those tensionsis through direct intercom?nunalnegotiations, and the Council has therefore
welcomedthe statementsmadeby both sideshere indicating a readinessto resumethosetalks.
7. The United Statesbelievesthat the Council has acted in
a constructive mannerto focus the attention of the parties
on the vita1 issuesfacing them in the comingmonths. While
we have spent considerabletime and energy discussing
among ourselvesthe exact wording of our decision, our
intentions have been clear. Both in the statements of its
members and in the draft resolution the Council is
adopting, we have urged both sidesto exercisethe utmost
restraint in their actionsand statements,so asto create an
atmospherein which the larger issuesbefore them can be
seriouslytackled. It is now incumbent on all of us---on the

avoided in order not to give rise to understandable
apprehensions.It therefore urges both parties to refrain
from any acts which might in any way give rise to such
apprehensions.It further urgesthe parties to resumethe
intercommunal talks as soon as possiblewith concrete
proposalsfor resolvingtheir differences.

Governments of all represented here-to express to the
parties themselves the hope and, indeed, the expectation
that they will move directly and expeditiously in the
direction of a negotiated solution.
8. For its part, my Government will do all that it possibly
can to encouragethe earliest possibleresumptionof the
intercommunal talks. As in the past, the United States
stands fully prepared at any time to assistthe parties,
should they so desire,in the effort to achievea settlement
that will be just and lasting, The time is indeed long
overdueto settle this problem through seriousnegotiation.
We are convinced that it is not beyond the powers of
representatives
of the two communitiesin Cyprus to build
successfullyon the foundation establishedin earlierrounds
of talks and to bring those talks to a successfulconclusion.

1.5, It is on this understandingthat my delegationwill
support the draft resolution before us. It has been my
Government’s conviction throughout the present debate
that the outcome of this Security Council meetingmustnot
in any way be regarded or used as an obstacle to
intercommunalnegotiationsbut should,on the contrary, be
conducive to such negotiations.My Government believes
that the present text-the result of extensive, careful,
patient and time-consumingconsultations-will finally help
to meet these requirements. I should like to take this
opportunity to expressmy specialgratitude to Ambassador
Jaipal and all those who have helped to bring about this
result.

9. My Governmenthopes that this debate wil mark the
renewal of concertedefforts by the two communitiesto
work out through direct negotiations a solution to the
difficult problem which has afflicted the island of Cyprus
for too long. If that is the case,then the time spentin this
debatewill havebeenwell worth while.

16. In concluding, let me reiterate what 1 said on the
occasion of the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-KeepingForce in Cyprus, on 16 June this
year [2013rh meeting/. My delegationonce againurgesthe
parties seriously to considerand recognize their common
interestsand not to missthe opportunity still open to them
to overcome their differencesthrough direct negotiations,
by adoptinga more conciliatory and realisticattitude.

10. The PRESIDENT: There are no more nameson the
list of speakers.I therefore wish to make a statementin my
capacity asthe representativeof the FEDERAL REPUBLIC
OF GERMANY.
11. I shouldlike to begin my statement by offering my
delegation’ssincerecondolencesto the Cypriot delegation
on the untimely and tragic death of Archbishop Makarios
lastmonth.
12. The Federal Republic of Germany, both within the
European Community and bilaterally, has continuously
tried to contribute to a solution of the questionof Cyprus
by helping the parties to come together for negotiations
and by lending its ful support to the mission of good
offices of the Secretary-General.In this my Government
hasbeenguidedby the firm conviction that a settlementof
the Cyprus conflict can be brought about only through
direct negotiations between the parties concerned. My
Government continues to hold the view that the talks
between the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot
communities,in order to be successful,must be basedon
mutual concessions
both on questionsof territory and on
questionsof the constitutional framework. Therefore my
Government is deeply concerned at the persistentlack of
progressin the intercommunal negotiations. For the same
reason,it regardswith particular apprehensionany incident
which may impedea resumptionof the negotiatingprocess.
13. My delegation has nevertheless noted with great
satisfaction the statements made to the Council to the
effect that the developmentsin the new town of Famagusta, brought to the attention of the Council by the
Governmentof Cyprus, are limited in nature and do not
constitute the beginningof a colonization or resettlement.
My Governmentthus feelsjustified in the sincerehopethat
further tension will be avoided and that intercommunal
talkswill be resumedwithout further delay.

17. I now resumethe functions of PRESIDENT. I shall
suspendthis meeting for a few minutes and invite the
membersof the Council to join me in the President’soffice
for a brief consultation.
The meeting wassuspended
at 4.05 p.m. and resumedat
4.45 p.m.
18. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now proceed to
take a decision on the draft resolution in document
S/12394. It is my understandingthat the Councilwishesto
adopt the draft without putting it to the vote. If there is no
objection, I shalldeclarethe draft resolution adopted.
The draft resnlution wasadopted.1
19. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): I shall speakbriefly on the
resolution that has just been adopted by the Council
without a vote.
.
20. The position of my delegationwas stated when we
spoke in the Council some two weeks ago (2028th
meeting/. It wasimplicit in that statementthat, in the view
of Pakistan, the subject-matter of the complaint being
consideredby the Council was not such as to justify a
protracted debate and an exchangeof chargesand counterchargesin the Council. Other meansare available to the
parties, including those afforded by the presencein the
islandof the Secretary-General’sSpecial Representative,to
resolvesuchdifficulties.
21. After the statementsmade by the representativeof
Turkey and the representativeof the Turkish part of

14. More generally, my Government believes that any
unilateral action, however limited in scope, should be

1 See resolution 414 (1977).

2

-

7-

-.~

Cyprus to the effect that no c010nization of the new city of
Famagusta was in progress as alleged, it would have been
enough, in our View, for the Council to take note of that
assurance in a statement of consensus and to remind the
parties of their commitment to and their common interest
in seeking a peaceful settlement of the Cyprus question
through the intercommunal talks. We note with satisfaction
that this idea is the central point of the resolution adopted.

resolution 365 (1974). If Ankara continues to disregard
those resolutionsand to showthe samecontempt towards
them, there wil1 remain no alternative for the Council but
to take appropriate action asprovided under the Charter to
ensurea long-delayedcompliance.
28. The negotiations between the representatives of the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities,to which
reference is made in paragraphs4 and 5 of the resolution
and which concern the internal aspects of the Cyprus
problem, have been going on for two and a half years
without any positive result. This is manifestly due to the
negative attitude of the Turkish side.We are very pleased
therefore to observethat the resolution contains a call for
the resumption of the negotiations,emphasisbeing placed
on the need for their being conducted in a meaningfuland
constructive manner on the basisof comprehensiveand
concrete proposals.Thus the proposalsmust not only be
concrete but alsocomprehensive,and to be comprehensive
they have to refer to all subjectsunder negotiation. In this
respect it can be hoped that the effect of the resolution will
be to prevent the Turkish side from any longer using the
talks for the solepurposeof coveringup faits accomplisand
as a meansof deflecting the pressuresof third parties and
international public opinion.

22. I wish to say, however, that had the draft resolution
been put to the Vote, my delegation would not have been in
a position to support it. Nevertheless, we did not wish to
stand in the way of the wish of the majority of the Council
to adopt the draft without a vote.
23. The PRESIDENT:
Affairs of Cyprus.

I call on the Minister for Foreign

24. Mr. CHRISTOI’HIDES (Cyprus): I should like to make
some remarks on the resolution just adopted.
25. Although we strongly feel that the situation in Cyprus,
aggravated by the recent developments in the New Famagusta area, warranted a resolution expressed in more
categorical terms, yet we can understand the reasons for the
way the Council chose to express itself, bearing in mind its
concern for unanimity or near unanimity in the adoption of
its resolutions. We acknowledge that the resolution taken as
a whole constitutes a positive response on the part of the
Council to the basic and urgent demands of the situation
and has in essence met its needs and achieved the objectives
which necessitated our recourse to the Council.

29. My Government fully supportsthis new resolution, as
indeed it hassupportedthe previousCouncil resolutionson
Cyprus. We shall also co-operate in all respectswith the
Secretary-Generalin its implementation.
30. However, our support and co-operation would not be
enough to bring about the results envisaged by the
resolution, for it is well known that, without a positive
responsefrom Turkey, the party primarily responsible,this
new resolution, like all the other Council resolutions on
Cyprus so far, will remain ineffective. If this unacceptable
state of affairs were to continue, it is to be hoped that the
Council would ultimately decide to dischargeits responsibilities under the Charter by adopting effective measures
for implementation, In this respect, we find reassuringthe
request to the Secretary-Generalcontained in paragraph6
of the resolution that he shouIdkeep the Council informed
of developmentswhich may adversely affect its implementation.

26. The resolution, in response to the complaint by the
Cyprus Government, expresses the concern of the members
of the Council 0ver the unilateral actions of Turkey in the
New Famagusta arca, in violation of the Council’s resolutions, and particularly resolution 367 (1975). The Council,
fully conscious of the disastrous repercussions of unilateral
actions on the prospects for a peaceful solution of the
Cyprus problem, calls upon the partiesto refrain from such
actions,whether in the New Famagustaareaor anywhere
elsein Cyprus. It is, of course,abundantly clear that this
call is directed at Turkey which, by its endlessseriesof faits
accomplisunderminesall efforts for a negotiated settlement. Further, the Council reaffirms its resolution
365(1974), by which it endorsedGeneralAssemblyresolution 3212 (XXIX), and its resolution 367 (1975) and calls
once again for their urgent and effective implementation.
Thus the Council once again reaffirms that its resolutions
constitute the appropriate basisand the valid framework
for ajust solution of the Cyprus problem.

31. I expressmy Government’sappreciation to the members of the Council for their concern at the situation in
Cyprus and for their interest in the promotion of a just
solution of the Cyprus problem. Weare particularly grateful
to those amongthe membersof the Council who, through
their statementsbefore the Council, through their sponsoring of the draft resolution and through their active and
constructive involvement in the intensive consultations of
the past three weeks,have acknowledgedthe merits of our
recourseand supported the just causeof Cyprus. A special
tribute is due to AmbassadorJacquesLeprette, the representative of France, under whosepresidency the debate on
the item “The situation in Cyprus” commenced and
continued until 31 August and to you, Ambassadorvon
We&mar of the Federal Republic of Germany, the current
President of the Council, who took over the difficult task
of the presidencyon 1 September.The outstanding ability
and diplomatic ski11of both Presidents, their untiring

27. As is known, those resolutions, in their basicprovisionsregardingthe external aspectsof the problem,demand
the cessationof all foreign interference in the affairs 0f
Cyprus and the withdrawal of all foreign troops without
further delay and,call for the urgent return of the refugees
to their homes in safety. Those demandsare addressed
t0
Turkey, which alone they concern. Turkey, however,
continues to violate them. This attitude led the General
Assembly to address to the Security Council in its
resolution 31/12 the request that it consider taking
appropriatestepsfor the implementationof its unanimous
3

1

40. Mr. CELIK: Mr. f’resident, I should like to thank you
and tflc members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to expressthe views of the Turkish Cypriot
sideon the resolutionjust adopted.

efforts and the statesmanlike manner in which they have
handled the discussions and consultations have been in the
best traditions of the high office of the presidency of the
Council and have greatly contributed to the adoption of the
resolution. We are indeed grateful to them both.

41. As I stated earlier during the debate, we saw no
justification for the presentGreekCypriot recourse.In fact,
it has already transpired from the statementsmadeduring
the deliberationsof the Council,and particularly that made
by the Secretary-General/202&h nzccting/, that there is in
actual fact no crisis in Cyprus. Indeed, the fact that it has
taken almost three weekssincethe original Greek Cypriot
recourse for the Council to reach any decision on the
matter goes to show that there was no urgency in the
situation.

32. I also take this opportunity to reiterate our deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, for
his continued interest and efforts to promote a just solution
of the Cyprus problem in accordance with the United
Nations resolutions.
33. Before concluding, I wish to express our gratitude to
the members of the Council who paid a tribute to our late
President, Archbishop Makarios. On behalf of my Government and the people of Cyprus I thank them warmly.
34. The PRESIDENT:
Greece,

42. It is evident that the present reconrsc has been
prompted by internal political considerations.That this is
so is confirmed also by impartial political observers,An
article by William Farrell in yesterday’sNew York Tinzcs
statesthat:

I calI on the representative of

35. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): Mr. President, 1 avail
myself of this first opportunity to speak before the Council
since our initial discussion in order to extend to you the
warmest and most sincere congratulations of my delegation
on your accession to the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. Your great diplomatic skill, your
prestige and your profound experience in United Nations
affairs, which are appreciated by all in the Organization,
have been highlighted once again by the successful conchsion to which you have brought this debate. We are
particularly gratified by the fact that you represent a
country, the Federal Republic of Germany, with which
Greece has the closest ties of deep friendship and cooperation.

“The prevailing view [among Greek Cypriots] . , . is
that the time from now and February, when Greek
Cypriots hold elections, will be marked by internal
politicking as Greek Cypriot leadersseek a replacement
for Archbishop Makarios . .”
This view is also sharedby membersof the diplomatic
community. That showsthat this whole thing is motivated
by internal political considerations.
43. Efforts to intcrnationalize the Cyprus problem are
exhausting the time and energy of the parties concerned
and cannot but fail. Nevertheless,becauseof the insistence
of the Greek Cypriot side,the Council hasdecidedto adopt
yet anotherresolution on Cyprus.

36. May I also once more express our sincere thanks to
your distinguished predecessor, the representative ul
France, Ambassador Jacques Leprette, for the able way in
which he began the examination of the agenda item.

44. During the deliberations of the Council, and also
during the consultationsheld outsidetbc Council chamber,
we tried to explain why we were againstthe adoption of a
resolution by the Council, pointing to the drawbacksand
the adverseeffects such a resolutionmight have on future
developmentsin the island. Yet we have before us a new
resolution on Cyprus, which, I atn afraid, containsharmful
elements that cannot possibly help to create a climate
conduciveto a negotiatedsettlement.

37. It is not my intention to prolong this debate. May I
just say that its outcome fully vindicates the action taken
by the Government of Cyprus in bringing this matter to the
Security Council and that we are very appreciative of the
positive responsemade by the Council in adopting the
prcscnt resolution.
38. As to the resolution itself, I will confine myself to
referring to the comments and remarks made thereon by
His Excellency Mr. Christophides, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Cyprus. None the less,I wishto
emphasizethat we support the new resolution, which, aswe
havejust heard, enjoys the full support of the Government
of
Cyprus. We share the hope that respect for and
implementation of this resolution will pave the way, asthe
Council wishes,for a just, peaceful and lastingsolution to
the problem, ensuring the sovereignty, independenceand
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

45. There already exists an establishedframework for the
solution of the Cyprus problem. That framework was
endorsedand further elaboratedat the summit meetings
held earlier this year between PresidentDcnktag and the
late Archbishop Makarios--moreparticularly, by the fourpoint agreementreachedat the secondof these meetings
/S/12323 of 30 April 1977, para. 51, which envisagesthe
establishment of an independent, non-aligned, bi-communal, bi-zonal Federal Republic.

39. The PRESIDENT: I am informed that Mr. Cclik, to
whom the Security Council extended an invitation under
rule 39 of the provisional rdes of procedure,would like to
addressthe Council. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.

46. Therefore, any involvement of the Security Council in
details which could be prejudicialto one of the parties or
could be interpreted by one side as prejudging the final
settlement, and hencemight actversclyaffect the negotiated
settlement,should in our view be avoided.

I ”

4

47. Greek Cypriot efforts to internationalize the Cyprus
issue and SOIVCtile problem through resolutions instead of
through negotiations cannot but fail.
48. We already have many intricate problems facing us,
making ihe way towards a settlement difficult. A profusion
of resolutions only serves to hinder progress towards a
negotiated settlement and make an already complicated
problem even more complex, This tendency to internationalize the issue is time-consuming as well as energy.
consuming, and unfortunately leaves very little opportunity
for constructive negotiations.
49. Our aim should bc to create an atmosphere conducive
to the carrying out cif intercommunal negotiations, to build
bridges of co-upcration between the two sides, and not-as
has happened here-further
to widen the gap between
them and create additional hurdles for the resumption of
the IXlliS.
50. We Lear that resolutions Such as this one will merely
provide the (ireek Cypriot side with further pretexts for
undue rccourscs to the Security Council, and I leave it to
the Council to decide how the negotiating process will be
affected in the event of similar Greek Cypriot recourses to
the Council in the future, without any sound justification,
in connexion with otlicr areas of northern Cyprus.
51. I low this resolution will affect the future of the
intercommunal talks, and whether or not a completely new
framework will be necessary if and when the talks start, I
am not in a position to say right now. This is something
that will have to be evaluated and decided upon by the
Government of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. It is
unfortunate, however, that Greek Cypriot leaders are more
concerned with short-term personal political gain than with
genuine efforts to solve the Cyprus problem, I hope the
Greek Cypriots rcalize that this resolution, which is totally
unacceptable to us, defeats the purpose.
57,. The 1~IZESIDEN’I’: 1 now call on the representative of
Turkey.

t

53. Mr. TflKKMliN (Turkey): As this is the first time I
have spoken in this debate, Sir, since your assumption of
the presidency of the Council two weeks ago, I should like
ta cxprcss to you, on behalf of my delegation and on my
own behalf, our warmest congrntuletions. In paying a
tribute to you for your eminent diplomatic skills and the
efficient and tactful manner in which you have conducted
the consultations, I should like also to stress lhe satisfaction
we feel in seeing as President of the Council the representative of’ a country with which Turkey has traditionally
enjoyed friendly and cordial relations.
54. 1 shall bc brief. I wish to state that my Government
does not find the resolution jtlst adopted by the Council
acceptable. Our position is based mainly on the following
reasons.
55. First, the resolution refers to the letter from the
“Permanent Representative” of Cyprus. Such a reference
presupposes the existence of a government representing the
whole of Cyprus, which, in our view, is not the case.

56. Secondly, the resolution is based on the premise that
there is a situation in Cyprus which, owing to certain recent
developments, justifies a decision by the Council. We do
not agree with that assessment. There is no crisis in Cyprus,
The only crisis related to the island is the artificial one
created in this chamber and in the adjoining rooms and
corridors during the past three weeks.
57. Thirdly, certain points in the resolution constitute
interference in what are the internal matters of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus until a final settlement of the
problem is reached.
58. Fourthly, by its very terms and implications, the
resolution damages the basis of intercommunal negotiations
under the good offices of the Secretary-General. Some of
its wording is incompatible with any negotiating process at
all.
59. We regret particularly the fact that the Council has
adopted a resolution which can negatively affect the
intercommunal talks. The Turlcish Government has always
considered these negotiations to be the only way which
might lead to an agreed settlement of the Cyprus issue.
Whatever the Creek Cypriots say, the conflict is between
the two communities and they will have to resolve it
between themselves. But, in the circumstances created by
the resolution, a new agreed framework will probably be
required, and this wiI1 be no easy task.
60. 1 wish to add that we in the Turkish delegation have
been distressed by the haughtiness and arrogance of the
Greek Cypriot delegation in its attitude towards the
Turkish Cypriot community. Mr. Christophides has lost no
opportunity to make derogatory and humiliating remarks
about the Turkish Cypriot community. He has constantly
referred to that community as the puppet of Ankara and
alleged that the Turkish Government dictates the Turkish
Cypriot position in the intercommunal negotiations. The
Greek Cypriot representatives know perfectly well that the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus is not dependent on
anyone in its decisions and course of action. Why, then, do
they insist on constantly repeating their false allegations?
Is this a tactic designed to implicate Turkey in every
development in the relations between the two communities,
or can they not bring themselves to consider the Turkish
community as their interlocutor and partner?
61, In any case, this position is contrary to the resolutions
of the Security Council which have called for negotiations
between the two communities under the auspices of the
Secretary-General. It is at the same time incompatible with
the political realities existing in the island. In the short run,
it affects negatively the atmosphereof the intercommunal
talks and, in the long run, it cannot but underminethe
confidence which should exist betweenthe two communitiesif they are to embark on a newventure of partnership,It
inevitably brings back to memory the sadand tragic ordeal
which the Turkish Cypriot community endured for 11
years under the ruthlessGreek monopoly of power which
ended in 1974. Unless the Greek Cypriot community
renouncesits yearning to recreate the past and liberates
itself from the nostalgiaof a bygonetyrannical supremacy,
the chancesof a solution areindeedslim.

just and mutually acceptable solution, and not to engage
in futile political fights in international forums.

ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation
from
The delegation of Panama wishes to place on
record its pleasure at the adoption of resolution
414 (1977). Mr. President, that action crowns the efforts
made with the help of your well-known diplomatic skill,
your dedication and your infinite capacity for understanding, It was made possible by the atmosphere of serenity and
by the consultations initiated by your predecessor, Ambassador Leprette of France, during his presidency. We must
also recognize the indefatigabIe efforts of our colleague and
dear friend Ambassador Jaipal of India, who, by a
magnificent alliance of justice and conciliation, was largely
responsible for the Council’s achieving this, in my view
harmonious, conclusion.

62. Mr.
,S’panish):

“The Turkish Cypriot side has always been and still is in
favour of the intercommunal talks. We hope that, despite
recent developments in the south which have caused a
temporary interruption in the negotiating process, it will
be possible for the talks to resume on a mutually agreed
date in the near future, and it is our ardent hope that this
time they may be more constructive and fruitful.” [Ibid.,
paras. 64 and 65.1
Nobody will dare to deny that this statement is fully in
accordance with the purpose of the Security Council’s
resolution.

63. I should like to state that, in my delegation’s opinion,
resolution 414 (1977) is to be understood as a positive
contribution towards creating the desirable and necessary
atmosphere so that negotiations between the parties may be
resumed and brought to a successful conclusion. That is
why I ventured to speak, because, in spite of the statements
made by the parties, which, in my view, do not cast any
shadow on the quality and effectiveness of the resolution, it
is fitting that we should insist upon the desire of the
Council-and I believe that I am not exaggerating when I
say that it is the desire of all its members without
exception-that the negotiations should be resumed. That is
why paragraph 5 of the resolution, on which we must lay
stress,

67. Our friend Ambassador Tiirkmen of Turkey, speaking
at the same meeting, expressed what is, in my opinion, a
mental or psychological attitude when he said that the
Turkish community wished to avoid a new obstacle to the
resumption of the intercommunal talks, and he added that
that was why they “acted with the utmost restraint and
moderation”. Later in his statement he added:
“Indeed, Mr, Celik also reiterated that the Turkish
community was firmly supporting the mission of good
offices entrusted to the Secretary-General and was ready
for a resumption of the intercommunal talks on a date to
be agreed upon by both communities.” /Ibid., para. 80.1

“Calls on the representatives of the two communities,
under the auspices of the Secretary-General, to resume
negotiations as soon as possible meaningfully and constructively on the basis of comprehensive and concrete
proposals.”

In that statement, Ambassador Tiirkmen expressed his
pleasure at the Turkish Cypriot community’s attitude in its
ardent desire to resume the negotiations. Then he made a
statement which I consider to be of great value, a value that
is in no way lessened by what he said a few minutes ago. It
reads as follows:

The mission of good offices of the Secretary-General is
recognized both by the members of the Council and by the
parties. The Secretary-General has consistently sought to
reconcile all the legal, moral and political factors which
cotne into play in a conflict of this kind.

“The Turkish Government will continue to support
fully the mission of the Secretary-General within its
present framework. We earnestly hope that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General at Nicosia will be
able to pave the way for substantive progress in the next
round of talks.” [Ibid./

64. In closing this debate, it is appropriate to address
ourselves once again to the parties, not only through the
resolution but also by recalling the expressions of goodwill
of those same parties and placing them on record at the
conclusion of the discussion.

68. We are aware of all the domestic political problems
that confront statesmen representing the parties to Ihe
conflict, but since they all refer to negotiations, why not
begin the talks in a frank and sincere manner, under the
auspices of the Secretary-General and with the blessing of
the Council? The framework for these talks, as was stated
by the Foreign Minister of Cyprus, Mr. Christophides, is to
be found in the guidelines laid down for the parties
themselves by the late Archbishop Makarios and Mr. Denkta!, the Turkish-Cypriot leader. Mr. Christophides said the
following:

65. At the first meeting dealing with this question, which
was held on 31 August, Ambassador Papoulias of Greece
said the following:
“It is well known that the intercommunal negotiations
on the problem of Cyprus should lead, inter alia, to a
settlement of the basic question concerning the territorial
aspect, which is linked to the return of the refugees to
their homes.” [202&h meeting, para. 50./

“At their last meeting,” -referring to the last meeting
between President Makarios and Mr. Denktag-“held
on
12 February in the presence of the Secretary-General,
certain guidelines were agreed on, and this was considered
at the time to mark a breakthrough in the intercommunal
talks. It was agreed that the common objective was the
creation of an independent, non-aligned bi-communal
federal State, where fundamental principles such as

66. When the representative of the Turkish Cypriot
community, the distinguished public official, Mr. Celik,
spoke before the Council he said the following-and this is
the thinking of the Turkish Cypriot community:
“Our main aim at this juncture should be to encourage
and foster intercommunal talks with a view to reaching a
6

freedom of movement, freedom of settlement and rights
of property for all Cypriots”--1 stress the words “for all
Cypriots”-“were
to be safeguarded. It was also agreed
that the territory under the administration
of each
community should be discussed in the light of economic
viability or productivity and land ownership, and that the
powers and functions of the central government were to
be such as to safeguard the unity of the country, Those
guidelines were intended to provide the interlocutors with
the terms of reference on the basis of which to negotiate
a political settlement of the constitutional and territorial
aspects of the Cyprus problem, as provided under one of
the provisions of the resolutions on the question of
Cyprus, leaving for implementation by Turkey those
provisions of the resolutions that concern it exclusively
and which include the withdrawal of foreign troops, the
cessation of foreign interference and, consequently, the
return of the refugees to their homes in safety.” [Ibid.,
para. IO.]
69. I should like to conclude by stating to the Council, on
the occasion of the adoption of resolution 414 (1977), that
in view of the positions stated by the parties and,
particularly, the guidelines agreed upon by the President of
the Republic, Mr. Makarios, and the Turkish Cypriot leader,
Mr. Denlctag, a basis exists for constructive negotiations to
be successfully concluded. I believe that the two communities are heirs to the cultural values of two civilizations to
which mankind is greatly indebted. We hope that the
statesmen of our time will live up to their glorious past
traditions.
70. The PRESIDENT: The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cyprus wishes to exercise his riglit of reply and J call on
him.
71. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES
(Cyprus):
A while ago, the
representative of Pakistan referred to the “representative of
the Turkish part of Cyprus” (see above, para. 211. J hope
that that was not said deliberately. I do not have to repeat
here that there is only one Republic of Cyprus, the
territorial integrity of which is guaranteed under the
Charter and the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, for some of which even Pakistan and
Turkey voted. It is true that, as a result of the Turkish
aggression and invasion in 1974, :I part of Cyprus is under
the military occupation of the Turkish armed forces, but

surely even the representative of Pakistan would agree that
this illegal occupation does not make the occupied part of
Cyprus the Turkish part of Cyprus, Therefore I should like
to believe that the reference of the representative of
Pakistan was made in error and not intentional.
72. I shall perhaps be allowed to make also a few brief
remarks on the statement made by the representative of
Turkey. He alleged that I had uttered derogatory remarks
about the Turkish Cypriot community. I should like to
assure the Council that we have nothing against the Turkish
Cypriot community. As we have frequently said, we can
and should live together, if only the Turkish intervention
were to be removed, for I am sure that my Turkish
compatriots feel the weight of the Turkish soldier’s boot as
much as we do.
73. There was a reference by the representative of Turkey
to the effect that decisions are made in Nicosia by the
Turkish Cypriot leadership and not by Ankara. The recent
events of Famagusta illustrate, 1 think, very well that it is
Ankara that makes the decisions in the Turkish-occupied
area of Cyprus. As the Secretary-General has attested, it
was only after Mr. Ecevit, the then Prime Minister of
Turkey, made his statement of 20 July regarding Famagusta
that Mr. Denkta_s started to proceed with steps towards the
colonization of the New Famagusta area, Perhaps 1 may be
allowed to quote what the Secretary-General said:
“On 20 July 1977, Mr. Ecevit, while still Prime Minister
of Turkey, stated that his Government had taken steps to
open Varosha for civilian settlement. He rejected the
impression that Varosha was being reserved for purposes
of territorial concessions through the intercommunal
talks. Mr. Ecevit’s suggestion was endorsed by Mr. Denktag.” /202&h meeting, para. 26.1
So I think that the facts speak for themselves and give a
clear and lucid reply to the question of who makes the
important decisions in the occupied area of Cyprus.
74. With regard to the ‘other remarks made by the
representative of Turkey, I think that the unanimous
adoption of the present resolution and its very provisions
constitute a sufficient reply.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

IJnited
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookslore
or write to: IJnited
Nations.
Salts

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

T,es publications
des Nations
Uniea son1 en vcnta dans lcs librairiea
ot les n~cnrcs
d&ositaires
du monde entier. Intormez-voua
aupr& de votre libraire ou H~~L’~SB~-V~IIS
k : Nations Unies. Section ties ventes. New York ou Gentivo.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

I,as publicaciones
de las Naciones IJnidas eslin en vcnta on lihrerins
y casas distri.
buidoras
en todas partcs del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijasc
a: Nariones
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

-Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-octohcr

1Q78--2X’o
