United Nations

S/PV.6255

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6255th meeting
Wednesday, 6 January 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2009/674)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-20219 (E)

*1020219*

S/PV.6255

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and of
thanks to outgoing members of the Council
The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council this year, I should
like to extend my very warm wishes for a fruitful new
year to all members of the Security Council, the United
Nations and the Secretariat. I wish them every success
in the New Year.
On behalf of the Council, I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the new members: Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria. We
look forward with confidence to their participation in
the work of the Council. Their experience and wisdom
will be of invaluable assistance in the discharge of the
Council’s enormous responsibilities.
I would like to take this opportunity to express the
Council’s deep gratitude to the outgoing members —
Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Viet Nam — for their important
contributions to the Council’s work during their term in
2008 and 2009.

request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and to Mr. Peter Schwaiger, acting head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should also
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Mr. Michel Kafando, Permanent
Representative of Burkina Faso, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
December 2009. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Kafando for the great diplomatic skill
with which he conducted the Council’s business last
month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2009/674)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, Pakistan and Norway, in which they

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Eide to take a seat at the Council
table.
I invite Mr. Schwaiger to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/674, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
offering my warmest greetings for the new year, 2010.
I hope and trust that it will bring greater peace and
serenity, to both the public and private affairs of
peoples and nations around the world.

10-20219

S/PV.6255

I welcome the new members of the Council:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Lebanon, Nigeria and
Gabon. I wish them a fruitful and distinguished tenure
on the Council. I also wish to commend the
contributions made by Burkina Faso, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Viet Nam as
non-permanent members of the Council during the past
two years. Of course, I would like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of China on his assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month.
I welcome this opportunity to brief the Council
on the situation in Afghanistan. Following my remarks,
Special Representative Kai Eide will provide an
update.
Last year was another extremely challenging
period for Afghanistan and for international efforts to
assist the Government and its people. Difficult
elections, deteriorating security and doubts about the
current strategies of both the Government and the
international community all combined to produce
further violence and uncertainty for a country facing
immense challenges.
There can be no doubt that Afghanistan will
remain one of our main priorities in 2010. Let me focus
on two aspects in particular: first, strengthening the
role of the Afghan Government, and secondly,
coordinating international civilian efforts under the
United Nations umbrella.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Development Programme, alongside other international
organizations and bilateral representatives, played an
instrumental role in helping the Afghan authorities to
conduct last year’s presidential and provincial council
elections. The electoral process was problematic, to say
the least. That should have been no surprise, given the
security conditions and institutional limitations.
Still, the elections did produce results that were
ultimately accepted. Preparations for this year’s
parliamentary elections are expected to start soon.
Should the Government ask for United Nations
assistance and if the Security Council agrees, the
United Nations is ready to support the process through
technical assistance and institution-building. More
generally, we hope that the tremendous political energy
released during last year’s elections will now be
directed towards forging a meaningful, realistic and

10-20219

renewed compact between the Afghan Government and
its people.
President Karzai’s inaugural speech was
encouraging. The priorities that he set out reflect the
real issues facing Afghan society: security, good
governance, corruption, national unity and the need to
expand cooperation with the country’s neighbours so as
to address drug trafficking and other cross-border
threats to stability. President Karzai also made an
explicit
commitment
to ensuring measurable
achievements, allowing for the start of a gradual
transfer of responsibilities from international actors to
Afghan institutions, particularly in the field of security.
That is especially important given that conditions
across the country have deteriorated further.
While the violence was caused by a politically
driven insurgency, it has also been exploited by
criminal groups, drug traffickers and others. There
have been increased civilian casualties and greater
risks for UNAMA and other Afghan partners. Efforts
by the Taliban and insurgents to prevent people from
participating in the electoral process have also
destroyed social structures and traditional security
mechanisms.
This insecurity remains the single biggest
impediment to progress. Last year, about three times as
many civilian deaths were attributed to antiGovernment elements as to pro-Government forces.
Most resulted from suicide attacks and improvised
explosive devices used by anti-Government elements
or air strikes by pro-Government forces. The
vulnerability of civilians is a serious issue, with great
implications for the standing of the Government and its
partners in steering the country towards stability and
peace. I urge all parties to do their utmost to uphold
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. All key
players, Afghan and international, have drawn
important lessons from controversial experiences and
missed opportunities. I appeal to both the Afghan
Government and the international community to make
the best possible use of the next few months.
The international community has reaffirmed its
resolve to complete the task of erasing the terrorist
threat. The sharpened strategies demonstrate a clear
understanding that continued pursuit of the same
policies will not lead to success, but if these strategies
are to be implemented in an efficient and timely

3

S/PV.6255

manner, the new Afghan Government must fulfil its
far-reaching pledges. At the same time, the relationship
between Afghanistan and its international partners
must be re-evaluated. Well-prepared international
conferences, both inside and outside Afghanistan, can
help to ensure the sustainability of the international
community’s efforts.
The forthcoming International Conference to be
held in London on 28 January offers an important
opportunity for fresh impetus, both to the international
effort and to that of the newly established Government
in Kabul, to provide greater stability and support to the
security and development needs of Afghanistan. While
external assistance can help, it is for the Afghans to
take ownership of these efforts through strong
commitment and good governance.
I appreciate the initiative taken by the leaders of
the United Kingdom, France and Germany in
convening this meeting. I also commend the important
contribution made by the group of friends of
Afghanistan. In this regard, I welcome the new
approach by United States President Obama that seeks
an optimal balance between military and civilian
efforts, and that would strengthen cooperation with the
United Nations. It is clear that there is a need for
broader and more effective civilian efforts, which will
require much better international coordination.
UNAMA is mandated to lead this coordination,
and Special Representative Kai Eide has suggested
exploring the viability of a dedicated civilian
coordination structure, in consultation with the Afghan
Government and international stakeholders. Ultimately,
however, the main obstacle is not the lack of structures
or even a shortage of resources, although both of these
play a part. Rather, the main problem is a question of
political will. Better coordination based on the strong
political willingness of donor countries and strong
local effort is key to resolving the current situation. We
need strategies that meet the requirements of building
sustainable institutions to deliver services to the
Afghan people and to develop the Afghan economy.
At a time of increasingly challenging security
conditions and a more demanding political
environment, our task is that much more difficult. But
if it is more arduous for us, imagine how it feels to the
average Afghan. Despite the uncertainties, the United
Nations remains firmly committed to supporting the
men and women of Afghanistan in finding the path of

4

stability and peace. We are also committed to ensuring
the safety and security of our local and international
staff in this increasingly dangerous Mission. Their
courage, dedication and, often, outright heroism are an
inspiration to us all.
At this moment, I wish to recall those who have
paid for this service with their lives. We can expect
more terror attacks, and I again ask for the Council’s
full support in doing everything possible to ensure the
well-being of the Mission’s personnel.
Let me close with a word on Special
Representative Kai Eide. His intrepid spirit, strong
determination and selfless dedication have sustained
the Mission during these past critical months. His
contribution will be remembered with gratitude both by
this Organization and the people of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kai Eide. On behalf of the Council, I
would like to express our gratitude to Mr. Eide, who is
today making his last appearance before the Council in
his capacity as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan. We have appreciated
Mr. Eide’s capable leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and his unwavering
approach to this challenging work since he assumed the
post in March 2008. We wish him success in all of his
future endeavours. I now give the floor to Mr. Eide.
Mr. Eide: Let me first express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for being here and for his very kind
words.
On this very day nine years ago, the United
Nations undertook its post-Taliban engagement in
Afghanistan, and I believe that, together, we have
achieved quite a lot in that time in the areas of
education, health, building State institutions and so on.
But I must also say that today, nine years later, I am
worried about negative trends. I am worried about the
growing impatience of public opinion in the donor and
troop-contributing countries. I am worried about
increasing frustration among the Afghan public over
what they see as expectations that have not been met.
And I am worried about the difficulties experienced by
the international and Afghan forces in putting the
insurgency on the defensive. If these negative trends

10-20219

S/PV.6255

are not reversed — and reversed soon — there is a risk
that they, in combination, will become unmanageable.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
political calendar has been set, with the London
Conference to take place in three weeks from now and
the Kabul conference later this year. Now, we have to
get the political agenda right — or rather, quite frankly,
return to the political priorities set in The Hague and in
Paris. We have lost valuable time, especially in the past
six months, when the protracted election process has
diverted energy from pursuing the priorities we had set.
The London Conference will focus mainly on
security issues. On 23 January, the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board in Kabul will decide on the
increase in the police force and on a reform programme
for the police. The London Conference should endorse
those decisions. It should also signal an acceleration of
the training and mentoring of the Army and a gradual
transfer of authority from the international to the
Afghan security forces. That will be the first step in a
new transition strategy that can allow Afghans to be in
charge of their future.
However, as the Secretary-General also pointed
out, this transition strategy must include key civilian
areas and the systematic build-up of civilian
institutions to enable the Government to deliver
services to its people, and the development of the
Afghan economy to enable the Government to pay for
those services when international aid is reduced. If we
do not take these civilian aspects of the transition
strategy as seriously as we do the military, then we will
fail.
What we need is a strategy that is politically and
not militarily driven. For years there has been a
consensus, at least in rhetoric, that this conflict cannot
ultimately be solved by military means. However, most
of our focus has nonetheless been on the number and
activities of military forces. The political strategy is
too often shaped as an appendix to military thinking.
For years there has also been a consensus, at least
in rhetoric, that the process of Afghanization must be
accelerated. However, structures that parallel the
Afghan Government have not been reduced, and
according to the last donor financial review from the
Afghan Government, 80 per cent of aid to Afghanistan
has been provided through bilateral projects, bypassing
the Government. Less than 10 per cent of total aid has
been provided to the Government, but only a quarter of

10-20219

that amount is not earmarked for a specific activity in
the budget. The situation has improved somewhat over
the past year, but only somewhat, and remains
basically the same as I have just indicated. These
figures do not demonstrate a mindset whereby Afghans
are allowed to take the lead.
To me, the London and Kabul conferences
represent critical opportunities to agree on a politically
driven strategy in which Afghan ownership and Afghan
capacity stand at the centre of all our activities. The
military surge must not be allowed to undermine
equally important civilian objectives and the
development of this politically driven strategy. It must
not lead to increased pressure for quick results in
governance and economic development efforts, which
would divert resources from a long-term approach to
civilian institution-building and economic growth.
Furthermore, it must not lead the military to expand its
engagement in key civilian areas such as those I have
mentioned. That could result in a situation where the
international community becomes more entrenched
rather than one where the Afghans are more
empowered.
Let me outline what I see as the components of a
political strategy, some of which I have touched on
before around this table. First of these is a systematic
approach to the building of civilian institutions. This is
not only a question of not appointing corrupt officials,
although anti-corruption will be an important part of
the effort. It is a question of training and education, of
infrastructure and incentives. Soon the Civil Service
Institute in Kabul and 32 provinces will have the
ability to train 16,000 officials in key bureaucratic
skills. At the moment, 1,700 young men and women
from all provinces are being trained as future
administrators in the National Institute for
Management and Administration. Thus, the institutions
exist, but they are fragile and underfunded.
Furthermore, we need attractive incentives to
ensure that young people who are trained by the
Government also go to work for the Government, and
that young people who come from the provinces and
districts return to the provinces and districts. Today, a
district governor earns $70 a month. Half of them have
no dedicated office, and they normally have an
operating budget of $15 per month. It will cost
hundreds of millions of dollars to implement an
ambitious institution-building programme, but it is the
best investment we can make in Afghanistan’s future.

5

S/PV.6255

Today, the Government lacks the delivery mechanisms
in terms of substantive national institutions able to
provide services. Our main challenge must be to
develop these tools and to expand the reach of the
Government, instead of continuing to rely on parallel
international structures that one day will be withdrawn.
Secondly, as to human resource development, the
education system is seriously unbalanced, as I think I
have also mentioned. I think I mentioned before that,
today, the number of young girls and boys in primary
school is 7 million, but there is room for only 60,000
of them in universities and 20,000 in vocational
education. These are serious imbalances, and we must
all take our share of the responsibility to correct them,
because it is important for the development of
Afghanistan’s economy.
Thirdly, the critical sector of agriculture
continues to be seriously underfunded, in spite of the
fact that at least 80 per cent of the population is
dependent on that sector, and in spite of the fact that it
was identified as a key priority in The Hague and,
before that, in Paris. Some even say that, in light of its
impact on poverty reduction, job creation and revenue
collection, the development of agriculture will decide
whether the country fails or succeeds.
Fourthly, infrastructure remains a neglected
sector in spite of rich mineral resources that could be
exploited, provide huge income and employ tens and
perhaps hundreds of thousands of people. The country
has Asia’s largest iron ore deposits and a number of
other exploitable minerals. The United Nations and the
Government have together identified transportation
networks and energy supplies as top priorities for
starting mining projects that would provide real
economic growth.
And, finally, a peace and reconciliation process
must be launched and become an integrated part of the
political agenda. It must be based on the Constitution
and be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led; and if the
insurgency were to agree to join a peace process, that
would significantly enhance the prospect of troop
withdrawals. However, by joining a peace process, the
insurgents must also distance themselves from the past
and embrace the future, as well as the progress that has
been achieved over the past few years. I have said
before that I am ready to meet anybody, anywhere, if it
can serve the purpose of peace. I believe that is the role
of the United Nations whenever the Afghan

6

Government seeks our support, and within the
framework of our mandate.
So these are, in my view, the key components of
the political agenda. The London Conference can
endorse a number of decisions, particularly in the
security sector. In other areas, the London Conference
should provide a road map for the time between
London and Kabul so that, at the Kabul Conference, we
can aim at having fundable projects ready in order to
give momentum to the strategy of transition and
contribute to turning the current negative trends
around.
With these challenges ahead of us, it is important
for all, and first of all the Afghan people, that a strong
and reform-oriented Government be put in place
without further delay. The parliament’s rejection of
17 candidates last week was a setback because it
prolongs a situation where Afghanistan is without an
established and functioning Government. This is
particularly serious, of course, in a country in conflict,
with so many challenges that need to be urgently
addressed. At the same time, of course, parliament
demonstrated that it is far from a rubber-stamping
body. Soon the President will present new candidates,
and it is my strong hope that parliament will then be
able to consider those candidates as quickly as
possible.
The
Secretary-General
mentioned
further
improved coordination mechanisms, which are
important. There has been some political progress over
the last few years. I believe the international
community speaks with one voice in important
political matters. The Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board reforms that the United Nations
initiated in 2008 have yielded a more effective
coordination mechanism. Together with the Afghan
Government, we have also been able to identify key
priorities more clearly and develop critical initiatives
in areas such as agriculture and capacity-building.
The next challenge is to align donor resources
behind these priorities, and there are some positive and
promising signs that this is actually happening. But we
need stronger coordination instruments. I have
therefore, with the Minister of Finance, put together
proposals that we believe will be an important step
forward.
These proposals are based on a continued United
Nations coordination umbrella, with all of us working

10-20219

S/PV.6255

more closely under Afghan leadership. This plan will
integrate officials of key donors into UNAMA’s
coordination structures, thereby ensuring that we are
constantly plugged into donors’ planning processes and
can influence them at an early stage. However, these
efforts must also be accompanied by greater efforts
within the International Security Assistance Force to
bring provincial reconstruction teams in line with
Government plans and gradually transfer civilian
projects carried out within the framework of military
institutions to civilian structures.

In terms of reform, the President has expressed
his intention to Afghanize the election process. I would
support that position — as long as it results in elections
that are considered to be fair and impartial by the
Afghan public. During the last elections there was
widespread fraud, which demonstrated the weakness of
electoral institutions and a difficult security situation.
There was also a perception of international
interference, which I will say undoubtedly also
occurred, before and after election day. Both must be
eliminated in future electoral processes.

This coordination must now have a nationwide
perspective. I have repeatedly — boring some, both
here and in the capitals — emphasized the importance
of not concentrating resources only in the south and the
east, but also investing in the centre and the north of
the country. That has not happened, however. Before
leaving for New York, I asked a number of prominent
Afghan politicians why the insurgency has spread over
the last few years. There is no simple answer, but one
element mentioned by all was the neglect of stable
provinces in the allocation of development resources.
For that neglect, we now have to pay a high price.

Let me add a few words about the presidential
elections that are now behind us. The SecretaryGeneral’s report explains in some detail the approach
that we took. But I want to emphasize here and now
how fragile the political situation was in the aftermath
of the first round. Significant economic resources left
the country in anticipation of political instability. The
number of visa applications rose dramatically for the
same reason. The possibility of serious instability and
violence was avoided through a careful handling of the
process until the very last minute. The international
community stood together, I must say, under United
Nations leadership, and the Afghan political actors
behaved responsibly and with respect for the
Constitution. Those were important achievements and
must not be underestimated.

However, with regard to coordination, I should
add that there are limitations. With hundreds of donors,
agencies and non-governmental organizations, there
are limitations in Afghanistan, as there would be in any
other country. Any institution, including the United
Nations, can go only so far in successfully coordinating
all actors.
The Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) has
announced that elections for the next parliament will
take place on 22 May, in accordance with the
Constitution. I certainly cannot criticize the IEC or any
of the prominent politicians who were consulted for
respecting the Constitution, which represents the
foundation for all orderly political activity. There are
technical reasons that will make it challenging to keep
this timeline. Security remains a major concern, and
the presidential elections demonstrated a need for
reform of electoral institutions.
Article 55 of the electoral law gives the IEC the
right to postpone elections on the basis of security,
financial or technical considerations. Should Afghan
authorities make use of that provision, then elections
could be held later in the year, but in a way that still
respects the Afghan legal system.

10-20219

Finally, since this meeting is my last before the
Council, I think it is important for me to emphasize a
fundamental aspect of our international approach to
Afghanistan. There is a tendency in the international
community to shape strategies, make decisions and
operate on the ground in a way that Afghans perceive
as disrespectful and sometimes arrogant. Afghans do
sometimes feel that their country is treated as a noman’s land and not as a sovereign State. That
perception contributes to unnecessary and dangerous
tensions between the Afghan Government and the
international community. It fuels suspicions of
unacceptable foreign interference and breeds a sense of
humiliation. I cannot emphasize strongly enough the
need to bring this phenomenon to an end.
Military activities, civilian casualties, house
searches and detention policies are sources of
recruitment for the insurgency. In the Afghan context,
what affects one individual in a village affects
everyone there. I am pleased to see General
МcChrystal’s efforts to reduce the number of such
incidents and to demonstrate greater respect for Afghan

7

S/PV.6255

sensitivities. The military surge will certainly make
that challenge even more difficult. However, whether
we are military or civilian, we must better understand
the Afghan context and Afghan society. Even among
ordinary Afghans who want our presence — and they
are the majority — there are many who resent what
they see as disrespect for their religion, their culture
and their values. Success in our long-term partnership
will depend on consulting more, listening more and
demonstrating greater understanding for a society that
needs our assistance but also demands our respect. We
have to learn the pulse of Afghan society, which is very
different from our own.
UNAМA has been through some difficult months.
UNAMA’s staff consists of dedicated, knowledgeable
and brave people. The terrible attack against the
Bakhtar guest house was traumatic and illustrated that
the United Nations is today more a target of attacks.
But it also demonstrated the strength and solidarity of
those who work for the United Nations in Afghanistan.
Every effort is being undertaken to ensure that we can
all continue our work, with safety and security for
United Nations staff. I am grateful for the support of
the Secretary-General and Member States in that
respect.
At the same time, we are facing a crisis in
recruitment that jeopardizes the future of the Mission.
When I took over UNAМA in March 2008, its vacancy
rate stood at 30 per cent. Ву working with the
Department of Field Support we were able to reduce
that rate to 12 per cent, which is very, very good.
Unfortunately, I have no such good news at this
juncture. The number of staff members who left the
Mission in the last six months of 2009 stands at 50,
mainly due to security concerns and understandable
fatigue. The number of staff members who have been
hired by UNАМА during the same time period is five.
The vacancy rate at the end of last year was around
25 per cent. On top of that come the new posts
provided through the 2010 budget, which will push the
vacancy rate even higher.
The new recruitment system put in place in July
2009 simply has not worked. In many cases it does not
offer the kind of staff that UNАМА needs. In every
case it has been far too slow. All vacancy
announcements have been closed, meaning that people
who have recently become interested in coming to
Afghanistan are not able to apply. This is, in my view,
a result of systemic flaws that affect not only UNAMA,

8

but all peacekeeping missions and special political
missions and, if not corrected, will threaten their
effectiveness and possibly even worse.
This is, as you said, Sir, my last briefing as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan. I have set out a political agenda that I
believe is required to turn around the current negative
trends. I am convinced that these trends can be turned
around and that the conflict can be brought to an end in
a way that serves the Afghan people and stability in a
wider sense. But that will require discipline by all,
constant efforts to give Afghans more of the
responsibility for their own country and a commitment
to a long-term partnership with the people who will
continue to need our support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to first
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
thank you for convening this first debate of the new
year.
As we are beginning a new year, I would also like
to welcome the new members of the Council. Let me
take a moment to thank Japan for its work in 2009 as a
lead country for the issue of Afghanistan in the
Security Council and to welcome Turkey to that role in
2010. I look forward to working closely with them this
year.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his presence in the Council and his remarks today
and for his most recent report on Afghanistan
(S/2009/674), and in particular for making Afghanistan
one of his priorities and for the personal attention he
has dedicated to Afghanistan in past months. Further,
especially in the face of the tragedy of 28 October
2009, I would like to thank the United Nations and all
of its entities, including this body, for the substantial
and invaluable aid that has been extended to the
Afghan people in past decades.
In addition, as this is the last appearance of
Mr. Eide in this Council in his capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, let me offer
him my own heartfelt thanks and the sincere gratitude
of the people and Government of Afghanistan. He has
shown tremendous dedication to the cause of peace and
stability in Afghanistan and has displayed ingenuity

10-20219

S/PV.6255

and persistence under extremely
challenging
circumstances. He has pushed for a stronger United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and for practical steps towards real progress in
Afghanistan. Perhaps most importantly, he has
consistently worked — most recently during the
elections — for closer cooperation and better
understanding between all parties in and outside of
Afghanistan. We thank him.
With the conclusion of the presidential
elections — an important but difficult milestone —
Afghanistan has reached a new beginning, defined by a
five-year mandate to bring Afghans closer to taking
control of their own future. In his inaugural address,
President Karzai outlined his plan to fulfil that
mandate. He committed himself and his Administration
to peace, to the physical and economic security of the
Afghan people, to national participation and
reconciliation, to good governance and to the fight
against corruption.
Most importantly, we all share the same ultimate
goal: to prepare and empower Afghans to take charge
of their own destinies. In the next five years, the
central goal of the Afghan Government will be
preparing for the transition to full Afghan rule by
strengthening Afghanistan’s sovereignty and national
ownership. We aim to consolidate national authority
and improve the Government’s capacity and
institutions. We call upon the international community
to ensure that every action taken in Afghanistan is in
support of those efforts.
The formation of a new Afghan Government is an
important first step in this new beginning. After the
parliament’s rejection of some of the ministerial
nominees, the President is preparing to introduce new
candidates and has instructed parliament to finalize
their votes of confidence before they recess for the
winter. We are eager to avoid any delay in the
formation of the Government and any vacuum in
management that could be counterproductive for
Afghanistan at such a delicate time.
Next, the Afghan Government and the
international community must look together at the
challenges facing us and forge a compact that clearly
identifies our strategies and responsibilities. On
28 January, a conference will be held in London,
chaired jointly by President Karzai, Prime Minister
Brown and the Secretary-General. That conference will

10-20219

be followed closely by a second in Kabul. The London
Conference will prepare a road map — as Mr. Eide just
put it — for future efforts, which will be transformed
into a detailed action plan in Kabul, possibly in March.
In London, focus will be directed towards security and
the Afghanization of security and defence, social and
economic development, good governance and
international and regional cooperation. For each of
those areas, we will need to clearly define the
respective roles of the Afghan Government and the
international community.
Afghans are ready to take responsibility for
securing our people and defending ourselves against
our enemies. In three years’ time, the Afghan National
Security Forces will assume responsibility for security
and defence in conflict areas in the south and east of
Afghanistan. In five years, with the necessary training,
equipment and long-term resources from the
international community, we will assume full
responsibility for security and defence across the entire
country. The international forces will be able to
transition simultaneously to a role focused on training
and enabling local forces.
However, there is a general consensus that peace
and stability in Afghanistan cannot be reached through
purely military means. As a result, the Government of
Afghanistan has always been, and remains, committed
to reconciliation and the integration of former
combatants into all levels of Afghanistan’s civilian and
security structures. Afghanistan’s Government has
opened its door to all Afghans willing to participate in
the stabilization and reconstruction of their country, in
line with the Afghan Constitution and with respect for
human rights.
But while reconciliation is an Afghan-led effort,
it cannot be achieved by the Afghan Government alone.
We ask this Council to conduct a review of the
consolidated list established under resolution 1267
(1999) with a view to possibly removing from the
sanctions list, upon request by the Afghan Government,
elements of the Taliban willing to renounce violence
and join the peace process.
Afghans continue to face crippling poverty and
widespread unemployment, and their trust is wearing
thin. Social and economic development and good
governance
remain
important
priorities
for
Afghanistan. However, it cannot sustain those efforts
without the continued assistance of its international

9

S/PV.6255

partners. The London Conference will be an
opportunity for the Government of Afghanistan and
international friends to coordinate their development
and capacity-building efforts so that Afghanistan may
eventually mobilize its resources, generate income and
jobs for its people and begin to support its institutions.
As the Secretary-General concluded in his report,
reinforced efforts towards coordination of donor aid
and civilian and military strategies are vital for our
efforts in Afghanistan. Afghanistan supports the central
coordinating role of UNAMA, as mandated by this
Council. We should discuss further what shape any
additional mechanisms might take and how they would
relate to the relevant actors. Crucially, any focus on
coordination must strengthen Afghan institutions and
encourage Afghan national ownership, rather than
promoting parallel governance structures.
Afghanistan is fast approaching its parliamentary
elections, which will occur at the end of May, as
required by the Constitution. We must ensure a credible
process. In that regard, the lessons learned from last
year’s elections will be important. We feel that any
suggestion that the elections be postponed ignores
constitutional requirements and will damage the
integrity of the process. The rule of law must be
maintained, even as that law evolves to reflect lessons
learned.
In conclusion, a true partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community is
important for success in Afghanistan. That partnership
will require realism — about timing, about resources
and about abilities — and a clear understanding of our
roles and responsibilities. Most important, that
partnership should be based on supporting and
encouraging strong Afghan national ownership, in
particular as we seek to transfer security and defence
responsibilities. Afghanization and the promotion of
Afghan capacity and leadership must be the ultimate
aim of all of our activities and the central consideration
during discussions going forward.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): As this is the first open
meeting of the Council this month, I wish to
congratulate the Permanent Mission of China and you
yourself, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of January. I would also like
to welcome to the Council the five newly elected

10

members, while at the same time paying tribute to the
five former members for successfully completing their
terms on the Council. I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/674) and his Special Representative, Mr. Kai
Eide, for his informative and frank briefing. We join
the Secretary-General and you, Mr. President, in
recognizing Mr. Eide’s excellent service in
Afghanistan. I would also like to welcome Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the Council.
We would like to commend the report of the
Secretary-General, which provides a comprehensive
outlook. We also agree with the report’s content and
observations. This meeting is taking place at a time
when many developments are unfolding with regard to
Afghanistan. We would therefore like to give Turkey’s
views concerning the situation in Afghanistan. I will
limit my remarks to three main areas: international
developments and the strengthening of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
regional developments and the parliamentary elections.
First, it is a welcome development that the
international community is widely discussing
developments in Afghanistan. While doing so — as has
been clearly expressed by Mr. Eide — we should
design our priorities in cooperation with the Afghan
Administration. Turkey believes that there is a need for
a comprehensive approach. This should include
security, governance, the rule of law, human rights and
social and economic development. But it should not be
limited to military means alone. In addition, four areas
need special attention: comprehensive economic
development, strong and well-trained Afghan military
and police, inclusive national reconciliation and a
modern education and justice system to effectively
combat extremism. In other words, a political and
economic action plan is needed.
As suggested in the report, the role of UNAMA
should be strengthened in order to better serve the
Afghan people. The new role should be designed
jointly with the Afghan Administration. On the other
hand, security threats against the United Nations are
increasing. This is the first time that the United Nations
has been targeted so deliberately. However, those
terrorist attacks should not deter us. They should only
strengthen our determination to assist the Afghan
people. The continuation of a strong United Nations
presence is of the utmost importance. We should

10-20219

S/PV.6255

therefore all support the Secretary-General in his
efforts to that end.
Secondly, we think that regional ownership could
be a key to success in Afghanistan. While there are
several international developments unfolding regarding
Afghanistan,
regional
cooperation
should
be
encouraged as well. From that perspective, in 2007,
Turkey initiated the Turkey-Afghanistan-Pakistan
trilateral summit process. The fourth trilateral summit
will take place in Turkey on 24 January, with a focus
on education.
Similarly, we will also host a regional summit on
26 January with the participation of the neighbours of
Afghanistan and some observers, so that those
attending the London Conference on 28 January —
where regional cooperation will be one of the topics to
be discussed — can bring with them regional input.
The regional summit will aim to address challenges
that are common to countries of the region, as well as
to enhance regional dialogue. We will also host the
fourth Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan in Turkey in 2010.
Thirdly, I would like to reiterate our views with
regard to elections. We believe that the new
Administration should embrace the whole nation
following the presidential elections. It should refocus
on national unity and reconstruction efforts as soon as
possible. It should reach out to all ethnic groups
through inclusive policies. On the other hand, all who
competed against President Karzai in the elections
should offer their support to the new Administration. In
our opinion, what Afghanistan needs now is to
strengthen democratic values and an efficient State
mechanism to combat several problems, including
misconduct. In democracies, parliaments stand for
those two elements.
Along the same lines, it would be quite preferable
for the parliamentary elections be held in 2010, as
foreseen in the Afghan Constitution. If there is need for
improvement in some procedures, these could, and
should, be realized. But since the international
community is defending the rule of law, it is hard to
explain the postponement of the elections. They may
be delayed for some time, but not for a long time. The
elections should be seen as a tool, but not as an
obstacle: a tool to encourage different groups to join in
national reconciliation and national unity.

10-20219

Finally, we would like to reiterate that, in
addition to our diplomatic efforts, Turkey will continue
its contribution in Afghanistan in the period ahead, in
cooperation with the United Nations. We are also the
lead country on Afghanistan in the Council for this
year.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council as we
begin a new year. I reiterate our great confidence in
your wisdom and experience.
I should also like to take this opportunity, as I
make my first statement on behalf of Lebanon as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, to
reaffirm my country’s commitment to work to promote
the principles and provisions of international law and
mutual respect and equality among States. I also
reaffirm that, thanks to its unique experience, Lebanon
is fully aware of the importance of the values of
diversity, tolerance and solidarity. Through our
presence in the Council, we hope to contribute to
answering the call for dialogue and understanding
among cultures and civilizations and for a more
democratic and just world.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2009/674), as well as for his presence among us
today. I would like also to thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his efforts and his comprehensive
briefing today. I also thank him for the important
conclusions he has drawn, and in particular for his
focus on the central importance of the political process.
I wish him every success in his future endeavours.
Lebanon would like to underscore the
fundamental role played by the United Nations in
Afghanistan in helping that country to secure the basis
for its sovereignty, independence and national unity.
Lebanon welcomes the pivotal role UNAMA
played in coordinating international efforts aiming to
allow the Afghan people to progressively become the
masters of their destiny. The holding of presidential
elections in Afghanistan was a test and a challenge for
the international community and for Afghanistan’s
constitutional institutions. This issue was a subject of
great controversy and revealed flaws that must be

11

S/PV.6255

corrected. However, the process did lead to results that
could be developed in order to consolidate the
principles of democracy and the rule of law.
Lebanon welcomes the ratification by the Afghan
parliament of a number of laws with respect to human
rights and to combating terrorism. Moreover, the
adoption of the draft law on the elimination of violence
against women will be an additional step forward.
However, the delays in forming the Afghan
Government have had a negative impact on developing
governmental programmes and the delivery and
distribution of aid. Lebanon is very concerned by the
deterioration of the security situation during the period
covered by the report, due to the fact that there were
1,244 incidents, on average, per month, not to mention
that there is not much hope of improvement of the
security situation now, at the beginning of the year.
Lebanon condemns terrorist attacks against
international forces and Afghan forces and civilians, in
particular the 28 October attack on United Nations
officials. We are also concerned by the continuing
growing of opium poppies in a number of regions,
according to the report, which is due to instability and
lack of security. It is particularly alarming, because the
danger of illicit drug trafficking is being exacerbated
by its close links with the financing of terrorist acts.
The implications of that are tragic for Afghanistan and
for the outside world.
We are encouraged by the determination of the
United Nations, as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral, to continue its mission in Afghanistan without
being deterred by terrorist acts. We also welcome the
measures taken by the Afghan Government and its
partners, which are noted in the report, with a view to
minimizing the impact of military operations on
civilians.
Lebanon calls for continuing reinforcement of the
Afghan army and National Police and intensifying
local and international efforts to train and to expand
the staff of those forces, while giving them the
necessary equipment and material to develop their
capacity to maintain security and law and order.
Lebanon also favours the International Conference on
Afghanistan to be held in London in January to
reinforce efforts to improve security and to establish
civilian institutions and to focus on economic
development.

12

Lebanon would like to emphasize the importance
of an integrated approach to the security situation in
Afghanistan, as provided for in resolution 1868 (2009),
particularly because of the close links between security
and stability on the one hand, and the implementation
of prosperity and sustainable development, on the
other. Military and security operations will not be
sufficient in themselves to yield the desired results.
Lebanon reaffirms the need to confront the underlying
causes of the crisis in Afghanistan and to work towards
national reconciliation and to integrate broader
categories of the Afghan population into the political
process, which, in our view, is central and of utmost
priority and importance.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. 1 would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his insightful report on the situation in Afghanistan,
and Special Representative Kai Eide for his thorough
briefing. 1 wish in particular to thank and to commend
the committed personnel of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who
have recently suffered grievous losses in the
performance of their duties. Bosnia and Herzegovina
would like to express its deepest sympathies to their
families and to their countries.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has aligned itself with
the statement of the European Union, in addition to my
statement.
Our country deplores the brutal attacks and the
current critical security situation in Afghanistan. The
increase in both the scale and the scope of the violence
since the Secretary-General’s last report is alarming.
The upsurge in civilian and military casualties and the
spread of violence into hitherto peaceful areas are
especially worrying. We are aware that this is a critical
conjuncture for peace and security in Afghanistan.
Moreover, the flaws of last year’s presidential
elections provoked grave concern. It is encouraging,
however, that that serious matter was also addressed
through Afghan institutions. Bosnia and Herzegovina
welcomes UNAMA’s efforts to strengthen independent
Afghan institutions such as the Electoral Complaints
Commission. Stemming from our own experience,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the belief that building
such institutions is quintessential for the practice of

10-20219

S/PV.6255

democracy. We appreciate the intense diplomatic
endeavours that helped resolve an acute political crisis,
which resonated well beyond Afghan borders.
In view of the forthcoming parliamentary
elections, we believe that holding elections is essential
as the ultimate expression of democracy. So too is the
probity of the electoral process, which confers
legitimacy on the results. Therefore, Bosnia and
Herzegovina strongly encourages the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community to
foresee and forestall weaknesses in that electoral
process.
With those considerations in mind, we share with
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative a
distinct sense of urgency regarding the coordination of
the international effort in Afghanistan. We support
closer coordination between civilian and military
efforts in building peace and security. Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes the Secretary-General’s call to
link that coordination effort with the Afghan
Government, which will ultimately bear responsibility
for peace and security. Therefore we endorse the
suggestion of a civilian structure that embraces all
stakeholders and is co-chaired by an Afghan minister
and the Secretary-General’s Special Representative.
In coming months, we look forward to
participating in the discussions regarding strengthening
of UNAMA.
We concur that the enhancement of Afghan law
enforcement and security agencies is vital for the
strategy for transition to domestically maintained
stability. The projected increase in the training and
numbers of police and army personnel is a prerequisite
for that transition. It may be further advanced by the
Community Defence Initiative’s promise of nimble
security forces with local knowledge. We believe that
the development of a transparent institutional
framework to coordinate the security agencies could
only increase their effectiveness. For such security
reforms to reap their greatest harvest, an Afghan-led
national reconciliation process will be significant.
Bosnia and Herzegovina feels particular empathy
for the problems faced by the quarter of a million
displaced persons inside Afghanistan and for the plight
of the refugees who returned in markedly lower
numbers in 2009. The solution to their displacement is
an integral part of long-term stability for Afghanistan.

10-20219

Against that sober backdrop, it is important to
recognize the positive developments of the last three
months. We applaud the draft law on the elimination of
violence against women currently under consideration
by the parliament. The provincial council elections
drew an appreciable turnout, further evincing the
Afghan people’s strong desire for democracy and
peace. An intensive diplomatic effort averted a
constitutional crisis, and a busy schedule of meetings
in the coming months, including the London
Conference, augurs well for the advance of peace and
security in Afghanistan. Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to support such advances with all means at its
disposal.
In conclusion, we would like to recognize once
more the significance of the work of UNAMA’s
personnel and would like to stress the vital importance
of ensuring their safety. We also thank Mr. Eide for his
service and wish him best of luck for the future.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): Mr. President, let me also
warmly welcome, on behalf of Austria, the newly
elected Security Council members — Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria —
and pay tribute to those countries that completed their
term at the end of 2009. I should like to express our
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Burkina Faso, Ambassador Kafando, for the great
diplomatic skill with which he presided the Council
last month and to congratulate Ambassador Zhang
Yesui on the assumption of the presidency for this
month.
On the issue of the day — Afghanistan — I wish
to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Eide, for their statements and for
their great personal commitment. Let me also thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Tanin, for his statement.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the European Union (EU)
delegation on behalf of the European Union.
When the Council met to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan in September 2009, Afghanistan was in
the midst of a deep political crisis in the wake of last
summer’s elections. It is due both to the democratic
responsibility displayed by stakeholders in Afghanistan
and to the efforts of the international community that
the immediate crisis could be overcome. We now need

13

S/PV.6255

to refocus attention on the requirements of building a
better future for the people of Afghanistan.
At the same time, it must be ensured that last
year’s course of events does not repeat itself. Lessons
need to be learned in order to improve the process for
the parliamentary and district council elections
scheduled for May this year. The recommendations
made by observation missions, such as the EU election
observation mission, as well as the findings by the
experts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, should be taken into account.
In view of the imminence of the 2010 elections, the
final report of the EU mission can provide valuable
guidance. It highlights a number of measures that, in
the view of the mission’s experts, could be
implemented within a short time frame in order to
address the most urgent concerns.
In order to tackle the many challenges, all
political stakeholders in Afghanistan must work
together in a constructive spirit for the benefit of the
country. We welcome the priorities set out by President
Karzai, as well as the commitments made in his
inauguration speech last November. That was an
important first step towards rebuilding trust and
confidence.
A clear agenda and strategies for institutionbuilding and economic development must be developed
for the endorsement and support of the international
community at the London Conference. A new joint
framework for the implementation of the Government’s
priorities must include concrete benchmarks and
timelines. The people of Afghanistan need to see
tangible progress soon. That has to include improved
governance, accountability and institutional reform, as
well as a more effective rule of law, including human
rights, particularly women’s rights.
Improvements on the ground should be seen to be
delivered increasingly by the Afghan authorities and
institutions. The Secretary-General’s emphasis on
capacity-building rather than substituting for local
capacity is the right approach in order to enhance
Afghan ownership and responsibility. In that respect,
we would like to commend the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission for its efforts in monitoring
and
implementing
human
rights
throughout
Afghanistan.
We
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
assessment that there is a need for a reinforced

14

international coordination structure in Afghanistan in
order to increase the impact of the peacebuilding and
development efforts. The coordination role of the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will be vital for the success of international
civilian activities. Austria therefore fully supports the
planned expansion and strengthening of UNAMA,
which should further enhance its effectiveness and its
ability to operate in the provinces.
The improvement of the security situation in
Afghanistan remains one of the biggest challenges. The
reported increase in attacks against the aid community
is extremely worrying and constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law. We are equally
concerned over the insurgents’ total disregard for the
lives of Afghan civilians. International humanitarian
and human rights law must be observed by all parties
at all times. Violations must be thoroughly investigated
and those responsible must be held to account. The
new approach of the International Security Assistance
Force, which places the protection of the Afghan
population as the highest priority and includes a closer
operational partnership with the Afghan National
Security Forces, has our full support.
We recognize the extremely difficult conditions
under which the United Nations is operating in
Afghanistan, which were highlighted by the attacks
against the United Nations guest house in Kabul last
October. We welcome the safety and security measures
taken in response to the rising threat against United
Nations personnel and premises. At the same time, we
fully agree with the Secretary-General that the United
Nations cannot and must not be deterred by such acts
of violence and needs to carry its important mission
forward. I wish to salute here the great courage and
commitment of all the United Nations staff operating in
Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s current security situation is also
closely linked to other factors, as set out in the recent
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) on addiction, crime and insurgency,
which reveals the links between drugs, crime and
regional insurgency in Afghanistan. The fight against
drugs intensified in 2009, prompted by UNODC’s
triangular initiative, and opium production could be
reduced significantly in certain parts of the country.
However, Austria is convinced that in order to further
improve the situation and to turn the tide on opium

10-20219

S/PV.6255

cultivation in other areas as well, such as Badghis and
Kandahar Provinces, our continued support is needed.
In conclusion, let me stress that the current
mandate of UNAMA, as defined in resolution 1868
(2009), has been a sound basis for the Mission’s work
but will have to be refocused in the light of the results
of the London and Kabul conferences, as well as
through further guidance by the Security Council. We
would like also to encourage UNAMA to continue
pursuing a results-based approach in its reporting by
refining the benchmarks and indicators of progress put
forward last September and by adjusting them to the
priorities of the new Afghan Government. Our
objective must be to facilitate the gradual transfer of
authority and responsibility to the Afghan authorities
and to assist them in their efforts towards security,
stability and prosperity.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me first of all to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of January. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Kafando of Burkina Faso for the
loyalty and effectiveness with which he guided the
Council’s work during the month of December 2009.
We appreciate the importance of the task
entrusted to Gabon and would like to assure all
members of the Security Council of our full readiness
to cooperate effectively in the Council’s work. Indeed,
it is a tremendous privilege for us to take part in the
work of the Security Council as one of the
non-permanent African members. I therefore take this
opportunity to thank all Council members for the very
warm welcome extended to our delegation. Our thanks
also go to thank the Secretary-General and to the
Secretariat team for their availability.
Before turning to the fundamental issues
addressed in the report (S/2009/674), I would like to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, for
the very comprehensive presentation of that report.
The situation in Afghanistan is of the greatest
concern to my country because of solidarity with the
Afghan people, but also owing to its implications for
and its impact on international peace and security. We
fully support the efforts made by the Afghan
Government, with the support of the international
community, in the areas of security, particularly the
fight against terrorism, and the strengthening of

10-20219

democracy and development in Afghanistan. That
active cooperation enabled the Afghan Government to
hold presidential elections on 20 August 2009 in a
particularly
difficult
political
and
security
environment.
While it must be recognized that despite all those
efforts, the situation on the ground remains of concern,
nonetheless the current initiatives for peace and
development in Afghanistan bear out our vision of a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan. The new strategy
seeking to reconcile military intervention and
development assistance in the country is, in our view, a
decisive factor in the stabilization process in
Afghanistan.
In fact, the military approach alone is not
sufficient. It is essential that it be accompanied by
development activities, such as building schools and
clinics, agricultural development and the ongoing
emancipation of Afghan women. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the decision of the Afghan
parliament to endorse the law on the elimination of
violence by criminalizing sexual violence. That
significant
advance
deserves
the
Council’s
encouragement and the support of the United Nations
system, not only to facilitate the adoption of that draft
law but also to assure its full implementation.
We welcome the activities of the international
community to that end, and in particular the
commitment of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan to the country’s reconstruction process,
despite ongoing threats to the security of its personnel
on the ground. We pay tribute here to United Nations
personnel and humanitarian workers for their heroic
service, sometimes at the risk of their lives.
We urge the international community to continue
to support the Afghan Government in its efforts to
promote the country’s political, economic and
sustainable development, with the ultimate goal of
allowing Afghan men and women to assume ownership
of their destiny and to write with their own hands the
pages of Afghanistan’s story as a stable and prosperous
country.
The International Conference on Afghanistan, to
be held at the end of the month in London upon the
initiative of France, Germany the United Kingdom,
will offer the international community a new
opportunity to make a comprehensive assessment of
the political, economic, social and humanitarian

15

S/PV.6255

situation in Afghanistan. The situation in Afghanistan
remains grave and of concern. It goes without saying
that greater solidarity in the renewed efforts of the
international community will be key to fully restoring
stability and security in that country.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for
introducing his latest report (S/2009/674) on the
situation in Afghanistan. We also thank his Special
Representative, Mr. Eide, for his assessments. We
commend his work as head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and wish him
success in his future endeavours.
We share the Secretary-General’s view that the
complex electoral process in Afghanistan resulted in an
important outcome that satisfies the Afghan people
themselves and fully meets the requirements of Afghan
law. We trust that the formation of a new, effective
Government for the country will be completed in
accordance with constitutional procedures.
Regrettably, we must note that, in spite of the
efforts of the Afghan authorities and the international
presences, the security situation continues to
deteriorate. Violence has reached unprecedented levels
in the country, and the situation in the previously calm
northern provinces is worsening. In that connection, it
is bewildering that the report makes practically no
direct reference to the main source of the threat to the
security of Afghanistan and the entire region — the
activities of the Taliban and Al-Qaida. We believe that
we must dispense with euphemisms in this regard.
We support the goal of national reconciliation in
Afghanistan, although that process should not
prejudice the achievement of long-term stability in the
country or contravene relevant decisions of the
Security Council, including with respect to the
effective implementation of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime. The possibility of reaching
agreement with the leaders of the Taliban and other
terrorist and extremist organizations cannot be
seriously envisaged. Dialogue is possible only with
those who have laid down their weapons, recognized
the Government and Constitution of Afghanistan, and
broken their ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist
structures.
The situation of drug production and trafficking
remains of particular concern. The global scale of the
Afghan drug threat requires more decisive action and a

16

new level of international cooperation. In that context,
we trust that NATO troops in Afghanistan will
cooperate more actively with the Afghan Government
and establish cooperation with the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), which has undertaken
effective anti-drug operations along the external
perimeter of Afghanistan’s borders for several years.
There is also a need for more resolute action to curb
the trade in precursors, which enter Afghanistan from
Europe, inter alia, and without which it is impossible to
produce heroin.
We believe that the 28 January International
Conference on Afghanistan in London will prove to be
an important international event and that it will give
new impetus to the phased transfer to the Government
of Afghanistan of full responsibility for ensuring
security throughout the national territory, parallel with
the creation of effective Afghan armed forces and
police. Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs Sergey
Lavrov intends to participate in the Conference.
The broadest possible international cooperation,
under United Nations auspices, is needed to address all
these challenges. States of the region should also play a
positive role, as should organizations active there,
including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the CSTO, within the framework of which concrete
plans for counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics
activities have been drawn up and are being carried out
alongside development activities in Afghanistan.
Russia will continue to provide Afghanistan with
the necessary assistance. Resources are currently
allocated to developing the education system in
Afghanistan, including rebuilding the Polytechnical
University of Kabul. Assistance is also being extended
in other forms. Russia recently sent a large shipment of
52 Kamaz trucks to Afghanistan.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council and assuring you of my
delegation’s full cooperation. I should also like to
congratulate Ambassador Kafando and the delegation
of Burkina Faso on their skilful leadership of the
Council last month.
My delegation would like to welcome the five
new Council members and looks forward to working
closely with them in the coming months.

10-20219

S/PV.6255

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and his comments, and Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for sharing his Government’s perspective
with us today.
I would like to offer special thanks to Special
Representative Kai Eide, not only for his
comprehensive briefing today, but also for his tireless
work at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The Special
Representative’s leadership has been essential to the
international community’s efforts in Afghanistan. My
Government is greatly appreciative of his efforts and
his commitment, and wishes him every success in his
future endeavours.
This is a crucial moment in Afghanistan. The
Government of Afghanistan, together with the Afghan
people, is pressing forward on a bold agenda to halt the
worrisome deterioration of the past several years. The
international community must now act deliberately and
urgently to help the Afghan’s themselves to turn things
around.
The United States commitment to Afghanistan is
enduring. Our objective remains unchanged: to disrupt,
dismantle and eventually defeat Al-Qaida and to
prevent its return to either Afghanistan or Pakistan.
Our focus is on building up the capacity of Afghan
institutions to withstand and diminish the threat posed
by violent extremism.
To achieve that goal, President Obama has
ordered an additional 30,000 United States to
Afghanistan. Those troops will target the insurgency,
secure population centres and train Afghan security
forces. Many of the 43 other members of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) have
also announced troop increases. Together, we will
partner with Afghan forces so that we can begin
transferring security responsibility to the Government
of Afghanistan by the summer of 2011.
For truly sustainable progress, our troop increase
must be matched by a stronger civilian effort and by
additional foreign assistance. Our civilian effort will
emphasize the development of more responsive and
accountable Afghan institutions at the provincial,
district and local levels. We will also encourage and
support the Government of Afghanistan’s reinvigorated
plans to fight corruption, including through concrete
measures of progress towards greater accountability.

10-20219

The United States is substantially increasing the
number of its civilian experts in Afghanistan. In fact,
we are on track to triple our civilian presence. At the
end of January 2009, 320 United States civilians were
on the ground; we are to have 920 Americans on the
ground this month, and we expect to achieve our target
of just under 1,000 civilians shortly thereafter. These
civilian experts are partnering with Afghans to enhance
the capacity of the country’s national and sub-national
institutions to govern effectively. United States experts
are also working with their Afghan partners to help
rehabilitate Afghanistan’s key economic sectors so that
Afghans themselves can defeat the insurgents, who
promise only more violence.
Economic growth is critical to Afghanistan’s
future, both to undermine extremists’ appeal in the
short term and to provide sustainable economic
development over the long term. To help reverse the
Taliban’s momentum, we are focusing our
reconstruction effort in areas where we can quickly
create jobs, especially agricultural ones. Rebuilding
Afghanistan’s once-vibrant agricultural sector will sap
the insurgency not only of foot soldiers but also of
income from narcotics. And let me underscore one key
element of our political strategy: to support Afghan-led
efforts to reintegrate Taliban members who renounce
Al-Qaida, lay down their arms and engage in the
constitutional political process.
The United Nations, and particularly UNAMA,
continues to play a vital role in the international
community’s civilian efforts in Afghanistan. Its work
on institution-building, governance, security sector
reform and donor coordination is central to our goal of
empowering the Government of Afghanistan. But we
must all do a better job of coordinating the
international community’s efforts to assist the Afghan
people. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2009/674), coordinating such a large array of
national assistance programmes with the goals
identified by the Government of Afghanistan is a
substantial undertaking, for which UNAMA needs
additional resources and support from Member States.
We strongly echo the Secretary-General’s call for
strengthened coordination, and we support his proposal
to bolster UNAMA with experienced staff from key
donor countries. For our part, the United States stands
ready to support such a request with appropriate United
States personnel.

17

S/PV.6255

We also see the usefulness of appointing a senior
civilian representative within ISAF, as recommended
by the Special Representative, to improve the
coordination of ISAF’s political and development
activities, in particular those carried out by provincial
reconstruction teams.
The success of UNAMA’s mission also depends
on its presence throughout the country. In this regard,
we note with satisfaction the continued progress in
opening UNAMA’s regional and provincial offices. We
are pleased that the Secretary-General’s report affirms
that, despite the brutal 28 October attack on the Kabul
guest house, the United Nations remains committed to
opening additional offices throughout Afghanistan in
2010. We reiterate our support for UNAMA’s efforts to
strengthen the security of United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan, and we are open to working creatively
with UNAMA to support those efforts.
The United Nations has played a critical role in
supporting the political process in Afghanistan,
including support for elections. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s observation that the 2009 Afghan
presidential and provincial council elections exposed
serious flaws in the Afghan electoral process. Along
with our international partners, we are committed to
working with the Government of Afghanistan to
address these shortcomings before future elections are
held.
The upcoming Conference in London, to be
co-chaired by Afghanistan, the United Kingdom and
the United Nations, will be an opportunity for the
international community to demonstrate its support for
the Government of Afghanistan’s agenda, as outlined in
President Karzai’s inaugural address. We look forward
to the conference in Kabul this spring, in which the
Government of Afghanistan will have the opportunity
to present more detailed plans and programmes for
achieving its ambitious goals. President Karzai’s
inaugural speech sent the right message about moving
in a new direction, including his commitment to
reintegration and reconciliation, to improving relations
with Afghanistan’s regional partners, and to steadily
increasing the responsibilities of Afghan security
services. We must now see action, and we must now
see progress.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency. May I add my voice to others in welcoming

18

five new colleagues to the Security Council; we look
forward to working with them over the next two years.
And special thanks go to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/674) and his comments, to Special
Representative Kai Eide for his very informative
comments, and also to Ambassador Tanin for his
comprehensive comments.
The international community’s goal remains a
stable and secure Afghanistan that can exercise
sovereignty over all of its territory, offer its people
representative Government and the conditions for
economic prosperity, and play a constructive role in the
region. None of us underestimates the scale of this
challenge, as the Special Representative set out very
clearly earlier. Building a stable and secure
Afghanistan will be a long-term task, but the
international community is determined to support the
Afghan Government in seeing it through. I would like
to say a few words first about the forthcoming London
Conference before turning to some issues raised in the
Secretary-General’s latest report.
The London Conference on 28 January will be
co-hosted by Prime Minister Gordon Brown, President
Karzai and the Secretary-General, and we welcome the
Secretary-General’s strong support for it. The purpose
of the Conference will be to deliver and coordinate
international support to enable President Karzai to
meet the ambitions that he set out in his recent
inauguration speech, and it will focus on three key
areas: security, development and governance, and the
regional framework and international architecture. The
London Conference should be seen as an important
step towards the international community’s taking a
more supportive role in Afghanistan and a further
acceleration in the Afghanization of the strategy. In this
sense, the London Conference will pave the way for a
conference in Kabul later in the spring, at which we
hope the Afghan Government will present its
commitments to the people of Afghanistan and build on
the groundwork laid in London.
I would now like to turn to four issues raised in
the Secretary-General’s report. First, on aid
effectiveness, we strongly agree with the Special
Representative that donors need to build rather than
substitute for Afghan capacity. We need to see a greater
donor willingness to coordinate with the Government
of Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), rather than
operating unilaterally.

10-20219

S/PV.6255

Secondly, we strongly support the efforts led by
General McChrystal to reduce civilian casualties. We
are pleased that the Secretary-General’s report
highlights this. The report notes that the
anti-Government elements were responsible for 78 per
cent of civilian casualties, with 54 per cent of those
due to suicide and improvised explosive device attacks.
The approach of the International Security Assistance
Force stands in stark contrast to that of the insurgents,
who seek deliberately to target civilians in
Afghanistan.
Thirdly, we agree with the Secretary-General
about the importance of the Afghan National Army and
National Police. Developing the Afghan national
security forces in terms both of quality and quantity is
key to enabling Afghans to take responsibility for their
own security, and we hope that the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board and London Conference will
give impetus to this progress.
Fourthly,
the
Secretary-General’s
report
highlights the importance of community defence
initiatives, and we welcome this emphasis. It is
essential that they be given sufficient training to be
effective and that they be held accountable. A national
security sector strategy would provide a framework for
the roles and functions of Afghan security forces, but it
needs to be made clear how the community defence
initiatives would fit into such a national strategy.
I would also like to raise one issue that is not
specifically covered in the Secretary-General’s report
but was referred to by the Special Representative:
corruption, which was an important backdrop to events
in 2009. UNAMA, working with others, is helping the
Afghan Government to build a capacity to tackle
corruption and to build the necessary sustainable
institutions to underpin good governance in the longer
term, and we strongly welcome this.
No one would deny that Afghanistan has been
through another challenging period over the past three
months. The presidential election process was not easy,
but we look forward to the endorsement of a strong and
capable Afghan Government that can take forward the
important commitments made by President Karzai in
his inauguration address, with the support of the
international community and to be confirmed at the
London Conference this month.
Finally, I would like to thank Kai Eide for his
efforts in Afghanistan over the past two years. His hard

10-20219

work, including delivering elections last year and
steering UNAMA through a traumatic period following
the attacks on its staff, deserves our admiration, and I
would like through him to pay tribute to all of
UNAMA’s staff as they take forward their important
work in extremely difficult circumstances.
In this respect, I was concerned to hear about the
challenges he faces in UNAMA’s staffing and
recruitment. The General Assembly agreed only last
month on a significant increase in the budget and
staffing of the UNAMA mission, and I hope that the
Secretariat will look imaginatively at ways to unblock
any impediments at United Nations Headquarters to
effectively staffing critical missions around the world,
including that of UNAMA in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of January. I thank you and
other members of the Council for the words of
welcome. Brazil looks forward to working very closely
and constructively with all Council members in
discharging its mandate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for being among us this morning, for
his remarks and for his latest report on Afghanistan
(S/2009/674).
Brazil joins other speakers in thanking Mr. Kai
Eide for his enlightening presentation. We take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for his work as
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for his invaluable
contribution under very challenging circumstances.
Recent months have brought a sobering reminder
of the daunting challenges that still lie ahead on the
path to peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.
The deterioration in the security situation is cause for
deep concern. Especially disturbing is the increase in
the number of conflict-related civilian casualties. The
large majority of those deaths were caused by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, and the
main responsibility should therefore be clearly laid at
their feet.
Obviously, that is no consolation for the civilian
casualties caused by pro-Government forces in the
Afghan conflict, such as the children reportedly killed
in Ghazi Khan village and in Lashkar Gah during the
last days of 2009. While fully acknowledging the steps
taken by the Afghan Government, the International
Security Assistance Force and the coalition, we believe

19

S/PV.6255

there is a need for continued efforts to better
distinguish combatants and non-combatants and
eliminate or further reduce risks to civilians. Apart
from being a moral imperative and an obligation under
international law, protecting civilians is key to
strengthening the legitimacy and effectiveness of the
international military presence in Afghanistan.
Also worrisome is the fact that extremists have
been increasingly targeting international staff and
humanitarian agents. The attacks against the United
Nations guest house in Kabul last October were
particularly shocking. We firmly condemn this
senseless and unjustifiable violence and honour its
victims. We also pay tribute to the United Nations
guards whose heroism helped to save innocent lives.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to
improve the safety of United Nations staff and local
personnel in Afghanistan.
The prolonged controversy about the results of
last August’s polls had an impact on governance in
Afghanistan and affected the country’s relations with
the international community. Electoral irregularities
such as those identified by the Electoral Complaints
Commission undermined the legitimacy of the electoral
process and are readily misused as propaganda tools
for extremist groups. They also highlighted the need
for reform.
While we ponder the challenges and setbacks in
building a safer, more democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan and try to learn from past experience, we
must also focus on the future. We should all welcome
the commitments made by President Karzai in his
inauguration speech to enhance efforts towards
national unity and reconciliation, increase the
responsibility of Afghan forces in providing security to
their own people, promote economic development and
administrative reforms and take firm measures to fight
corruption. We should also ensure that our collective
support for President Karzai effectively helps him turn
words into deeds.
The appointment of a competent and inclusive
Cabinet is a key element in fulfilling those
commitments. We encourage the Afghan Government
and the Wolesi Jirga to continue working on the
formation of the new Government. My delegation also
supports President Karzai’s initiative to promote
national reconciliation, including through talks with
the armed opposition.

20

Another crucial area on which the new
Government will certainly want to focus is electoral
reform, so as to prevent the recurrence of the problems
identified during the 2009 elections. The 2010
elections must contribute to the consolidation of
democracy in Afghanistan. We note UNAMA’s calls for
reform and more transparency in the Independent
Electoral Commission ahead of the parliamentary and
local elections scheduled for next May and call for
increased dialogue between the Afghan Government
and the Mission. We encourage further dialogue and
cooperation in that regard by all stakeholders.
Continued progress on the promotion and
protection of the rights of women is also needed. It
would be important for the Afghan parliament to
consider in a timely manner the draft law on the
elimination of violence against women and the
amended Shia personal status law. Matching progress
in the legislative area with the strengthening of
institutions charged with its implementation is key. A
long-term solution for the security situation in
Afghanistan requires steady transfer of responsibility
to the Afghan Government. That will make possible a
gradual withdrawal of the international military
presence on the ground and the normalization of life in
the country.
The conflict in Afghanistan will not be solved
purely on the military front. The convincing argument
made by Mr. Eide on the need for a politically driven
strategy rather than a militarily driven one should
guide our work. Refocusing the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy on long-term projects also
seems to be the correct approach to follow and may
require a stronger role for UNAMA, which we would
support.
Improved
coordination
of
the
civilian
international action in Afghanistan is crucial if both the
Government and donors are to achieve greater
effectiveness in their actions. In so doing, adequate
attention must be given to national ownership so as to
ensure the long-term sustainability of international
action in the country. We therefore support the
initiative of establishing a dedicated civilian
coordination structure in Afghanistan under the United
Nations umbrella, able to gradually transfer to the
Afghan Government the coordination of donor support
for its programmes and priorities. To that end, donor
countries must find the political readiness indicated in
the Secretary-General’s report to shift their focus in

10-20219

S/PV.6255

Afghanistan from capacity-substitution to capacitybuilding.

welcome the International Conference on Afghanistan,
scheduled for 28 January 2010 in London.

We agree with Mr. Eide’s observation that the
best contribution the international community can
make to assist the Afghan Government and Afghan
society is to help them to strengthen institutions. Such
a task is complex by definition, but it is the only real
option in the long run. In that context, the international
conferences to be held on 28 January in London and
later this year in Kabul will be important opportunities
to advance in that direction.

We note with concern that the security situation
worsened over the reporting period, with increasing
numbers of armed and suicide attacks. This upsurge in
violence, which has resulted in more casualties and
loss of life, is regrettable and must be brought to an
end. My delegation is encouraged by the efforts of the
Afghan Government and its international allies to
improve the security situation.

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I congratulate you, Sir,
and delegation of China upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
salute Ambassador Kafando and the delegation of
Burkina Faso for their leadership of the Council in
December. Let me also take this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Council and to wish
them success during their tenure.

It is imperative to build the capacity and
capability of the Afghan security institutions,
especially the Police and the Army, to take
responsibility for the country’s long-term stability. We
commend the Afghan Government for passing the
Counter-Terrorism, Antitrust and Firearms Laws during
the reporting period. We also welcome the draft law on
the elimination of violence against women and
encourage its endorsement by the Afghan Parliament.

I thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Kai Eide, for his briefing,
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement.

We are deeply concerned about attacks targeting
United Nations staff in Afghanistan, which have had a
negative impact on their ability to carry out their
mandate. We call for the enhancement of measures to
ensure the safety and security of all UNAMA
personnel.

We commend UNAMA for continuing to play an
important role in leading international efforts towards
security, stability and development in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan faces daunting security, political and
economic challenges. It is incumbent upon all Afghans,
especially the political leaders, to work together
towards national unity and reconciliation and to nurture
democratic governance, peacebuilding and prosperity.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Kai Eide, for his leadership
and, through him, thank the UNAMA staff for carrying
out their mandate under very difficult circumstances.
We wish Mr. Eide success in his future endeavours.

We welcome the conclusion of the electoral
process in Afghanistan, in spite of the flaws and
difficulties encountered.
We call upon all political actors to ensure that the
approval of the Cabinet is finalized without further
delay. The new Government needs to embark on the
urgent tasks ahead, including political reform and
addressing the root causes of insurgency. It needs to
focus with greater impetus on economic recovery,
reconstruction, the delivery of services and improving
the livelihoods of the people. There is also a need for
development partners to work together in a more
coordinated and streamlined manner to support the
national efforts of the Afghan people. In this regard, we

10-20219

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express to the entire Council my
best wishes for the new year. Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Allow me also to
pay tribute, as previous speakers have done, to the
outstanding work carried out by Ambassador Michel
Kafando and his entire team during the month of
December.
With respect to the subject of our debate, I should
like, again as previous speakers have done, to pay a
wholehearted tribute to the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kai Eide.
Thanks to his efforts, the United Nations is now the
principal actor in Afghanistan in terms of coordinating
international action and dialogue with political actors

21

S/PV.6255

and Afghan society. This achievement must be
preserved, and its effects should be amplified.
This is a momentous occasion for France. For the
first time in the Security Council, the European Union
will speak through its delegation to the United Nations.
This is the result of the implementation of the Treaty of
Lisbon. I therefore welcome that representative. For
France, this is an important and a moving moment.
France, of course, associates itself with the statement
that he will deliver.
I would like to emphasize in particular the main
challenges of the year ahead. The most imminent
event, as Mr. Kai Eide said, is the London Conference
to be held on 28 January 2010. It will be an important
step in the process aimed at framing the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community
in terms that enable full ownership by the Afghan
people of their destiny.
President Karzai made important commitments to
reform in his inaugural speech. We hope that the
London Conference and the Kabul conference to
follow will be opportunities for the Afghan
Government to launch its reform programme, in
particular in the priority areas of governance,
particularly local governance, concerning which
Mr. Eide was particularly eloquent; strengthening
Afghan civil and security forces; the fight against
corruption and drug trafficking; regional cooperation,
and the reintegration of combatants.
This programme must be based on more coherent
action by the international community. We have been
talking about this for years, and I believe that we must
at last align our actions with this commonsense
objective. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) was given a central role in this
area by the Security Council. It should have the
necessary resources, as well as the authority that is
essential to more effective coordination. This will
involve strengthening the ties between the United
Nations and the other international organizations
present in the country, as well as with the main donors.
We therefore support the establishment of a
structure that includes the main civilian and military
actors in Afghanistan under the co-chairmanship of the
Afghan Government and the United Nations. Such a
structure, which would meet frequently and at regular
intervals, should cover civilian aid, civil-military
coordination and regional cooperation. I would stress

22

that this last issue should, in the future, receive
increased attention. We hope that, to this end, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
enhance his efforts for follow-up to and promotion of
regional dialogue.
We have taken note of the wish of the Afghan
authorities to hold legislative elections in May 2010 in
accordance with the timeline set out in the
Constitution. This choice is, of course, the sovereign
decision of the Afghan authorities alone. However, the
lessons of the presidential elections must be heeded,
and certain reforms of the electoral system must be
carried out ahead of time and in accordance with the
Constitution. We must help the Afghan authorities to
identify the necessary reforms that have a realistic
chance of being carried out before the elections. The
Afghans have shown their commitment to democracy,
and this commitment should not be betrayed. The next
elections should be held in conditions that ensure a free
and democratic choice. The fraud witnessed during the
presidential elections must not be repeated.
I would like to conclude by assuring the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative that
we share their concerns about the security of United
Nations staff. In Afghanistan, as in other countries in
crisis, the necessary means must be dedicated to
protecting United Nations personnel. The necessary
reinforcement of these means, which should be
earmarked for spending in the field as a priority, should
be carried out alongside a comprehensive reflection on
the future geographical placement of UNAMA
installations and deployment of its missions in the light
of the new political and security context, which is all
too real.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
welcome the five new Council members among us. I
would also like to commend you, Sir, and the Chinese
delegation on your assumption of the important post of
the presidency for the month of January. Allow me also
to express our deep gratitude to Ambassador Kafando
and his delegation for their excellent work in
December.
On the question of Afghanistan, the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, Kai Eide, gave
us very useful briefings this morning. Ambassador
Tanin also made a contribution to our discussion.
On behalf of my Government, I should like to
take this opportunity to commend Mr. Eide on his very

10-20219

S/PV.6255

difficult work, especially on the handling of the
delicate process of the presidential election in the past
few months. I assure Ambassador Eide of our deep
appreciation and full support.
There can be no doubt that for those engaged in
Afghanistan, including us, last year was the most
challenging one since 2001. Exceptional time and
energy were spent handling the complicated electoral
process. To all of us, the guest house attack in October
was a shocking reminder of the treacherous situation
on the ground in which men and women are working to
implement tasks that we mandated them to do.
Regrettably, it seems as though we have been
repeating the same New Year’s resolution in the past
several years. But it seems to me that this is more
serious than the previous two years. This moment at
the beginning of 2010 is critical to reversing the
negative trends of the previous year and to ensuring
future success in Afghanistan. Although the current
political situation surrounding the formation of the new
Cabinet has been a concern to us, we expect that the
new Administration of President Karzai will soon start
to work on the reform agenda, nation-building and
uniting people.
It should also be noted that all of us in the
international community are strengthening assistance
for Afghanistan in both the military and the
development fields. Japan very much welcomes the
new United States strategy announced on 1 December.
For its part, Japan announced a new assistance package
for Afghanistan of up to appropriately $5 billion over a
five-year period beginning in 2009. That package will
include assistance for the enhancement of the police
force, the reintegration of former insurgents and
sustainable and self-reliant development. That
announcement was timed to coincide with the
completion of the presidential electoral process and
five years of President Karzai’s presidency, as well as
to demonstrate Japan’s unchanged support during this
challenging period for the people of Afghanistan. We
hope that Japan’s assistance will provide impetus for
further concrete international assistance to the country.
But I would also like to emphasize here that it is
important not just to make pledges, but also to
implement them. The track record in that regard is not
necessarily very good. It is time to honour the many
pledges that have been made and to accelerate their
implementation.

10-20219

Likewise, we expect the same degree of strong
commitment from the Afghanistan Government. We
welcome the commitment shown in the inaugural
address by President Karzai, including his
determination to promote national reconciliation and to
fight corruption. I have full confidence that President
Karzai’s determination will be translated into concrete
actions. We will stand by the Afghan Government to
assist in that effort. Against that backdrop, the
upcoming London Conference will be an opportune
occasion to reaffirm the commitment on the part of the
new Afghan Government to implement reforms, and on
the part of the international community to lend support
and provide resources.
Among the most important items on the agenda
of the new Afghan Administration will be the
reintegration of former insurgents. We should
encourage political outreach towards those former
insurgents who have forsaken violence and are
committed to live peacefully within the framework of
the Constitution. In parallel with the military effort to
maintain security, a political agenda including
reintegration must be pursued to help stability to take
root. Let me emphasize that such a plan must be led by
the Afghan Government. We are ready to lead
international efforts in assistance for reintegration as
one of the three pillars of a new strategy, based on our
experience in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts and in the disbandment of illegal
and armed groups. We hope that the London
Conference will add further momentum to consolidate
these efforts.
In the past few years, Japan has consistently
argued the importance of enhanced aid effectiveness
and donor coordination in Afghanistan. However, the
situation is far from satisfactory, as Kai Eide has told
us. We should definitely do more to avoid waste and
enhance impact.
Japan’s assistance priorities of agriculture and
rural development, infrastructure and basic human
needs are in line with the areas that the Afghan
Government has prioritized. We concur with the
Secretary-General
that
measures
for
donor
coordination must be taken in partnership with the
Afghan Government, with the ultimate goal of
Afghanization in mind. The United Nations should
play an important role in coordination efforts.

23

S/PV.6255

The capacity of the United Nations Assistance
Mission (UNAMA) in that regard is important. We
should look into concrete measures to improve
UNAMA’s coordination structures, as well as to
expedite the recruitment of experienced staff. I think
that it is very clear that we need to streamline
recruitment procedures, including broader delegation
of authority to UNAMA. At the same time, I stress that
effective coordination cannot be achieved without the
cooperation of donor countries and their willingness to
be coordinated by the United Nations. That is a point
that the Secretary-General has emphasized. We need
political will at the highest level.
Security is the biggest challenge and prerequisite
in all those efforts. We pay a high tribute to troopcontributing countries, many of which have lost
precious lives of their personnel. We also commend the
Afghan security forces. But it is very clear that much
more needs to be done to further strengthen their
quality and numbers to ensure long-term stability.
The role of the United Nations has been, and will
remain, indispensable in helping to stabilize and
reconstruct the country. We pay a high tribute to the
continuing courageous work of United Nations staff on
the ground. We will continue to support the work of
UNAMA to the maximum extent possible. The security
of staff is of the utmost concern to us all. We should
provide every possible support for additional security
measures by the Secretary-General to enable relocated
staff to return as early as possible.
In addition, the mandate of UNAMA will be the
subject of discussion among us in the coming months
to ensure that it meets the expectations of both the
Afghan people and the international community. We
very much look forward to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his next report.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Japan’s strong
commitment to helping the Government and people of
Afghanistan and to supporting UNAMA. I also wish
Turkey well in its role as lead country on Afghanistan.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): As the representative of
one of the newly elected members of the Security
Council, let me seize the opportunity provided by this
first formal debate of the Council in 2010 to reiterate
Nigeria’s unwavering commitment to the preservation
of international peace and security. I want to assure
you, Mr. President, of our solemn obligation to work in

24

concert with other members in the discharge of the
daunting responsibilities of the Council.
We congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and on
having convened this important meeting. We also
greatly appreciate the presence of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon in our midst. We commend him
especially for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and security
(S/2009/674). The report contains cogent observations
critical to the attainment of peace in the country. We
also thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Afghanistan, for his succinct
briefing and for the resolute manner in which he
discharged the duties of his office. We wish him the
best in his future endeavours. We also greatly
appreciate the insightful statement of Ambassador
Tanin.
Nigeria is concerned that, in spite of intensified
global efforts, the challenges in Afghanistan, in
particular the security challenges, remain intractable.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the deteriorating
security situation in the country and the expansion of
the insurgency, including suicide bombings, rising
conflict-related civilian casualties and escalating
threats to United Nations and international aid
personnel. This deplorable situation constricts not only
aid delivery around the country but also the efforts of
the Government to deliver basic services to the people.
The situation is exacerbated by existing and new
political challenges, as well as severe economic
stagnation.
In spite of these challenges, we appreciate the
resilience and commitment of the Afghan people to
democratic governance. We also appreciate the roles
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
successful resolution of the political crisis following
the elections.
Nigeria believes that the new Afghan
Government deserves support to strengthen and
consolidate its capacity to deliver basic services,
maintain domestic peace and security, facilitate an
inclusive process of dialogue and national
reconciliation and fortify its relationship with its
neighbours. Indeed, the rule of law and a vibrant
political process capable of supporting national

10-20219

S/PV.6255

reconciliation are prerequisites for the gradual return of
peace and stability to the country. The international
community must augment its investment in these areas.
That is why we welcome the London Conference
scheduled for 28 January 2010 and the subsequent
Kabul conference, in the hope that both conferences
will help to galvanize international resources and
support for the country. The task for the international
community is to ensure that progress is effectively
monitored.
To reverse the deteriorating security situation in
the country will require the consolidation of existing
security mechanisms and the adoption of fresh
initiatives, including the proposal to use local security
agents under the Community Defence Initiative, and
security sector reform. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that this combination of measures must
be underpinned by national reconciliation and good
governance. In addition, there must be sustained
cooperation between local security forces and their
international counterparts. Meanwhile, we urge greater
protection for United Nations personnel and aid
workers and for Afghan civilians.
Nigeria is mindful that electoral contests have
increasingly constituted a major challenge to the
security and stability of emerging democracies. We
therefore welcome the proposal for electoral reforms in
Afghanistan. The reform should be a measure to
reinforce the country’s nascent democracy and should
constitute the foundation for sustainable political
development in the country. In effect, the focus of the
reform should be to bolster the electoral process, to
sustain continuous electoral exercises and to guide
meaningful political relationships. In this regard, the
Electoral Complaints Commission and the Independent
Electoral Commission should be reformed to conform
to international best practices by being truly
independent and free of partisan bias and control. The
reform should be all-encompassing, affecting all levels
of government and involving all the stakeholders in
Afghan society. We urge the country’s political actors
to understand and defend the electoral process and also
to approach the political system with a sense of
compromise and reconciliation.
In the final analysis, under the rubric of lesson
learned, it is important to make public the
recommendations of the ongoing investigations into the
electoral irregularities in the country, as a means of
forestalling future occurrences.

10-20219

Nigeria supports the need for the international
community, within a framework of a strategy of
transition, to reinforce the coordination structure in
Afghanistan, under a United Nations umbrella. We
appreciate the central role which UNAMA plays in
these efforts and we hope that the full implementation
of its 2010 budget, as approved, will help to strengthen
the Mission. We appreciate the contributions of
Afghanistan’s neighbours to the efforts to tackle the
challenges confronting the country and urge
international
support
for
sustained
regional
engagement.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I assure you once again of my delegation’s
support as you guide the work of the Council to
success. My thanks go also to the delegation of
Burkina Faso for its successful presidency last month. I
join in thanking the delegations which have just
completed their term on the Security Council for their
great contributions to the Council. I also welcome the
five new non-permanent members.
I also join others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative for their
comments and for their valuable reports. We appreciate
the work done by Mr. Kai Eide over the past two years
in the face of the challenges his Office has confronted
in the effort to achieve development in Afghanistan; he
has done a good job of meeting those challenges. We
wish him the best in his future endeavours.
As a new year begins, my delegation notes with
concern that old challenges in the areas of security,
human rights, strengthening the rule of law and
institution-building continue to be obstacles to stability
and progress in Afghanistan. Along with these, new
challenges have arisen as a result of major events in the
final months of 2009 relating to a political and
electoral process that was under the cloud of
irregularities, as well as to the precarious security
situation, which obliged the United Nations itself to
reformulate its strategy in the field in order to protect
its personnel.
In such circumstances, strengthened coordination
and support from the international community to
ensure stability in Afghanistan are clearly necessary.
The establishment of a coordination mechanism within
the framework of a transition strategy, under a United

25

S/PV.6255

Nations umbrella, is of key importance in mobilizing
the resources needed for programmes in support of the
country’s security forces and civil institutions and,
hence, its economic development.
We hope that the London Conference planned for
28 January and the subsequent Kabul conference,
which will analyse new security and development
strategies, will help buttress that proposal on the basis
of a clear definition of the roles that the Afghan
Government and the international community must
play, as noted by the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.
The electoral process was a watershed in the
international community’s support. It revealed the
weakness of Afghan institutions. In that situation, the
Government of Afghanistan is now facing the difficult
task of enhancing the credibility of its actions among a
sceptical population, through a renewed political pact,
as rightly suggested by the Secretary-General. My
delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that the
recently elected Government should redouble its efforts
to make good on the commitments it entered into on
the basis of priorities established by President Karzai.
These relate directly to goals such as fighting
corruption and impunity in the country. It is clear that
rapid and determined action against those evils will
enhance the Government’s authority and generate trust
among the population, thus strengthening the
Government’s position with respect to insurgent
activities.
The endeavours of Government bodies will have
a key role to play in furthering the interests of the
Afghan people. We therefore believe it to be of
fundamental importance that institutional unity be
maintained. We hope that the appointment of new
members of President Karzai’s Cabinet will be another
step towards the strengthened confidence and unity that
are so necessary. We encourage the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
other United Nations entities in the field to support the
Afghan Government, with a view to reaching that goal,
which will enable the Government to strengthen its
institutions and extend its authority within the country.
With regard to security, the figures in the report
we are considering today (S/2009/674) cause concern.
They reflect a considerable increase in violent
incidents compared to past years. Certainly those
figures show that insecurity continues to be the main

26

factor affecting progress in Afghanistan. While we
support the efforts to address that situation, we
reiterate our conviction that such actions should go
hand in hand with parallel measures to promote
development, respect for human rights and the
strengthening of the rule of law, thus tackling the root
causes of the insecurity.
Furthermore, my delegation regrets that as a
direct consequence of the insecurity and the political
instability in Afghanistan, attacks against humanitarian
and United Nations personnel continue, restricting and
threatening their commendable and valuable work.
The Security Council and the Organization as a
whole must deploy all their forces when it comes to
protecting the Organization’s own personnel. Thus we
support all efforts of the Secretary-General to review
the security mechanisms in order to protect the
personnel deployed in the field, and we reiterate the
obligation of the parties to comply with resolution
1502 (2003), on the security and protection of
humanitarian and United Nations personnel, promoted
by my delegation during its earlier participation in the
Security Council. In that regard, it is essential to
eliminate the threat of terrorism, while respecting
human rights in those efforts.
To conclude, I would like to note that my
delegation believes that President Karzai and the
Afghan authorities have before them an inescapable
commitment to themselves and to the international
community. That is why we reiterate our support for
any efforts both by President Karzai and by his
country’s political class to foster an environment of
reconciliation and security and to resolutely address
the main challenges afflicting the country.
We are confident that the international presence
in Afghanistan, together with the support and
leadership of the United Nations, will help to establish
the conditions that Afghanistan needs to exercise fully
its national capacities and responsibilities as a
sovereign State.
The President (China) (spoke in Chinese): I shall
now make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
We would like to congratulate the Afghan people
on the election of their new national leader. China
hopes that the new Afghan Government can be
established and carry out its functions as soon as

10-20219

S/PV.6255

possible. We support the Afghan Government’s efforts
to bring stability to the country. We hope that the
international community will further increase its efforts
to actively assist the Government in strengthening the
capacity-building of the army and the police so as to
enable them to assume the responsibility for security at
an early date.
We support the Afghan Government and people in
their efforts to promote steady social and economic
development and to improve people’s livelihoods, and
we call on the international community to provide
more support and assistance in view of the country’s
development needs. We hope that the international
conferences on Afghanistan, to be held in Istanbul,
London and Kabul, will achieve positive and concrete
results.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, as your assumption of
the presidency of the Council this month and also the
new members of the Council: Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria.
The New Year coincides with a new beginning for
Afghanistan. The past year has seen many successes
but also challenges. We also note with great sadness
the continued violence all over Afghanistan, including
in Kabul, as insurgents have attempted to strike at the
heart of Afghan and international efforts to rebuild the
country. My delegation offers our deep condolences to
the families of all Afghans, as well as to those of the
civilians and soldiers from many Member States
represented here today who have lost their lives or
been injured in the violence in Afghanistan.
As the Secretary-General notes in his very useful
report (S/2009/674), while the election process
revealed that substantial work remains to be done, we
must not ignore the successes that have been achieved
to date, including the fact that significant numbers of
Afghans turned out to vote despite violence and
intimidation. While there was widespread fraud, it was
detected and addressed, and now a new Government is
being formed with a set of clear priorities for the road
ahead.
President
Karzai
has
commitments to building a

10-20219

made
stable,

Afghanistan, but major challenges lie ahead.
Immediate action must be taken to address corruption
at all levels and to continue to reform the judicial
system. Continued progress on security, strong
accountable national institutions, basic services and
economic development for the Afghan people must be
delivered. It is also clear that significant reforms to the
electoral system are required so that future elections
can be more transparent and accountable. Canada
remains ready to assist, while noting that it is the
responsibility of the new Afghan Government to
demonstrate leadership on those priorities.
In that context, Canada recognizes the democratic
process that is taking place in the nomination and
confirmation of the new cabinet, a process that is
enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. We encourage all
parties to work towards a quick resolution in order for
the Government of Afghanistan to move forward on the
significant challenges facing Afghans.
Looking ahead, strengthening Afghan ownership
will be the key to success. Canada recognizes that all
our collective efforts must enhance the capacity of
Afghans to take increasing responsibility in managing
the affairs of their country, from security and
governance to basic services. Over the coming months
President Karzai and his Government must establish a
contract with the Afghan people aimed at building a
relationship of trust. Canada looks forward to seeing
the building blocks of that contract articulated during
the upcoming conferences in London and Kabul,
clearly outlining its plans for the way ahead.
The variety of international meetings and
conferences on Afghanistan planned over the coming
months is indicative of the urgency and seriousness
with which the international community, including my
country, wants to support progress in Afghanistan.
Those conferences are a chance for the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community to work
together with renewed vigour to address the many
challenges faced by Afghanistan. We trust that the
28 January conference in London, followed by a spring
conference in Kabul, will give the international
community the opportunity to direct its efforts to a
well-defined set of realistic and prioritized objectives
set by the Afghan Government and to develop a new
international
architecture
for
engagement
in
Afghanistan.

important
democratic

27

S/PV.6255

The international effort in Afghanistan has been
boosted by the recent announcement by the United
States of important measures to reinforce its
engagement, including the deployment of additional
military and civilian resources. Canada welcomes those
additional resources, particularly to the south of
Afghanistan, where they will help provide a more
secure environment for the Afghan people.
Coordination of international engagement in
Afghanistan to achieve our shared goal presents many
challenges, not least of which are the sheer number of
actors and the complexity of the issues. It is thus all the
more crucial, as we strengthen coordination structures,
that consistency be ensured in the international
community’s approach to helping the Afghan
Government to rebuild Afghanistan.
(spoke in French)
In that context, Canada firmly believes that the
United Nations role as coordinator of civilian efforts in
Afghanistan should be maintained and strengthened. In
that regard, we support the efforts to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Mission of Assistance
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to implement its mandate
and to maintain a continuous leadership presence on
the ground. Canada is also supportive of a strengthened
NATO senior civilian representative to coordinate the
civilian contribution to counter insurgency, noting that
UNAMA and NATO must work hand in glove to help
ensure the synergy of international efforts.
A more focused and better coordinated
international effort, within the framework of a
transition strategy, is paramount to success. This
coordinated effort will bear fruit, however, only if the
focus is on advancing Afghan capacity to lead on the
key priorities moving forward. Canada shares the view
of the United Nations and our allies that we must not
lose sight of the necessity to leave the governing of
Afghanistan in the hands of a capable and effective
Afghan Government.
Finally, I would like to express the Government
of Canada’s appreciation for the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kai Eide,
whose term is ending soon. Since his appointment two
years ago, Kai Eide has worked tirelessly to advance
the
international
community’s
objectives
in
Afghanistan, and Canada appreciates the energy and
commitment he has brought to the task.

28

We note with deep appreciation the fact that he
has worked hard to strengthen UNAMA by greatly
expanding its resources and its presence in the
provinces; to build UNAMA’s coordination capacity as
well as to strengthen and reform the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board; to prepare the ground for much
closer cooperation between the International Security
Assistance Force and the United Nations; and to play a
key political role in shaping international conferences
in Afghanistan and elsewhere at key times, such as the
recent elections. While much remains to be done in
Afghanistan, Mr. Eide deserves our heartfelt thanks for
his accomplishments and dedication.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to contribute to this
important and timely discussion, and takes this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council, as well as the new members
of the Council.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report (S/2009/674) and Special Representative Kai
Eide for his work, for this morning’s briefing and,
above all, for the role he has played. We wish him well.
While the report is sobering and raises many
matters of real concern, we agree that the key priorities
must be a more focused and better coordinated
international effort, as well as reform of the Afghan
electoral process and Government. We affirm that the
United Nations has a critical role to play in
Afghanistan, and will continue to support that role.
Last year, New Zealand reviewed its participation
in Afghanistan and reconfirmed its commitment to the
provincial reconstruction team that has led work in
Bamyan province since 2003. We have also redeployed
our Special Forces to Afghanistan during the period
President Obama has identified as critical to defeating
the insurgency. New Zealand welcomed the
1 December statement by President Obama, given its
emphasis on a coherent and credible pathway forward
in Afghanistan. We particularly welcome his focus on
increased short-term military capacity to improve
stability and security, and enhancing the capacity of the
Afghan National Army and Police to assume primary
security responsibility.

10-20219

S/PV.6255

Mindful that the Secretary-General’s report calls
for a “change of mindset in the international
community as well as in the Government of
Afghanistan” (S/2009/674, para. 50), we also support
President Obama’s sense of urgency about transferring
that security responsibility to local forces and on
shifting the focus of international efforts to building
civilian capacities that will put Afghanistan on a
peaceful
development
path.
Without
those
commitments, there can be no realistic way forward.
For its part, New Zealand is stepping up its
capacity-building with the Afghan National Police in
Bamyan, preparing a pathway for the civilianization of
our provincial reconstruction teams, and increasing its
official development assistance budget to underpin
those changes. We are establishing an embassy and
appointing an ambassador in Kabul to coordinate our
efforts with those of our partners including, most
importantly, the Afghans themselves, so that when
international troops are drawn down, they leave behind
a country capable of managing its own security and the
increased humanitarian assistance that nations such as
ours have signalled their readiness to provide.
All that represents a significant commitment for a
small country with limited military and other
resources. It is a commitment made for good reason to
the people of Afghanistan, but it is also a commitment
made in expectation of a meaningful effort and
response from President Karzai and his new
Administration, when it can be finally formed.
Nothing should disguise the challenge they face.
While we welcomed the fact that elections were held,
doubts about the probity of the results and the lack of
progress around institution-building, and concerns as to
the true depth of the Administration’s commitment to
anti-corruption measures have sorely tested the
capacities of contributing nations to maintain or
enhance their contributions. We strongly encourage
President Karzai to move quickly to address the deepseated security, governance, corruption, human rights,
justice and narcotics challenges facing Afghanistan —
all identified in today’s report.
It is imperative that the Government deliver
tangible improvements to the daily lives of ordinary
Afghans. In so doing, it will have the support of the
international community, but those who put their
military in harm’s way in the interests of Afghanistan

10-20219

and its people are entitled to see better progress on
corruption and governance.
While we strongly support efforts to build a new
and peaceful Afghanistan, we look to the Karzai
Administration to meet the obligations it has now
incurred to the international community. We therefore
welcome Britain’s lead in coordinating international
support through a Conference later this month. We will
attend at the ministerial level, and hope that we quickly
reach the stage where meetings to discuss
Afghanistan’s future can be held regularly in
Afghanistan itself. We therefore welcome the fact that
the second meeting is to be held in Kabul.
As the Secretary-General’s report emphasizes,
there is an urgent need to improve governance and give
greater confidence to ordinary Afghans that their
Administration is working for them, not least in
stamping out corruption. The extent of corruption
outlined in the report makes it clear that the
Administration must address this in all forms and at all
levels. For all those who abuse the system, there must
be no sanctuaries, no safe havens and no impunity.
We want Afghanistan, its people and its
Administration to succeed in their endeavours. They
have our good wishes, our blessings and our active
commitment. We know they need time and space to
rebuild their country, and our contribution is to help
provide that. The people who showed their support for
democracy in the recent elections, sometimes at great
risk, are entitled to see greater probity and better
governance as a result. But the military and civilians
who risk their lives to work in Afghanistan for this
United Nations, for civil society and in provincial
reconstruction teams — all to help Afghanistan and its
people — are also entitled to see better progress on
addressing corruption and governance issues. It is for
the Government and people of Afghanistan to decide
for themselves how best they should do that, but doing
it is the nub of the matter as we see it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Windsor (Australia): On behalf of Australia,
I would like to congratulate China on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. I would also
like to congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria on taking up their vital
duties as elected members of this important body.

29

S/PV.6255

As the Secretary-General said, and as Australia
fully agrees, we are now at a critical juncture in
Afghanistan. What we need now is unity of effort,
greater attention to key priorities, and a new mindset
on the part of the international community and the
Government of Afghanistan. This imperative is
increasingly being recognized both in Afghanistan and
internationally. It is, of course, reflected in the renewed
commitment to an effective strategy articulated by
United States President Obama and by the International
Security and Assistance Force (ISAF) late last year,
and in the ongoing work that the international
community and the Afghan Government are doing
together to redefine their partnership so as to better
meet the pressing needs of the Afghan people.
The security situation inside Afghanistan
undoubtedly remains difficult and dangerous. The
levels of violence will likely increase further in the
coming year as the insurgency comes under increased
pressure from Afghan and ISAF operations. Recent
attacks, such as those in Khost and Kandahar — for
which we offer our condolences to all those affected —
are a reminder of the ongoing human cost of our
necessary efforts to build security and stability.
Australia has boosted its contribution to the
critical task of strengthening the Afghan security
capacity as a key focus of efforts to deny terrorists safe
haven in Afghanistan. We are committed to training the
Afghan National Army to a point at which it can take
on security in Uruzgan province, where our troops
have been serving alongside the Dutch, who have led
capably in that province for the last four years.
Australian police have also expanded their efforts to
train and advise Afghan police, including in Uruzgan
province. We will continue to expand our contribution
on the civilian side, with a particular emphasis on
building the capacity of the Afghan authorities to
deliver more effective governance and basic services.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/674) and his statement here today, and Special
Representative Kai Eide for his presentation. I join
those who have praised his leadership and the work he
and his staff have done under incredibly difficult
circumstances, as we all know. We, too, welcome
President Karzai’s commitment to action that he set out
in his inauguration speech. The timely finalization of a
credible and competent new Cabinet will be an
important initial step towards ensuring that the new
Afghan Government realizes early, demonstrable

30

progress on its key priorities — improving governance,
including at local levels, addressing corruption,
delivering basic services, making progress with
reintegration
and
reconciliation
efforts,
and
strengthening the Afghan National Army and Police.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s report that
the problems associated with the 2009 presidential
election very much demonstrate the need for the reform
of some key aspects of the electoral system. Lessons
need to be learned and shortcomings rectified, in
particular before the next parliamentary elections, in
order to secure Afghan and international support for
democratic processes in Afghanistan.
We all need to lift our game. Increased efforts on
the civilian side need to be well targeted and better
coordinated. The United Nations has an indispensable
role to play, and it can be further strengthened, but
other key players, including ISAF, also have an
important contribution to make to the improved
coordination of civilian effort. These international
coordination mechanisms have to ensure that the
necessary coordination actually happens in a regular,
effective and efficient manner and at all the levels it
needs to be to ensure there is an actual outcome on the
ground.
The actual mission strength of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) remains
a concern. We, too, were pleased to support the
enhanced package for UNAMA at the end of the year.
But if it would assist the Mission, we should look at
flexible arrangements, such as providing secondees or
liaison officers to make sure that the job required is
actually done. UNAMA’s security needs also have to
be kept very clearly in mind if it is to continue to play
its indispensable role throughout the country.
Australia stands ready to work with the new
Afghan Government and the international community.
We look forward to the London Conference, and to the
subsequent one in Kabul in the spring, as a basis for a
renewed partnership between the Afghan Government
and the international community, and a renewed
commitment between the Afghan Government and its
people. We must all remain committed to this vitally
important effort to reclaim Afghanistan from violence
and extremism. Afghanistan has endured so much for
so long. We had a very difficult year last year together,
and we have an equally difficult one ahead. With the

10-20219

S/PV.6255

right commitment and unity of purpose, we can provide
a better future in the years ahead.

We agree with the Secretary-General that we
must resolve to implement

The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of Pakistan.

“a political reform that addresses the root causes
of the insurgency, including through efforts aimed
at improving governance and an Afghan-led
political
process
to
re-establish
peace”
(S/2009/674, para. 25).

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for this
month, representing a major Power in the area.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
Kai Eide for the briefings given this morning in this
Chamber. Specifically, my delegation would like to
thank you for convening this important meeting on the
situation in Afghanistan. Today’s meeting provides a
timely opportunity to review the overall situation in
Afghanistan, a country steeped in blood where
geography jostles with ethnology and strategy with
history, especially in the context of President Karzai’s
success in the recent Afghan elections and the Security
Council’s forthcoming consideration of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), due to expire in March 2010.
Pakistan, as one may well imagine, has a vital
stake in the peace, stability and economic development
of Afghanistan. In human conflict, no neighbour, no
other country has suffered more than Pakistan from the
consequences of conflict and human tragedy in
Afghanistan. But the people of Pakistan share these
sorrows of their Afghan brethren. In their prosperity we
see our prosperity; in their progress, we see our
progress; and in their woes, we see our woes.
We value the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2009/674) on the situation in Afghanistan. It
provides useful information on the Afghan electoral
process and the difficulties encountered in that regard;
the nature and complexity of the security situation in
Afghanistan; and aid effectiveness, donor coordination
and development.
The insecurity driven by the political-economic
insurgency and its exploitation by criminals and drug
traffickers are the main factors impeding progress in
Afghanistan. This insurgency needs to be eliminated as
a priority, without externalizing the problem. By
externalizing the problem, as Sir Henry Durand
commented wryly more than a century ago, “these
instructions from afar are a phantasm of remote danger
that tend to warp judgement”. This is an issue linked to
the inadequate capacity to enforce law in the
treacherous landscape of Afghanistan.

10-20219

Outsiders, as former British Prime Minister Disraeli
predicted to the House of Lords, can only be bogged
down in financial convulsions while the war in
Afghanistan would exhaust the resources of any
country. And I think we should remember that as a
lesson.
We have always believed that peace and
economic development in Afghanistan can be brought
about only by a stable Government in Kabul, enjoying
the majority support of the Afghan people. The
presidential and provincial council elections held last
year showed the commitment of the Afghan people to
democracy and the rule of law. The Government of
Pakistan extends its full support to President Karzai’s
agenda and road map, as articulated in his inaugural
speech.
Pakistan acknowledges the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, particularly that of UNAMA,
ably led by the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative. Security Council resolutions 1806
(2008) and 1868 (2009) clearly lay down UNAMA’s
strengthened and expanded presence throughout the
country and outline its central role in aid coordination,
providing
political
outreach
and
promoting
implementation
of
the
Afghanistan
National
Development Strategy. Resolution 1868 (2009)
specifically spells out expansion of UNAMA’s
activities and programmes at the provincial level.
Accordingly, UNAMA plans to open new
provincial offices in 2010. We have supported the
budget proposals that entail such expansion, including
the Secretary-General’s request for the immediate use
of $7.9 million for security requirements. The United
Nations has an important responsibility in coordinating
a comprehensive international effort in Afghanistan.
Pakistan is further committed to strengthening
our friendly bilateral ties with Afghanistan, in the spirit
of the joint declaration on the directions of bilateral
cooperation, signed by our two Presidents in 2009. Our
assistance package for Afghanistan is the biggest

31

S/PV.6255

cooperation programme Pakistan has had with any
country. We have elaborate human resources
development programmes in various fields for our
Afghan friends. Afghanistan is also our third largest
trading partner and is soon likely to become the second
largest partner.
We are also engaged in security and intelligence
cooperation with Afghanistan, including through the
Tripartite Commission, which also includes the United
States and the International Security Assistance Force.
The last highest-level meeting of the Commission, held
on 29 December, reviewed the overall coordination in
the security area specifically. We are also looking
forward to constructively participating in the meetings
being organized by the Turkish Government in Istanbul
during the last week of this month and in the London
Conference on Afghanistan to be held on 28 January
2010.
But let us signal a cautionary note. As Lord
Curzon, Viceroy of India, said, anyone who has read
the history of the area will not prophesy the future.
Suddenly the status quo changes. Whether it be 100
years ago or the Mad Mullah of Swat or the Mullah of
Pawinda — also emulated recently — you suddenly see
them lead thousands of Lashkars down the mountain.
Prior to the first Afghan war, McNaughton signalled
the Governor in Calcutta, “All is well”; he was
murdered the next day. In the period of the second
Afghan war, Cavagnari cabled the same to Delhi; he
was also killed the next day. And when Commissioner
Undy in Peshawar spoke of the calm, tribal Afridi
Lashkars came out of nowhere to attack Peshawar. This
is Afghanistan.
We are committed to a voluntary, gradual, safe
and dignified return of the over 3 million refugees that
still live with us in Pakistan, but there is a need for
more diligent and sustained efforts at creating
necessary pull factors in Afghanistan. We would stress
the need for strengthening reintegration programmes
for these refugees within Afghanistan’s development
strategy. We expect the United Nations and the
international community to be more forthcoming in
assisting in this endeavour with the necessary
resources.
The international community is nearing
completion of a decade of engagement with
Afghanistan. That calls for introspection and a genuine
reappraisal of achievements and failures. There is no

32

doubt that Afghanistan stills needs international
assistance through sustained, pragmatic and prudent
engagement. Non-intervention and non-interference in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan must however be a
cardinal element of this engagement. No regional or
extra-regional State should be allowed to manipulate
the situation. The long-term objectives of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan can be
realized only by respecting its sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
In 1907, two empires met and signed the Saint
Petersburg Convention; both are now sitting in the
Security Council. Russia agreed to channel its foreign
policy on Afghanistan through Whitehall, and the
British agreed not to invade, annex or occupy any part
of Afghanistan, having just ceded the territories of
Kandahar and Herat to Amir Abdur Rahman Khan.
There is a lesson of history in this pax. Let us hope that
this Council is listening.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me start by
emphasizing that the international community has a
common desire for improved security, political stability
and development for the people of Afghanistan. We all
share that goal, and we also agree that a joint political
strategy is the only way to bring about a sustainable
peace in Afghanistan.
Unfortunately, through the years since the Bonn
Agreement, we have witnessed, in efforts by the
international community, a lack of unity on how to
reach a sustainable political solution in Afghanistan.
This fragile situation cannot be allowed to continue.
There is thus an urgent need for concerted action to
focus on joint priorities under Afghan leadership and to
coordinate in a way that empowers Afghan institutions.
There needs to be a gradual and responsible transfer of
authority to the Afghan Government.
The aim of our joint efforts should be to enable
Afghans to fulfil their responsibility to manage Afghan
institutions and national programmes in a transparent
and competent manner. Enhanced international
coordination should produce focused priorities, better
delivery in line with Afghan priorities, and more
accountability to both the international community and
the Afghan authorities.

10-20219

S/PV.6255

It is necessary to ask how we and the Afghan
Government should set our priorities and where we can
improve our performance. Succeeding in Afghanistan
will depend on our ability to improve and strengthen
our capacity to coordinate international civilian and
political efforts. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays a key role in
finding constructive answers to these questions. To
maintain both legitimacy and broad international
support, it is vital that the United Nations play the
leading role in coordinating all political and
international civilian support to Afghanistan. All major
donors should also step up international coordination
and accept being coordinated under the primacy of the
United Nations, in order to avoid duplication or
fragmentation and to strengthen Afghan capacity.
At the same time, we need to recognize that the
political mandate of the United Nations should be
better combined with the role of coordinating
international development assistance. The UNAMA
mandate to be renewed in March needs to cover the
relationship between UNAMA and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and their
coordination functions. ISAF needs to strengthen its
capacity and competency in civilian assistance to
ensure more effective delivery of provincial
reconstruction team assistance aligned with Afghan
priorities. But the overall civilian coordination needs to
lie with UNAMA. UNAMA should also be granted a
more independent role with regard to developing a
political strategy. Such a strategy is critical in
providing guidance for the military efforts. UNAMA
also needs to focus more of its work on rule of law,
human rights and transitional justice.
UNAMA’s ability to deliver optimally requires
resources, qualified personnel and a more conducive
security environment. We are very pleased that the key
role played by UNAMA in Afghanistan is reflected in
the significant increase in the Mission’s budget for
2010. Only with a sufficient level of predictable
funding will UNAMA be able to implement its
mandate effectively. We therefore welcome the
approval of the UNAMA budget in the Fifth
Committee, but call on the United Nations Secretariat
and UNAMA to provide for concrete measures that can
be implemented to speed up the recruitment and
deployment of personnel to Afghanistan. It is critical
that UNAMA become fully staffed without delay. It is
also important that the enhanced UNAMA field offices

10-20219

get a clearer mandate that is based on best practices
and lessons learned. The Mission’s presence should
also correspond with where UNAMA can add the most
value. Norway also welcomes the additional budgetary
allocation for ensuring the security of United Nations
staff.
The past few months have been difficult ones for
all who have been engaged in Afghanistan, but
especially hard for the United Nations. UNAMA and
its staff face difficult and often dangerous
circumstances. We commend their courage and
dedication in risking their lives as they work for a
better and more peaceful Afghanistan.
As this is the last briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kai Eide in
the Council, we would also like to express our deep
appreciation for his dedicated leadership over the past
two years and for his principled commitment through a
difficult period.
The Afghan presidential election and its
aftermath last year illustrated clearly how challenging
it can be to conduct elections in conflict-affected areas.
The controversy of the 2009 elections undermined
confidence in Afghan leadership and affected
negatively
the
international
engagement
in
Afghanistan, though the result was acceptable to
Afghans and respected Afghan laws and institutions.
The result of the elections last year confirmed the
fact that Afghan institutions are weak and fragile.
Serious flaws and weaknesses in the Afghan electoral
institutions need to be corrected before we can engage
in similar support to parliamentary elections this year.
We need to see progress and reforms that can prevent
fraud from taking place.
It is not only the Afghan people but also the
international community that have expectations and
demands. As stated by President Karzai in his
inaugural speech on 19 November, the new Afghan
Government will have to commit itself on a larger
scale and take all necessary measures to combat
corruption and the culture of impunity, improve
governance — in particular at the local level and
including the rule of law — protect human rights and
women’s rights, and improve the security situation and
its capacity to deliver basic services to the Afghan
people.

33

S/PV.6255

As members of the international community, we
must stand ready to assist the next Afghan Government
in meeting these demanding commitments to the
people of Afghanistan. Norway looks forward to the
London Conference, where the partnership between the
Afghan Government and the international community
will be renewed and key actions of the new Afghan
Government will be endorsed. This will be an
important road map to the next Afghan-led conference
in Kabul, expected to be held later this year. Norway
welcomes the focus on transition within the military
and civilian sector in order for the Afghan people to
assume more responsibility for their own country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Hans-Peter Schwaiger, acting head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Schwaiger: We would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council at the beginning of
2010. We would also like to congratulate the five
newly elected members of the Security Council.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) in accordance with the new
arrangements for external representation of the Union
under the Treaty of Lisbon. In this respect, it is a very
special and, as the French representative said, a very
moving moment for the European Union.
The candidate country Croatia; the countries of
the Stabilisation and Association process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this declaration.
Allow me to begin by expressing our appreciation
for the opportunity to participate in today’s debate.
Like other speakers before me, I would especially like
to thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing, his
excellent work in the past and his ongoing work in
leading the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also want to wish him all
the best in his future endeavours.
The European Union welcomes the conclusion of
the presidential electoral process and congratulates
President Hâmid Karzai on assuming office for a
second consecutive term. The EU wishes to underline
its readiness to support President Karzai and the future

34

Afghan Government in the implementation of the
commitments made to the Afghan people in his
inaugural speech, namely, in the five key areas of
peace and reconciliation, security, good governance,
economic development and regional cooperation. This
will require close and strategic coordination of the
international efforts under the lead of UNAMA.
The European Union takes note of the
announcement
by
the
Independent
Electoral
Commission that the parliamentary elections will take
place in May 2010. It also underlines the need for
urgent reform of the electoral system, including a
review of the appointment mechanism of the
commissioners
of
the
Independent
Electoral
Commission to ensure its impartiality, as recommended
in the final reports and findings of the EU Election
Observation Mission and other observations groups on
the presidential and provincial council elections.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
extremely challenging. As highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/674), the security situation
has worsened over the reporting period, with a 65 per
cent increase in the number of incidents from 2008,
including the tragic attack of 28 October 2009, which
highlighted the increased level of risk exposure for
United Nations personnel. In this context, the European
Union wishes to reiterate its condolences to the
families of the victims.
The European Union concurs with the SecretaryGeneral that, to reverse this downward trend, the new
Government will have to show resolve in implementing
political reform that addresses the root causes of the
insurgency, including through efforts aimed at
improving governance and an Afghan-led political
process to re-establish peace. Also, everything possible
must be done to avoid civilian casualties.
The European Union actively supports the
improvement of good governance, the rule of law, the
fight against corruption and impunity, and respect for
human rights in Afghanistan. Building Afghan capacity
and ownership in the police and civil sectors remains at
the core of the European Union’s engagement in
Afghanistan, as reaffirmed in our recent plan of action.
The European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan is
clear proof of that active and continued engagement.
Equally, the European Union urges the new Afghan
Government to give the utmost priority to the

10-20219

S/PV.6255

achievement of significant progress in those areas,
especially at the sub-national level.
Stability,
security
and
development
in
Afghanistan are closely linked to the overall situation
in the region. The European Union strongly supports
the development of a coordinated approach at the
regional level and enhanced cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours, especially Pakistan.
The EU has initiated decisive steps to strengthen and
achieve a more coherent and concerted approach to EU
action in Afghanistan and Pakistan through its plan of
action for the region.
The European Union strongly supports UNAMA
in its important role as the coordinator of international
efforts,
while
recognizing
Member
States’
responsibility to provide UNAMA with the necessary
resources to perform this task. The European Union
concurs with the Secretary-General that a more focused
and better coordinated international civilian effort,
under a United Nations umbrella and within the
framework of a transition strategy, is urgently required.
In that regard, the European Union is ready to
further explore initiatives such as the establishment of
a reinforced and dedicated civilian coordination
structure that ensures strong Afghan ownership and the
involvement of all major stakeholders, and the
appointment of a senior civilian official within the
International Security Assistance Force. Those and
other initiatives, including the improvement of existing
coordination mechanisms, need careful analysis.

The European Union also looks forward to the
upcoming London Conference, on 28 January, and the
subsequent Kabul conference, which will offer an
opportunity for the new Afghan Government to lay out
its priorities, plans and commitments. The United
Nations will have a prominent role in both conferences.
For the international community they will be occasions
to review and reaffirm its engagement in Afghanistan.
We should agree on new goals, benchmarks and
timelines in order to renew a common framework for
our work towards the shared goal of a peaceful and
secure Afghanistan. Those conferences also represent
an important step towards the formulation and
subsequent implementation of a transition strategy,
with the emphasis on building up the Afghan National
Security Forces and the gradual handover of
responsibility for security to Afghanistan’s own
authorities.
The European Union reiterates its full recognition
that the primary responsibility for the development of
the country lies with the Afghan Government and
people themselves. But I would like to assure the
Council that the European Union will continue to play
an active role in assisting Afghanistan on its road to
security, stability and prosperity, in close cooperation
and coordination with UNAMA and other international
actors.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

10-20219

35
