S/2021/884

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 October 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 21 October 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8883rd meeting of the Security Council,
convened on 19 October 2021 under the agenda item “The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question”. The interventions of the briefers, the
members of the Council, the Observer State of Palestine and Israel will be published
as an official record of the Security Council (S/PV.8883).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members
for the 8883rd meeting, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are enclosed: Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil,
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, the European Union, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and
the United Arab Emirates. Those statements will be issued as an official document
of the Security Council in accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated
7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was
agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, and reference to the document will be made in S/PV.8883.
(Signed) Martin Kimani
President of the Security Council

21-15501 (E) 171121 050122

*2115501*

S/2021/884

Annex 1
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Kenya
on its successful presidency of the Security Council this month and to express our
gratitude for the opportunity for the Non-Aligned Movement to present its position
on the question of Palestine, which has historically constituted an issue of concern
and vital importance to the Movement and remains one of the longest-standing items
on the Security Council’s agenda.
This year, during the Online Mid-term Ministerial Conference of the NonAligned Movement, held on 13 and 14 July under the theme “Non-Aligned Movement
at the centre of multilateral efforts in responding to global challenges”, the ministers
adopted a political declaration, stressing, inter alia, that a just, lasting and peaceful
solution to all aspects of the question of Palestine, based on the internationally
endorsed parameters enshrined in the relevant United Nations resolutions, must
remain a priority on the Movement’s agenda and an ongoing responsibility of the
United Nations until it is satisfactorily resolved in all its aspects in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
In that regard, the States members of the Movement take this opportunity
to once again reaffirm that this ongoing historic injustice, with the over 54-year
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory and other Arab territories at its core,
continues to pose a serious threat to regional and international peace and security
and requires urgent attention and action, in accordance with international law, the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations. The
international community cannot remain paralysed on this issue and cannot accept
arguments that this issue is “intractable” or that peace “is not possible” at this
time. The international consensus on a just solution is firm and clear, and we have
multilateral political and diplomatic tools to promote the achievement of a peaceful
resolution and must use them responsibly and urgently.
The Security Council in particular has a clear responsibility for ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security. It must uphold its Charter duties
and must act to implement its own resolutions, which constitute the foundation for a
peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict. The question of Palestine cannot
be the exception to international law and to the authority of the Security Council.
We therefore remain deeply concerned that, for too long, this organ has been unable
to fulfil its mandate on this important question, particularly due to the use of the
veto by one permanent member. The members of the Movement call on the Security
Council to overcome its paralysis and fulfil its Charter duties towards the Palestine
question, restoring credibility to this organ and upholding its obligations towards
the achievement of a just and peaceful solution to this protracted conflict and
tragic injustice.
The Non-Aligned Movement still believes that resolution 2334 (2016), which
reaffirmed the Security Council’s many relevant resolutions on the matter, provides
the only viable path to peace, setting forth the essential requirements and parameters
for the achievement of a just outcome on the basis of the two-State solution based
on the 1967 lines, in accordance with the long-standing terms of reference of peace
endorsed by the international community, namely, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, including the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, and ensuring the fulfilment by the
2/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including to self-determination and the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We therefore reiterate NAM’s call for full respect for resolution 2334 (2016)
and for the effective implementation of its provisions and obligations, particularly
by the occupying Power, including in terms of States’ obligations with regard to
distinction, which is a matter central to ensuring accountability. We also underscore
the need for the intensification of international and regional diplomatic efforts aimed
at bringing an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution, as also called for in resolution 2334 (2016) and
call on the Security Council to examine all practical ways and means to ensure its
implementation, as it has pledged to do.
Similarly, the States members of the Movement continue to call for full respect
for, and the implementation of, all other relevant resolutions, including with regard
to the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities and the status of occupied
East Jerusalem, since that would create the necessary conditions for bringing an
end to the occupation, justly resolving the conflict in all its aspects and making
Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a reality for the benefit of both peoples, the
region and the international community as a whole.
It is imperative that action be taken immediately, in line with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, to redress the situation on the
ground, which has been marked by rising violence and tensions that must be
urgently de-escalated, and to foster an appropriate environment in the pursuit of
peace. That must include a halt to all unilateral and unlawful measures, which serve
only to embolden Israel to further pursue its illegal policies and practices in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Actions that violate the
Security Council resolutions and the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem and
its holy sites are provocative and dangerous, destroy the prospects for peace and
should not be supported or celebrated by any country. Threats of annexation by
Israeli officials and the continued settlement activities and forced displacement of
Palestinian families from their homes and lands must be unequivocally condemned.
Any measures taken in that regard must be forthwith rejected as null and void and
without any legal effect and must be met with firm measures of accountability for
such grave breaches, including by lawful countermeasures.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for full respect for the historical status quo
at the holy sites and for the Hashemite historical custodianship exercised by His
Majesty ⁠K ing Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, King of Jordan, over the Christian and
Muslim holy sites in the city and for the protection of the sanctity of the holy sites.
The Non-Aligned Movement commends the efforts of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of the Islamic
Cooperation. The Movement welcomes the Call for Al-Quds/Jerusalem, signed in
Rabat on 30 March 2019 by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco and His
Holiness Pope Francis, to stress the important role that Al Quds/Jerusalem plays as
a city of tolerance and mutual respect among the people of the three monotheistic
religions and the need to preserve its specificities and features as a city of
peaceful coexistence.
In relation to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains of great concern to the
Movement, particularly the grave humanitarian situation, which regrettably
continues to deteriorate day by day. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call
for the complete lifting of the Israeli blockade, which continues to impose untold
humanitarian, social and economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian
children, women and men in Gaza. This crisis must be comprehensively addressed
21-155013/53

S/2021/884

in accordance with international law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, and the relevant United Nations resolutions, and in
the context of the unequivocal calls and overriding responsibility to bring an end to
the illegitimate, belligerent Israeli foreign occupation of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, since 1967.
In the absence of a solution, the States members of the Movement reiterate
their call for the continued provision of the needed humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees. The NonAligned Movement therefore stresses the importance of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), along with
other United Nations agencies and international organizations, in alleviating their
plight, and calls for full support for UNRWA’s mandate to ensure the continuity
of its vital programmes and its contribution to regional stability. In the light of the
continuing financial shortfalls, we urge the international community to provide
UNRWA with the necessary funding to ensure the continuity of its indispensable
operations in all fields of operation.
As Israel has clearly abdicated on its obligations as the occupying Power
to protect the Palestinian civilian population, as prescribed by the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, we also reiterate our long-standing call for international
protection for the Palestinian people. This is urgent in order to alleviate the dire
state of insecurity of the occupied population and prevent the loss of more innocent
human lives. Failure to do that can lead only to further escalations and the tragic loss
of more civilian lives.
In that connection, we reiterate our grave concern about the lack of
accountability for all the violations committed by Israel, many of which may amount
to war crimes. The absence of justice only fosters greater impunity, leads to the
recurrence of crimes and destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby further
diminishing the prospects for peace. We continue to call for international action,
particularly by the Security Council, to ensure a cessation of, and accountability
for, the violations that are being systematically committed by Israel against the
Palestinian civilian population under its occupation. We reiterate that Israel must
comply with its duties and responsibilities under international law and must be held
to account if it continues its blatant contempt of this organ and its international
legal obligations.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan, the Non-Aligned
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel,
the occupying Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December 1981 that purports
to alter the legal, physical and demographic status and the institutional structure,
as well as the Israeli measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration there,
are null and void and have no legal effect. In that regard, and in line with our
principled position, we once again demand that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981)
and fully withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to its 4 June 1967 borders, in
implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In addition, we reiterate
our condemnation of the unilateral and arbitrary proclamation by the United States
of America on recognizing the Golan Heights as part of Israel and renew our call on
the Security Council to unequivocally condemn that provocative act.
Moreover, the States members of the Movement emphasize that Israel must
withdraw from all Lebanese territories, including Sheba’a Farms, the Kfar Shouba
hills and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar village up to the Blue Line, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006).
4/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

To conclude, we seize this opportunity to reiterate our call for the international
community to act collectively, with responsibility, to uphold international law and
to exert and intensify all necessary efforts in support of the just Palestinian cause,
the ultimate goal of which is to bring an end to this historic and grave injustice. We
reaffirm our commitment to promoting a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight of
the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm our support to the Palestinian people in their
struggle to achieve justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including to self-determination, freedom and independence in their
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

21-155015/53

S/2021/884

Annex 2
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations, Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Kenya for holding today’s important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would also like to
thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his valuable briefing.
The Middle East remains in a state of instability and insecurity. The people
of a number of its States are experiencing difficulties as a result of ongoing wars,
crises and conflicts that have taken lives, displaced millions and destroyed cities,
villages and infrastructure. As a result, focused and concerted efforts are required
to achieve security, stability, peace and prosperity in the region by adhering to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which provide for noninterference in the internal affairs of States, commitment to good-neighbourliness,
mutual respect and the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as the strengthening
of international cooperation.
The path to peace is a strategic approach and option for the Kingdom of Bahrain
to bring lasting and comprehensive peace to the region and establish a culture of
tolerance and peaceful coexistence for the good of the peoples of the region and the
world. In that context, the Kingdom of Bahrain emphasizes the importance of action
by the international community to bring about a fair and comprehensive resolution
of the Palestinian question that fulfils the aspirations of the Palestinian people for an
independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital in accordance with the principle
of a two-State solution, internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, so as to safeguard the right of the Palestinian people to live in a safe, stable
and prosperous homeland.
Houthi terrorist militias continue to attack civilians and civilian infrastructure
in the fraternal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, systematically and deliberately launching
ballistic missiles and drones in clear violation of international humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn such terrorist attacks and repeated violations, as well as the
militias’ insistence on threatening maritime navigation and undermining regional
security and stability. The Kingdom of Bahrain supports all measures being taken by
the fraternal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to preserve its territorial integrity and protect
its citizens and residents and stresses the need for the international community
to condemn those heinous hostile acts, which are intended to harm civilians and
civilian objects.
The Kingdom of Bahrain supports the Saudi Arabia initiative for a ceasefire in
Yemen so that a political solution to the Yemeni crisis can be reached in accordance
with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the all-inclusive National Dialogue Conference and Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2015), and so that an end can be brought to
the suffering of the Yemeni people.
In conclusion, the great challenges facing the Middle East region compel us to
maintain our faith in the need for concerted multilateral action while respecting the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, so that the region may
enjoy peace, stability and prosperity.

6/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 3
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I congratulate Kenya on its successful stewardship of the work of the Security
Council in October. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his informative briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered by the representative
of Oman on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 18) and by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(annex 1). Allow me to add the following points in my national capacity.
While the Security Council holds its open debate on the situation in the Middle
East today, Israel, the occupying Power, continues to impose institutionalized
discrimination against Palestinians living under its rule in occupied East Jerusalem,
the West Bank and Gaza. On 6 October, Israel attempted to divide the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, violating both the historic and legal status quo at this
holy site and blatantly disrespecting the Islamic Waqf. Such a provocative act comes
only months after the Israeli aggression on the Al-Aqsa Mosque last May, which
killed 232 Palestinians, including 65 children, 39 women and 17 elderly persons;
injured over 1,900 people, many critically; and displaced over 60,000 Palestinians.
Despite the fact that the occupying Power is absolutely forbidden under the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 from transferring any of its civilian population
into the occupied territory, Israel continues to do so. In the first week of October
2021, Israel announced its illegal settlement plan across occupied Palestine to
construct 10,000 settler housing units in the Qalandiya area, north of occupied
Jerusalem. That constitutes a flagrant violation not only of international law but also
of relevant United Nations resolutions. That would undermine the territorial integrity,
viability and contiguity of the Palestinian State — and thus the possibility of the
two‐State solution.
Such appalling Israeli brutality continues with impunity in the occupied
Palestinian territory. This cycle of violence and Israeli aggression is nothing new.
Our inaction and failure to hold Israel accountable for its aggression only makes
things more vicious. More than seven decades of inaction weigh heavily on the
conscience of the Council.
Bangladesh strongly denounces such abhorrent acts of terror. I reaffirm
Bangladesh’s unflinching commitment to realizing the inalienable rights of the
brotherly people of Palestine for an independent homeland, based on the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Let me reiterate the following priorities.
First, Israel must end its illegal occupation and annexation of Palestinian
territory. We call for an immediate halt to the Israeli aggression and urge the
international community to take urgent and decisive action to end this cycle of
violence and injustice. For now, serious efforts must be made to strengthen the 20
May ceasefire and revitalize the Middle East peace process.
Secondly, decade after decade, there has been an endless longing to end the
conflict. However, global mobilization to end Israel’s wrongdoing is still lacking. In
the current context, such mobilization can be effected only by the Security Council.
The absence of any serious political and legal actions by the Council to enforce its
standing resolutions that aim to end the decades‐long Israeli occupation is neither
acceptable nor sustainable and contradicts the Council’s Charter duties. The Council
21-155017/53

S/2021/884

must ensure Israel complies with all international human rights and humanitarian
laws and relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Thirdly, the international community, led by the United Nations, must promptly
engage in a thorough, serious and firm approach to this conflict for a sustained
political and just initiative that upholds Palestinians’ human rights in accordance
with international law and ends the occupation. The swift implementation of the
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the efforts of the Quartet are crucial building
blocks in that regard.
Fourthly, the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people must be
urgently met. Humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as supplies, must have
uninterrupted access to the civilian population in the Palestinian territory, including
the Gaza Strip. We also need to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) by addressing
its perennial funding crisis so as to meet the basic needs of the 5.8 million Palestine
refugees registered with the Agency. Solidarity and joint action to mobilize resources
will contribute to easing the difficulties facing UNRWA. Bangladesh will continue
to support UNRWA with its annual contribution.
Finally, the flagrant violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law and other international accords by the Israeli
occupation forces are tantamount to war crimes. Persistent impunity and inaction
have only led the Israeli occupation forces to become more violent over the years.
Holding the violators accountable would be an important step in finding justice
and lasting peace. In that regard, we welcome the developments at the International
Criminal Court.
As I conclude, I would like to reiterate Bangladesh’s unwavering support
for the Palestinian people. We stand firmly with them in achieving their legitimate
rights and aspirations. A two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders is the
only solution to bring about lasting peace in the region. Bangladesh will support all
efforts to that end.

8/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil would like to thank Kenya for organizing this quarterly debate on the
situation in the Middle East.
Our position on the question of Palestine is well known. Brazil remains
committed to supporting a peaceful resolution of the conflict, based on a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side-by-side within secure and internationally
recognized borders. We are following, attentively and hopefully, the resumption of
high-level contacts between the new Israeli Government and Palestinian authorities.
Brazil welcomes gestures such as Israel’s granting of additional work permits
to Palestinian workers and the lifting of some restrictions on the flow of goods
to the Gaza Strip, which are extremely relevant as confidence-building measures.
We also welcome the announcement by the Palestinian Authority of the holding of
municipal elections. We hope that will be a step towards transparent and inclusive
general elections, which are essential to strengthen the legitimacy and credibility of
Palestinian institutions.
Brazil attaches great importance to measures that may improve the lives of
Palestinian refugees. For hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who live in refugee
camps, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is frequently the only source of basic services, such as education
and health. As a member of the UNRWA Advisory Commission, we express deep
concern over its chronic financial challenges. We reiterate our willingness to
cooperate closely with the Agency, especially in the light of the additional challenges
posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We believe the momentum created by the Abraham Accords, when old rivalries
gave way to unequivocal commitment to dialogue and diplomacy, can forge the path
to build unprecedented trust in the Middle East.
Turning to the situation in Syria, we are encouraged by the convening of
the Constitutional Committee yesterday, in Geneva, and thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his efforts in that regard. While, after two years since its creation, the
Committee has yet to show substantive progress, this week’s meeting represents
a critical opportunity. Brazil urges the members of the Committee to bridge their
differences and engage seriously in drafting a new constitution conducive to peace,
stability and reconciliation.
Brazil reaffirms its support for the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen in
facilitating a solution to the conflict under the overarching framework of resolution
2254 (2015). We remain convinced that only a Syrian-owned and -led, United
Nations-facilitated political process, with due regard for the preservation of Syria’s
territorial integrity, will bring about lasting peace and provide relief for the suffering
Syrian population.
Brazil reiterates its condemnation of the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians, the targeting of medical and humanitarian workers, as well as schools
and hospitals, and the forced disappearances, arbitrary detentions and summary
killings, which have become all too common throughout the conflict. Additionally,
humanitarian exemptions for any sanctions programme related to Syria must be
observed to ensure that they do not undermine access to food and essential health
supplies for those most in need.
Brazil commends the people and the Government of Iraq for the general
elections held peacefully on 10 October. Those elections follow an intense period
21-155019/53

S/2021/884

of demonstrations in which the Iraqi people raised their voices to call for good
governance and the consolidation of democracy. We hope that the new Government,
once formed, can respond to their call. Brazil also commends the invaluable support
provided by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq, not only through its
expanded election-monitoring team but also through the long-term advice and
technical assistance it has provided to the Iraqi Government.
In Yemen, we have witnessed a disturbing escalation of violence over the past
few months, ranging from the ongoing and alarming Ansar Allah offensive against
Ma’rib to the car bomb attack in Aden last week. The impasse surrounding the repair
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker is further cause for concern, and we call on Ansar Allah
to allow United Nations-mandated personnel to conduct urgently needed inspections
and repairs.
Brazil is extremely concerned by reports from the World Food Programme and
other agencies regarding the immediate risk of famine in the country. Guaranteeing
safe and unobstructed humanitarian access to all parties is more important than
ever. In September, Brazil announced a new financial contribution — of $75,000
through the World Food Programme — to United Nations humanitarian operations
in Yemen for measures related to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We hope that
small gestures coming from countries outside the purview of traditional donors can
help generate a positive trend towards a more diverse donor base.
It was under these challenging circumstances that Mr. Hans Grundberg
assumed his role as the new Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Yemen, in
September. Brazil notes his recent trip to Riyadh, Aden and Muscat and wishes
him success in this crucial task. We urge all parties to cooperate with the Special
Envoy, cease the current escalation of violence and engage in good faith in peace
negotiations, without preconditions.
Two months from now, the Libyan people will elect their new leaders in the
24 December parliamentary and presidential elections. That will be an opportunity
to move towards national reconciliation and the building of truly representative
institutions. For this reason, Brazil welcomes the efforts of Libyan political forces
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya — which recently had its mandate
renewed until 31 January 2022 — to respect the electoral schedule. We believe that
will be a decisive step for Libya to start a new chapter in its history, one in which the
aspirations of its people are at the forefront.
Finally, we cannot conclude without a word about Lebanon. Brazil is deeply
concerned about the outbreak of violence we all witnessed last week in the streets
of Beirut. We support the efforts of the Lebanese Government to restore calm and
dialogue. Brazil reiterates its commitment to Lebanon, a country with which we
share historical ties of friendship, highlighted by the expressive presence of the
Lebanese diaspora in Brazil.
We have an important record of efforts towards the stabilization of Lebanon.
For almost 10 years, under the mandate of resolution 1701 (2006), Brazil had the
honour and responsibility to serve as commander of the Maritime Task Force of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. We are proud of this contribution and
reiterate our readiness to support Lebanon in overcoming the current crisis.
As we consider the situation in the Middle East, it is necessary to bear in mind
that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing. Efforts to support the peaceful resolution of conflicts should
be combined with initiatives to promote socioeconomic development, which are key
to build resilient and inclusive societies.

10/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 5
Statement by the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Cheikh Niang
On behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, at the outset I would like to congratulate Kenya for its able
presidency of the Security Council this month.
As we engage once more in this quarterly debate, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory remains tense. Palestinians continue to be victims of
increasing levels of violence and insecurity, recorded by the United Nations, most
non-governmental organizations and even the Israeli press. Much of the violence
is increasingly perpetrated by illegal Israeli settlers in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, who have stepped up attacks and harassment against the civilian
population as well as the establishment of illegal outposts on Palestinian land.
The Committee remains concerned by the continued loss of life and serious
injuries, especially to children, in the occupied Palestinian territory. According
to the Special Coordinator, from 12 June to 27 September alone, 27 Palestinians,
including two women and five children, were killed by Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other incidents. During the same
period, thousands of Palestinians were injured, including 10 women and 530 children.
The Committee urges further measures to ensure that Israel fulfils its
obligations as the occupying Power, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, to protect Palestinian civilians from violence, including by Israeli settlers, and
to investigate and hold accountable all those responsible for such attacks.
Israeli demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian homes and structures have
also continued across the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, since the
Committee’s last statement to the Council (see S/2021/91). According to the Special
Coordinator’s September 2021 statement to the Council (see S/PV.8869), those
actions displaced 433 people, including 102 women and 251 children, during the 2
June to 27 September period. The Committee calls on Israel to cease the demolition
and seizure of Palestinian property throughout the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, in line with its obligations under international humanitarian law and
equally in respect of international human rights law.
During September, Palestinians continued to demonstrate in the occupied
West Bank to protest the situation of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention,
including six Palestinians on hunger strike. On 6 September, the reported escape
of six Palestinians from Israel’s Gilboa prison, who were later rearrested, ignited
protests that escalated into clashes throughout the West Bank and Gaza. The
Committee warns that punitive measures by Israel against the Palestinian prisoners
and detainees it is holding in its jails risk provoking an open confrontation and
escalation of this volatile situation.
Palestinian civil-society organizations continued to face restrictions on their
freedoms of expression, assembly and association. On 11 August, Ms. Mary Lawlor,
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders,
noted that arrests and raids on the homes of Palestinian human rights defenders form
part of a wider crackdown against those defending the human rights of Palestinians
in the occupied Palestinian territory.
We also continue to witness the limitation of access for Palestinian worshippers
to sacred sites. For example, the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process reported that tensions rose at the Ibrahimi Mosque
site, in Hebron’s Old City, following a decision by Israeli authorities to temporarily
21-1550111/53

S/2021/884

restrict access for Palestinian worshippers between 21 and 24 September, during the
Jewish holiday of Sukkot.
In occupied East Jerusalem, a recent Israeli judicial decision to allow
“silent Jewish prayers” in Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif under Israeli
police escort risks inflaming an already precarious situation because it constitutes
an alteration of the historic and legal status quo at the holy site, which must be
respected, as repeatedly demanded by the General Assembly, the Security Council,
the Human Rights Council and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization.
United Nations human rights experts on 13 August called on the Government
of Israel to immediately return confidential documents and office equipment that
its military seized from the offices of Defense for Children International Palestine
in Al-Bireh, in the occupied West Bank. The Committee calls on Israel to take all
necessary measures to protect the right to freedom of association and ensure that
human rights organizations in the occupied Palestinian territory are protected from
such arbitrary actions and repression.
Over six months since the escalation of hostilities between Israel and Hamas,
the truce in Gaza remains fragile and reconstruction and recovery remain urgent.
The Committee is encouraged by recent efforts to facilitate movement and access
to and from Gaza. In particular, the Committee notes the limited easing of access
restrictions by the Israeli authorities; the expansion of the fishing zone on 29 July;
the easing of import and export restrictions on 13 and 26 August; the issuance of
permits to Palestinian traders and businesspeople to cross from Gaza into Israel; and,
more critically, permission for construction materials, food and non-food items and
fuel to enter Gaza. However, let me reiterate that Gaza requires political solutions
that will see a complete lifting of the illegal Israeli blockade, in line with resolution
1860 (2009), and the return of the legitimate Palestinian Government to Gaza, and
further recall that Gaza remains an integral part of the occupied Palestinian territory
and must be part of an independent, sovereign Palestinian State.
The Committee echoes concerns expressed by many about the Palestinian
Authority’s financial position, which, according to the Special Coordinator, has
deteriorated in 2021, partly due to Israel’s withholding of additional clearance
revenues since July and the ongoing impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
While the Committee calls on donors to support the Palestinian people, it also urges
the Palestinian Authority to implement commensurate reform priorities to improve
the fiscal outlook.
The Committee welcomes the announcement that the delayed Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting will be held in November to consider Palestinian needs and
financial contributions. In addition, the Committee appreciates Qatar’s contribution
of $40 million to the United Nations to support cash assistance to 100,000 vulnerable
families in Gaza and an additional $10 million per month for the Gaza power plant.
The Committee also commends donors’ response to the United Nations
Humanitarian Flash Appeal, which raised $45 million of the requested $95 million
to support humanitarian aid and recovery for the Gaza Strip. The Committee
appreciates, inter alia, the 22 September decision by the Government of the United
States of America to release the remaining $20 million of a total humanitarian aid
package of $75 million for Palestinians earmarked in March of this year.
The annual report to the General Assembly (A/76/13) on the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
presented to the Fourth Committee by its Commissioner-General Philippe Lazzarini
on 5 October, highlighted the Agency’s financial situation, which remains dire and
12/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

uncertain, lacking the funds to operate in November and December due to funding
reductions by some donors and despite the return of the United States of America
this year as a partner and donor to the Agency. A disruption in UNRWA services
will deny millions of Palestine refugees, among them many young people, across the
region the essential rights of a dignified life: education, health, food and housing.
The Committee therefore reiterates its appeal to the international community to
provide timely, sufficient and predictable funding to UNRWA so that is can fulfil its
General Assembly mandate to assist the Palestine refugees pending a just solution on
the basis of resolution 194 (III).
In conclusion, the Committee remains committed to upholding its
responsibilities towards the full realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including to self-determination and freedom. It supports the idea of a just
solution based on international law and relevant United Nations resolutions that
ensures two States, Israel and Palestine, may live side by side in peace and security
along the pre-1967 lines and with East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian
State. In that regard, the Committee will remain a reliable partner in support of
international efforts to create the conditions to garner broader global support for
the just resolution of the question of Palestine and the realization of a peaceful and
secure Middle East.

21-1550113/53

S/2021/884

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations, Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta
[Original: Spanish]
We support the statements made by the representatives of Azerbaijan, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (annex 1), and of Senegal, in his capacity as
Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (annex 5).
The Secretary-General’s urgent call for an end to armed conflicts, hostilities
and wars, and for increased opportunities for diplomacy and cooperation, must be
heeded so that together we may tackle the devastating coronavirus disease pandemic.
While the Security Council remains inactive, Israel continues its occupation
of the Palestinian territories, intensifies its annexation policies and steps up its
illegal practices and colonization measures, including the building and expansion
of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, punitive demolitions, the forced
displacement of hundreds of civilians, the blockade against the Gaza Strip and plans
to annex Palestinian territory in the Jordan Valley and other parts of the West Bank
and East Jerusalem.
The repeated obstruction of Security Council action by the United States of
America has enabled Israel’s impunity and prevented this organ from fulfilling the
responsibility entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is time for the Council to take steps to end the
Israeli military aggression and occupation of Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, in accordance with its resolution 2334 (2016).
We reaffirm our full support for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The Palestinian people must be allowed to exercise
their right to self-determination and to have an independent and sovereign State,
within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, that upholds the
right of return of refugees.
This longstanding call — reiterated by high-level representatives of the vast
majority of members of the international community during the general debate of
the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session — must be met as soon as possible.
We express our steadfast solidarity with the Palestinian people and Government.
We support the accession of the State of Palestine to full membership in the United
Nations and the call by its President for an international peace conference.
In its unjustified and unilateral acts of aggression in the Middle East, the
United States continues severely contravening the legitimate interests of Arab and
Islamic nations and fuelling a dangerous escalation in the region.
We reiterate our rejection of the so-called “deal of the century” devised by
the United States Government, which ignores the two-State solution, long-supported
by the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other international actors.
The unilateral decision by the Government of the United States to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, to establish its diplomatic presence in that city with
disregard to its historical status, as well as to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over
the Syrian Golan represent serious violations of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and relevant Security Council resolutions. The current United
States Government has not reversed those decisions, which further undermine the
possibility of a negotiated solution.
14/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

We call for Israel’s complete and unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian
Golan and all occupied Arab territories.
We demand the cessation of external interference in Syria and full respect for
its sovereignty and territorial integrity while supporting efforts to find a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the situation imposed on that brotherly country.
We strongly condemn the implantation of the “Cesar Law” and other economic
sanctions imposed by the United States and its allies, which hamper reconstruction
in Syria, made all the worse amid the difficulties of the COVID-19 situation.
We reaffirm our support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with
Iran and our rejection of the unilateral withdrawal of the United States from
that agreement.
We reiterate the call for an immediate and unconditional end to the imposition
of arbitrary and illegal unilateral coercive measures against sovereign nations, which
generate additional difficulties amid the ongoing efforts to battle the pandemic, and
violate the human rights of their peoples, international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
The Security Council must carry out its role in maintaining international
peace and security, pursuant to the powers entrusted to it by the Charter of this
Organization, without double standards.
Despite continuous violations of international law, including in the threat
and use of force in international relations, aggression against sovereign States and
interference in their internal affairs, we will continue advocating multilateralism,
peace and full respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

21-1550115/53

S/2021/884

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ecuador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Kenya on its successful presidency
of the Security Council during the month of October 2021.
We reaffirm the validity of our statements delivered on 22 April, 16 May
and 28 July in the open debates on “The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question” (see, respectively, S/2021/404, S/2021/480 and S/PV.8826).
We reiterate our concern at the escalation of violence observed over recent
months in the region, and on the parties to engage in bilateral and collective efforts
aimed at agreeing on effective negotiations with a view to achieving just and lasting
peace in the Middle East without delay.
According to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), demolitions continue at an alarming rate. The properties subject to
destruction include homes, animal shelters, latrines and solar panels essential to the
livelihood, well-being and dignity of communities, something made much worse by
the threat of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
According to OCHA, from January to July, 694 Palestinian structures were
demolished, displacing 963 people. At the current rate, the demolitions and resultant
displacement will exceed last year’s figures — 854 structures demolished and 1,001
people displaced. Ecuador expresses its concern at the humanitarian situation and
the violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
Refraining from causing any further harm to the civilian population is
imperative, as is respect for people’s lives and safety, in accordance with obligations
under international humanitarian law.
In our view, the hostility between the parties that has caused destruction and
death is unacceptable, especially since the two nations have the obligation to comply
with the norms of international law.
We likewise express our profound concern at the annexation measures, which
constitute serious breaches of international law and seriously impact the prospects
for a two-State solution and undermine the possibility of renewed negotiations. In
that regard, the international community must reject any sort of illegal settlement
policy, including the demolition or confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures,
including water and sanitation structures and humanitarian aid, throughout the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) remains a serious problem in the
Palestinian territory, taking into account that the pandemic has claimed more than
4,300 lives in Palestine since its onset. We call on the international community to
strengthen the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility and other initiatives to
promote and expand the national vaccination campaign in Gaza and the West Bank.
In our view, it is crucial that the international community step up efforts to
get the parties to re-engage in meaningful negotiations with a view to reaching a
just and lasting political solution for the parties based on the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel.
16/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Ecuador once again urges all bodies of the United Nations and the
international community to mobilize international support and assistance for the
Palestinian people.
In conclusion, the Security Council must ensure the effective implementation
of its resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) for a worldwide ceasefire and cessation
of hostilities.

21-1550117/53

S/2021/884

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October and to wish you success in leading
the work of the Council. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing.
Egypt aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (annex 1), the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (annex 18).
A situation of high tension continues in the occupied Palestinian territory
despite efforts to maintain the ceasefire reached after the recent escalation between
Israel and Palestinian factions in the Gaza Strip. Israel continues to blockade the
Gaza Strip, expand its settlement practices in the West Bank, confiscate land and
demolish Palestinian homes and infrastructure. Arrests and settler violence against
unarmed Palestinian civilians continue, as well as the ongoing Judaization in East
Jerusalem and the attempt to expel Palestinian families from the Shaykh Jarrah and
Silwan neighbourhoods. Furthermore, all those developments are taking place in the
context of the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories.
Against that backdrop, Egypt seeks to contain the situation by reaching
out to all parties concerned, both Palestinian and Israeli, and at the regional and
international levels, to establish a ceasefire and prevent further deterioration
of the situation by assisting with the entry of individual humanitarian assistance
through the Rafah crossing, fostering reconciliation between Palestinian factions
and allocating $500 million for reconstruction in the Gaza Strip through projects
sponsored by Egyptian companies.
Egypt recognizes the importance of building trust between the Palestinian
and Israeli sides and improving the situation on the ground, both in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. However, we must be honest with ourselves that such actions
cannot be a substitute for a political settlement; rather, they pave the way towards
it. Without a political settlement, we will be plunged into a vicious circle of violent
reprisals between the two sides, which we must seek to avoid in order to safeguard
the lives of innocent civilians and the capacities of the Palestinian people, which are
destroyed every time.
Egypt therefore calls for the cessation of all unilateral actions and practices,
particularly settlements, that inflame the situation in both the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip, where the Israeli blockade must be lifted. Egypt
also calls for the provision of the necessary support to the Palestinian Authority so
that it can cope with the difficult domestic circumstances facing the Palestinian
people. Egypt therefore looks forward to the international conference on support for
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in the coming month, to be convened under the auspices of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan and the State of Sweden, so that a lasting solution can be found to the
Agency’s financial crisis, thereby allowing it to completely fulfil its mandate.
With respect to the political process, Egypt stresses the importance of
improvements on the ground to create a climate conducive to the resumption of
negotiations, so that a political settlement can be reached and the Palestinian people
can attain their legitimate rights through an independent State based on the 4 June
18/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with internationally
recognized resolutions, the two-State solution and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Egypt reiterates that the only way to achieve security and stability in the
Middle East is through the Palestinian people’s attainment of their legitimate rights
and the liberation of all Arab territories occupied in 1967, including the occupied
Syrian Golan, where the situation is no better, given the expansion of settlements.
At the regional level, Egypt welcomes the appointment of Hans Grundberg
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and looks forward to working
with him and supporting his efforts to achieve a comprehensive settlement of the
Yemeni crisis through a political solution that guarantees the unity, sovereignty
and independence of Yemen. Such a settlement should fulfil the aspirations of the
Yemeni people and end their humanitarian suffering, in accordance with the basic
terms of reference of the crisis, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
Egypt also supports United Nations efforts in Syria and Yemen to push
forward the political process and bring about a comprehensive ceasefire within the
parameters set forth in the relevant Security Council resolutions. Egypt stresses the
need for the Security Council to play a more active role to achieve the political
settlement of those crises, impose ceasefires and combat terrorism and illegal
armed groups.
Egypt reiterates its deep concern about the continued launching of attacks
by vessels on other vessels at sea and the attendant threat to international freedom
of navigation. Egypt condemns, in the strongest terms, the attacks against Saudi
Arabia and the escalating use of force outside internationally agreed frameworks
by certain parties in the region, a course of action that violates international law
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and jeopardizes regional and
international peace and security. Egypt also condemns the persistent interference by
some States in the region in the internal affairs of other States and the fuelling of
sectarian divisions that inflame conflicts.
Egypt continues to support all international and regional efforts to achieve
security, stability and sustainable peace in Libya. In that regard, Egypt has been
actively engaged in the work of the second Berlin Conference on Libya and the
recent conference of countries neighbouring Libya in Algeria. We are scheduled
to host the next session in Egypt. Egypt has also taken part in high-level events on
Libya held on the margins of the high-level segment of the General Assembly. Egypt
has supported the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, which began drafting
the ceasefire agreement in October 2020, from its efforts to open the coastal road
and exchange prisoners up to its recent adoption of the integrated action plan for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm Egypt’s firm position on the need for the
full implementation of resolution 2570 (2021), the conclusions of the second Berlin
Conference, the resolutions of the African Union and the League of Arab States on
the holding of presidential and legislative elections in Libya on 24 December 2021 and
the immediate departure of all foreign forces and mercenaries. In that regard, Egypt
follows with concern the repeated attempts to treat foreign forces and mercenaries
separately and to suggest that the departure of foreign forces could be delayed to a
stage following that of the mercenaries. That includes the omission of the issue of the
departure of foreign forces from the agenda of the Libya Stability Initiative meeting
scheduled for 21 October 2021. Egypt asserts that such a separation runs counter to
Security Council resolutions and calls on all parties to comply fully with the relevant
21-1550119/53

S/2021/884

international resolutions and not separate foreign forces from mercenaries. That is
essential to achieving the desired peace and stability in Libya.
A just and comprehensive peace can be achieved in our region only if there is
full compliance with internationally recognized resolutions and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, especially the principles of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and non-intervention in their internal affairs, and
only if all occupied Arab territories are liberated, especially in Palestine and the
Syrian Golan.

20/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 9
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog, in its capacity as observer
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania, and the country of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, align themselves with
this statement.
The EU reaffirms its commitment to a just and comprehensive resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the two-State solution, with the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine living side by side in peace and security and mutual recognition. To that
end, meaningful re-engagement between the parties, confidence-building measures
and improving the living conditions of ordinary people are urgently needed. The
EU welcomes the recent high-level contacts between the parties, including those
aimed at agreeing on measures to improve socioeconomic conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and encourages them to continue. The EU stands ready to
support such efforts with the aim of improving the situation on the ground and
restoring confidence, and of opening a path towards the relaunch of the peace process
as soon as possible. Restoring a political horizon towards a two-State solution, to
which the EU reaffirms there is no alternative, remains of the utmost importance.
The EU continues to call for the consolidation of the ceasefire in Gaza and
recalls its unequivocal position that rocket fire, the launching of incendiary balloons
and other attacks by Hamas and other terrorist groups are unacceptable. The EU
welcomes the steps that Israel has taken to ease some restrictions on Gaza and calls
for the further lifting of restrictions to allow for early recovery and reconstruction
efforts and basic service delivery as well as unimpeded humanitarian access to
Gaza. The EU calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce a fundamental
change in the political, security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including
the end of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points, while addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. The situation in the Gaza Strip has long been
unsustainable; only a political solution will bring an end to the conflict.
The preservation of the viability of the two-State solution, with Jerusalem
serving as the future capital of both States, is at the core of EU policy and will remain
a priority. The EU urges both parties to demonstrate their stated commitment to a
two-State solution through concrete actions and to refrain from unilateral actions
that threaten it.
In that context, the EU is concerned about demolitions and evictions, including
in East Jerusalem. Furthermore, the EU firmly condemns settler-related incidents.
The EU reiterates that settlements are illegal under international law. The EU’s
opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and actions taken in that context, including in
East Jerusalem, is well known. Such actions as building the separation barrier beyond
the 1967 line, demolitions and confiscation — including of EU-funded projects —
evictions, forced transfers, including of Bedouins, illegal outposts, settler violence
and restrictions of movement and access severely threaten the two-State solution and
will only escalate an already tense environment. It will be important not to proceed
with any planned evictions.
The EU recalls the special significance of the holy sites and calls for
upholding the status quo put in place in 1967 for the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif
in line with previous understandings and with respect to Jordan’s special role. The
EU will continue to closely monitor developments on the ground and their broader
21-1550121/53

S/2021/884

implications and remains ready to take further action in order to protect the viability
of the two-State solution.
The EU reiterates its call on the Palestinian Authority (PA) to organize the
postponed national elections without further delay. The EU has consistently expressed
its support for credible, inclusive and transparent elections for all Palestinians.
We firmly believe that strong, inclusive, accountable and functioning democratic
Palestinian institutions based on respect for the rule of law and human rights are
vital for the Palestinian people, for democratic legitimacy and, ultimately, for the
two-State solution. We strongly encourage all Palestinian actors to resume efforts
to build on the successful talks between the factions over recent months, to adhere
to previous agreements, to renounce violence and terrorism, to recognize Israel’s
right to exist and to commit to democratic principles, including the rule of law. We
reiterate our call on Israel to facilitate the holding of such elections across all of the
Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem. The EU continues to stand ready
to work with all those involved to facilitate EU observation of the electoral process.
Palestinian civil-society organizations and actors must be allowed to carry
out their important tasks free from obstruction, harassment and intimidation; the
Palestinian Authority must also take responsibility in that respect. The EU expects
a full, independent investigation into the death of Nizar Banat to be duly carried out
and those responsible to be held accountable. The EU calls for the fundamental right
to freedom of expression in areas under PA control to be upheld.
The European Union reiterates its deep and genuine appreciation for the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and for its dedicated staff, who are working in an extremely difficult
and challenging context. UNRWA is playing a vital role in the humanitarian response
and in early recovery and reconstruction in Gaza; it is an essential provider of vital
services to millions of Palestine refugees and a stabilizing force in the region. Until
a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the refugee issue in accordance with
international law is found, UNRWA remains crucial for providing the necessary
protection and essential services for Palestine refugees, and we will continue to
support UNRWA in all its fields of operation, including in East Jerusalem.
The European Union recalls that together with its member States, it is the
largest contributor to UNRWA. We welcome the additional financial support
from other and new donors, including the renewed commitment from the United
States, and calls upon all partners, including the Arab Gulf States, to increase their
contributions to UNRWA. The upcoming conference hosted by Sweden and Jordan
will be an important opportunity to take steps towards sufficient, predictable and
sustainable funding of the Agency.
Allow me to turn now to the situation in Syria.
After more than a decade of conflict, the international community must not
give up on Syria and must continue its efforts towards a political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Conflict, violence and instability in Syria continue to have profound
repercussions on the stability of the entire region, causing enormous human
suffering, with millions of Syrians still displaced or living as refugees in other
countries, as was made clear once again in the recent devastating statistical update
from the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Syria continues to be an EU priority, as the EU declaration to mark the tenth
year of the conflict, followed by the Brussels Conference on Syria in March this
year, made clear.
22/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

The European Union remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Syrian State and recalls that any sustainable solution to
the conflict requires a genuine, inclusive political transition, in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), negotiated by
the Syrian parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process, with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women. We recognize the important role played by
the Women’s Advisory Board in advising the Special Envoy.
The European Union fully supports the efforts, approach and determination of
United Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to advance on all aspects of resolution
2254 (2015) through a comprehensive approach, including on the issue of detainees
who are in the hands of the regime and missing persons and the establishment of a
safe and neutral environment in order for free and fair elections to be held under
United Nations supervision, and continues to encourage the work of the Syrian-led
Constitutional Committee, under United Nations auspices.
The European Union encourages progress during the sixth round of negotiations
of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva, which started on 18 October, and calls
on all participants, particularly on the Syrian regime, to engage in good faith with
the aim of achieving swift and meaningful progress on constitutional reform.
The European Union has taken positive note of Special Envoy Pedersen’s
proposals for a new political format and for a “steps for steps” approach to move
forward in the political process.
The European Union continues to call upon the Syrian regime and its allies, and
indeed upon all parties to the conflict, to fully respect human rights and international
humanitarian law, and in particular to permanently cease indiscriminate air strikes
and the shelling of civilians and humanitarian workers. The recent siege and the
attacks perpetrated by the Syrian regime on Dar’a are not acceptable.
In the north-west of Syria, the situation continues to be highly insecure. The
ceasefire agreed in March 2020 is fragile and must be upheld and strengthened,
civilians must be protected at all times, and attacks on civilian objects, including
hospitals, must cease. The EU strongly condemns the recent attacks on Idlib.
Signs that parties to the conflict are once again preparing to escalate the military
confrontation are worrisome.
The European Union also continues to be concerned by the situation in the
north-east of Syria. Military action by any party in Syria renders ordinary life
dangerous and intolerable for the civilian population. The European Union once
again echoes the call made on a number of occasions by the United Nations and
the Security Council for the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and 2532 (2020).
Turkey is a key partner of the European Union and a critically important actor
in the Syrian crisis and the region. Turkey’s security concerns in the north-east of
Syria should be addressed through political and diplomatic means — not military
action — in full respect of international humanitarian law.
Within Syria, violations of international law, including violations and abuses
of human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law by all parties,
particularly the Syrian regime and its allies, persist.
The latest report (A/HRC/48/70) by the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic has again shed troublesome light on the
continued violations committed across the country. Among those most exposed to
the ongoing violations are women, children, older persons, displaced persons and
individuals who have returned to Syria, as well as persons with disabilities. The
21-1550123/53

S/2021/884

conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and displaced
persons, including internally displaced persons, have yet to be met in Syria. We share
the Commission’s conclusions in that regard. We also reiterate our strong concern
about reports of social and demographic engineering in all areas throughout Syria.
The European Union continues to demand an end to repression, the release
of detainees, information on the fate of the missing and meaningful engagement
by the Syrian regime and its allies towards the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015).
The EU continues to insist that the Syrian regime cooperate fully with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), including in its
investigations on the use of chemical weapons in the conflict, and deplores the
regime’s continued lack of cooperation with the OPCW.
All those responsible for breaches of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, some of which may constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity, must be held accountable. The European Union reiterates its call
to have the situation in Syria referred to the International Criminal Court.
The recent event organized by Liechtenstein on the margins of the General
Assembly, co-sponsored by the United States, Germany, the Netherlands and Qatar,
entitled “Raising the Bar: Working towards Comprehensive Justice for Syria”, once
again underlined the continued commitment of the wider United Nations membership
to achieving justice for the most serious crimes committed in Syria during the
past decade.
The EU remains convinced that accountability and justice for victims is
essential for a stable, peaceful Syria, based on a credible, inclusive and viable
political solution, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
In the absence of avenues for international justice, the prosecution of war
crimes under national jurisdiction, where possible, which is now under way in
several European Union member States, represents an important contribution
towards securing justice.
The European Union will continue to support efforts to gather evidence,
including by the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria and
the work of the Commission of Inquiry, with a view to pursuing future legal action.
We welcome the initiative of the Netherlands, together with Canada, to invoke Syria’s
responsibility for human rights violations that breach its international obligations,
notably under the United Nations Convention against Torture.
The Syrian refugee crisis is the largest displacement crisis in the world, with
5.6 million registered refugees and another 6.7 million people displaced within Syria
and with conditions not in place for their safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable
return, in line with the parameters defined by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and in accordance with international law. The
European Union insists that the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
to their places of origin will be encouraged only when those conditions are met. The
underlying causes of the refugee and displacement crisis must be addressed through
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The European Union continues to warn against any further displacements in
any part of Syria, as well as against the potential exploitation of such displacements
for the purposes of social and demographic engineering.
Humanitarian needs in Syria have continued to increase: from 11 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance in 2020 to 13.4 million people in need
24/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

in 2021. The EU and its member States are the largest donors in this humanitarian
crisis, having provided €25 billion during the past 10 years. We will continue to
show our solidarity.
The European Union welcomed the unanimous adoption of resolution 2585
(2021) on 9 July 2021, which provides considerable relief over the next 12 months
for millions of Syrians who rely on the humanitarian assistance delivered through
this mechanism for their survival. The renewal of the Security Council resolution
on cross-border assistance will continue to be vital as long as there is no adequate
alternative to meet the immense and growing humanitarian needs in north-west Syria.
All parties must allow rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access, including
across conflict lines, in order to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches people
in need through the most direct routes.
The EU calls on all parties to the conflict, in particular the Syrian regime and
its allies, to depoliticize the delivery of humanitarian aid, abide by their international
humanitarian law and international human rights obligations and permanently cease
indiscriminate air strikes and shelling.
The European Union, in line with European Council conclusions, will be
ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine
and inclusive political transition, in the framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process, is firmly under way.
We call on all parties to the conflict to advance a credible, sustainable and
inclusive political solution based on the full and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015), which is the only way to bring sustainable peace to Syria.
The EU will continue to support the Office of the Special Envoy in its efforts to
bring about an inclusive political solution.

21-1550125/53

S/2021/884

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements made by the representatives of
Azerbaijan and Oman on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex
1) and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 18), respectively.
Indonesia remains concerned about the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, which continues to deteriorate. We deplore the continued violations by the
occupying Power, including illegal occupation, settlement expansion, oppression,
violence and forced displacement. The fact that such illegal actions continue
unabated despite many United Nations resolutions is a reminder to this organ that it
needs to act decisively to carry out its mandate by ensuring international peace and
security. In that regard, allow me to reiterate three points.
First, we must continue to pursue a just, lasting solution. We must remain
committed and united in our efforts to deter Israel’s illegal actions, end the occupation
in Palestine and hold Israel accountable for violating Palestinians’ human rights.
Indonesia reaffirms its unequivocal support of a just, comprehensive and inclusive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through the two-State solution, based
on United Nations resolutions and internationally agreed parameters, with East
Jerusalem as the Palestinian capital.
Secondly, the Security Council must put an end to Israel’s illegal actions and
hold Israel to account. Israel’s continued violations have exacerbated insecurity,
led to the loss of lives and undermined the prospects for a just peace. This must
stop. The international community, particularly the Security Council, must ensure
protection for Palestinian people. Moreover, in order to address the current sense of
impunity, it is crucial to hold Israel accountable for its many violations. We stress
the importance of ensuring that Israel upholds its commitments and responsibilities
under international law.
Thirdly, it is essential to provide humanitarian relief to Palestine. We are
concerned that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, which provides much-needed humanitarian relief to Palestinian
refugees, continues to face funding shortfalls. The international community must
recommit to ensuring sufficient, sustainable and predictable funding in order
to enable the Agency to fulfil its mandate effectively. We also call on Israel to
completely lift its blockade of Gaza, which has resulted in a humanitarian tragedy
and the suffering of Palestinian people.
Lastly, Indonesia would like to reiterate that we remain committed to the
people and the State of Palestine. We stand ready to support the Palestinian people
and all efforts to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting solution.

26/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
The current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is worrisome and
continues to be a matter of grave concern for the international community. The
people of Palestine continue to suffer from the horrors of a brutal occupation that
has lasted for over seven decades.
Israel, the occupying Power, has intensified its destructive, aggressive
policies and practices against the Palestinian people, leading to civilian casualties,
including children.
At the same time, the Israeli regime has continued the desecration of religious
shrines and Islamic holy sites. A prime example of such aggression is the Al‐Aqsa
Mosque, which has been the target of repeated attacks, provocations and daily
incursions by Israeli settlers, with the aim of speeding up the implementation of
Israel’s illegal plan — the temporal and physical division of this holy shrine.
Equally important, the humanitarian situation in Gaza Strip remains dire.
The blockade has devastated Gaza’s economy, caused widespread destruction and
left most people largely cut off from the outside world. The continuation of the
cruel blockade of Gaza is the collective punishment of innocent human beings. It
constitutes a crime against humanity and poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. It is an aggressive and savage act that breaches all international
laws and norms.
The Israeli regime also continues its aggressive and destabilizing practices
in the region by violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States of the
region, including Syria, and threatening openly to use force against the sovereignty
of the States Members of the United Nations.
It is deeply regrettable that the Security Council has thus far been unable
to shoulder its responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations to end the
occupation of the Palestinian territory.
Failing to act against the violation of international law in the occupied
Palestinian territory has emboldened the Israeli regime to continue its heinous
crimes against the oppressed people of Palestine.
We call on the international community, particularly the Security Council,
to take all the necessary measures to put an immediate end to Israel’s occupation
of Palestine, repeated attacks on the Palestinian people and cruel blockade of Gaza,
where people are suffering under inhuman, tragic living conditions.
The Israeli regime must be held to account for its violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Such crimes must not go unpunished. The settlement of the Palestinian
crisis can be achieved only if the inalienable rights of the people of occupied Palestine
are fully recognized, restored and preserved.
The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the only possible solution for the
realization of the fundamental rights of Palestinian people, particularly their right
to self-determination, is to hold a national referendum consistent with historical
realities and the principles of international law, with the participation of all
Palestinian people, including Muslims, Christians and Jews and their descendants.
Such a referendum would constitute a solid basis for the settlement of the question of
Palestine, the restoration of its sovereignty and an end to the occupation.
21-1550127/53

S/2021/884

Finally, we totally reject and strongly condemn the unfounded accusations
and fabrications made against my country at this meeting by the representative of
the Israeli regime (see S/PV.8883), which regularly makes baseless claims against
Iran. Again today, the representative of the Israeli regime attempted to play victim
and distract the attention of the international community from the atrocities it has
committed against the Palestinian people in the occupied territory.
Israel’s accusations regarding Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme, whose
peaceful nature has been verified on numerous occasions by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), are completely absurd, irrelevant and baseless. It is
obvious that the Israeli regime’s objective is to cover up the danger that its nuclear
weapons pose to the region and beyond. To remove that threat, the international
community must compel this regime to renounce nuclear weapons, join the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and put all its nuclear activities and
facilities under the comprehensive safeguards of the IAEA.
The representative of this terrorist regime has misused this forum, whose
primary responsibility is the maintenance of international peace and security, and
explicitly threatened to use of force against a Member State of the United Nations.
That illegal threat constitutes a gross violation of international law and the United
Nations Charter, particularly its Article 2, paragraph 4, and must therefore be
denounced and condemned by the Security Council.
The Islamic Republic of Iran reserves its inherent right under international
law to take all the necessary measures to protect and defend itself.

28/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
First and foremost, I would like to reaffirm Japan’s commitment to supporting
a two-State solution based on all relevant Security Council resolutions and
internationally agreed parameters.
Japan’s Foreign Minister Motegi visited Palestine and Israel in August to
demonstrate our unwavering commitment to this issue, even under the ongoing
coronavirus disease crisis. In meetings with his counterparts, he urged both sides
to take concrete measures to ease tensions and restore trust, while stressing the
importance of improving the situation through peaceful means.
Tensions in Gaza have decreased since the ceasefire was declared.
Humanitarian and reconstruction efforts are ongoing, with logistical and financial
support from neighbouring countries and donors. Although humanitarian needs in
Gaza remain unmet, Japan appreciates the fact that the ceasefire has been sustained
and that there have been positive developments, such as the smoother delivery of
humanitarian goods and movement of people. Efforts by Egypt and others to facilitate
talks between Palestine and Israel and among parties in Palestine, as well as recent
high-level contacts between Israeli and Palestinian officials, are all encouraging.
On the other hand, the situation on the ground remains worrisome. Settlement
activities, the destruction of homes and Palestinians expulsions by Israeli authorities
in the West Bank, as well as acts of violence at demonstrations, continue. Such acts
jeopardize efforts to build trust among the parties and could lead to re-escalation.
Japan calls upon all parties to halt all activities that could hinder progress towards
the realization of a two-State solution and reiterates that such a solution cannot be
achieved through violence, but only through negotiations and mutual trust.
Japan is committed to continuing to support the people of Palestine so long
as humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges remain in Palestine, particularly in
Gaza. Japan has extended grant aid totalling $23 million to Palestine since June, as
well as $40.9 million to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) this year. Japan thanks the United States for
its full re-engagement with, and support for, Palestine, including its hefty financial
contribution to UNRWA. Japan takes this opportunity to reiterate its support for
UNRWA’s work on the ground, including its generations-long efforts in the education
sector. Japan encourages the international community, particularly the countries of
the region, to provide funding for the Agency.
Furthermore, Japan has been taking the lead in two important initiatives —
the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity and the Conference on Cooperation among
East Asian Countries for Palestinian Development — with the aim of supporting
political dialogue among the parties concerned, Palestinian State-building efforts
and confidence-building between the two sides.
Let me conclude by expressing Japan’s determination to spare no effort to
achieve a two-State solution.

21-1550129/53

S/2021/884

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We appreciate your important role in enabling
the Council to carry out its mandate of maintaining international peace and security.
The peace process today faces two options: either a just peace leading to an
end to the occupation and the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
with the 4 June 1967 borders and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
the two-State solution, or an intensification of the conflict through continued
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people and illegal actions that undermine
any opportunity for peace.
The Jordanian-Egyptian-Palestinian trilateral summit, which brought
together His Majesty King Abdullah II, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi
and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas on Thursday, 2 September 2021 in
Cairo, reiterated the rejection of illegal Israeli measures that undermine the twoState solution and threaten the chances for peace in the region, including settlement
construction and expansion in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
land confiscation, house demolitions and the displacement of Palestinians from their
homes. In that last connection, the summit stressed the need to respect the right of
the people of Shaykh Jarrah to their homes.
The continued Israeli violations against the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Haram AlSharif are a threat to international peace and security, as was clearly demonstrated
this past April and May, when Israeli violations led to a cycle of violence and
destruction and the Israeli war on Gaza. Jordan believes that the practices of the
occupying forces, the incursions of settlers and extremists into the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif, the obstruction of the work of the Jordanian Jerusalem
Waqf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs Administration at Haram Al-Sharif and attempts
to impose a new status quo are violations of Israel’s obligations as an occupying
Power under international humanitarian law. The Security Council must carry out
its responsibilities to stop those violations and compel Israel to respect the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980).
We stress that the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif, with a total
area of 144,000 square metres, including courtyards, is a place of worship purely
for Muslims and that the Jordanian Jerusalem Waqf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs
Administration is the legal body with exclusive jurisdiction to manage all the affairs
at Haram Al-Sharif and control the entry into and exit from it.
We affirm that the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, based on the historical
Hashemite guardianship of the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem exercised
by His Majesty King Abdullah II, will continue its role and efforts to protect and
care for the holy sites and preserve their legal and historical status.
We note the importance of continuing efforts to stabilize and build upon the
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip in order to achieve comprehensive and sustainable deescalation, as well as the importance of reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip and
the provision of development support to other Palestinian territories. We call on the
international community to make efforts to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in the
Gaza Strip by participating in reconstruction efforts and by pressuring Israel to end
its illegal blockade and respond to the basic needs and humanitarian needs of the
people of the Gaza Strip, in line with its responsibilities under international law as
an occupying Power in the Gaza Strip.
30/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Jordan and Sweden are preparing to hold an international conference on the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) next month and are continuing their efforts to mobilize political support
and translate it into sustainable and predictable financial support so that UNRWA
can implement the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly.
UNRWA must continue to provide the vital services it is mandated by the
Organization to provide pending a just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine
refugees that would uphold their right of return and compensation in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), and in the context of a comprehensive solution that
would end the occupation and lead to the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital along the 4 June 1967 borders, in
the context of a two-State solution and in accordance with international law.
The achievement of peace is our main concern in the region because we
are aware, as others should be, that instability, wherever it occurs, is a threat to
security everywhere.

21-1550131/53

S/2021/884

Annex 14
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Kuwait

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and the Permanent Mission
of Kenya on successfully presiding over the work of the Security Council during the
month of October and to wish you success for the month’s remaining meetings. I also
thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his valuable briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8883).
I reiterate our support for him and for all efforts to de-escalate the situation and
restore stability in the region.
The Security Council is today holding its quarterly open debate under the
agenda item “The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”
as the wider world —and the Middle East in particular — continues to face serious
challenges. The coronavirus disease pandemic is at the forefront of those challenges
and has claimed more than 4.7 million lives, exacerbated food insecurity and caused
severe economic contraction and stagnation. Regrettably, Israel, the occupying
Power, exploits the fact that the international community is focused on that decisive
struggle and persists in its relentless policy of aggression against the Palestinian
people, reminding us once again that it has not backed down from plans to annex
more Palestinian territories in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Such policies and practices serve to illustrate yet again that Israel, the
occupying Power, seeks to entrench the occupation by extending its illegal activities
and policies through the expansion, construction and establishment of thousands of
settlement units and the annexation of land, in flagrant violation of Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). Several reports have confirmed the
continued deterioration of the situation in the Palestinian territories as a result of,
among other things, the increase in settlement activities in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem — where Israel, the occupying Power, announced several days ago
its decision to resume plans to build 10,000 illegal housing units for settlers in an
area north of occupied Jerusalem, in addition to demolishing Palestinian homes in
the Silwan neighbourhood.
We are also further concerned by the continuing violence perpetrated by
Israeli settlers and security forces against the defenceless Palestinian people. Israeli
security forces in the occupied West Bank have shot dead at least 60 Palestinians,
while more than 260 Palestinians, including 66 children and 41 women, have been
killed in Gaza so far this year. Those acts constitute yet more war crimes to add to
the litany of atrocities perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian people and to its
blatant violations of human rights, the Charter of the United Nations, United Nations
resolutions and international law. Israel, the occupying Power, aims with its policies
to destroy any prospect or hope for the Palestinians to establish an independent,
contiguous, viable, lasting and sovereign Palestinian State.
Such practices require us, more than ever before, to leverage international
political and legal mechanisms to hold Israel accountable for its ongoing violations of
the rights of the Palestinian people — rights that are guaranteed under international
law — so as to put an end to the arbitrary arrest campaigns, the demolition of
Palestinian buildings and destruction and seizure of Palestinian property, the forced
displacement of civilians and the deaths of Palestinian civilians at the hands of
settlers, not to mention the blockade imposed on Gaza and the repeated attacks on
Islamic and Christian holy sites.
32/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Israel and the entire world are aware that the Palestinian issue has been,
and continues to be, central to the Arab and Islamic world. Tension and instability
will continue to prevail in our region unless the Palestinian people attain all their
legitimate political rights and Israel, the occupying Power, ceases its practices and
violations of international humanitarian law, namely, the building of settlements,
the confiscation of land, the continued blockade of Gaza and the desecration of
holy sites.
We stress the importance of continuing efforts to relaunch negotiations within
a specific timetable aimed at a just and comprehensive peace in accordance with the
terms of reference of the peace process, internationally recognized resolutions and
the Arab peace Initiative to end the Israeli occupation. We also stress the importance
of the establishment of an independent Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the return of refugees.
At the same time, we emphasize the historical role of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in providing
basic assistance to millions of Palestinian refugees and the importance of continuing
support for its work. Based on its firm position of support for the Palestinian cause,
Kuwait, through the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, donated $21.5
million to ensure the continuation of the vital educational, health and social services
provided by UNRWA to the Palestinian refugee community in its various areas
of operations.

21-1550133/53

S/2021/884

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Allow me to thank the President for his active and effective presidency this
month and for giving prominence to issues that deserve the attention of the Security
Council and the whole United Nations system.
The situation in the Middle East continues to grip the Council and the
whole world because of the protracted conflicts, the enduring occupation and the
humanitarian crises that were borne of these unfortunate conditions. The path to
peace is still blocked in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, with no movement on the
horizon that might bring hope for peace to millions of Palestinians under occupation.
The situation on the ground is getting worse, making the goal of a two-State solution
harder to implement with every passing day.
Israeli settlement activities are accelerating and uprooting the Palestinians
from their land to build new settlements or expand existing ones. This is the torturous
daily reality for Palestinians. Only last week the Israeli authorities approved a new
building plan in an illegal Jerusalem settlement. In fact, three new building plans
for new or existing settlements in and around Jerusalem have been designed to
split Palestinian villages off from Jerusalem and sever all their physical ties to the
holy city, while linking the Israeli settlements in the West Bank to Jerusalem. This
policy will render any hopes for a Palestinian State impossible, as long as every
day passes without a peaceful settlement. Only a comprehensive and just settlement
based on resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 2334 (2016), inter alia, can be a basis
for a political settlement that gives the Palestinians their due political rights and
self-determination.
The absence of such a settlement will prolong the daily Palestinian suffering
stemming from the Israeli occupation, in particular the land confiscation, house
demolitions, acts of violence against Palestinians and the imprisonment of millions
in Gaza. This is in addition to the violence and harassment that the Palestinians
endure from the settlers. During olive-harvesting season, Palestinian villagers endure
attacks by settlers who uproot trees, destroy their crops and physically assault them.
The absence of a peace horizon or hope for an end of the occupation will prolong any
prospects for peace for the Palestinian people and the region as a whole.
Lebanon welcomes the determination by the United States Administration to
move forward with opening a consulate in Jerusalem and deepen American ties with
the Palestinians in the context of working toward a two-State solution, as Secretary
of State Anthony Blinken affirmed last week. This will give the Palestinians hope
for a better future in their own independent State.
The Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Philippe Lazzarini, recently warned
that the Agency is at risk of collapse if funding is not guaranteed in the upcoming
weeks. It currently lacks funds to operate in the coming months of November and
December. UNRWA’s vital role to millions of Palestinian refugees, particularly
those in Lebanon, is unquestionable. We have always stressed the importance of
ensuring predictable financing for the Agency by providing sustained and multi-year
contributions. In this regard, the preparations for holding an international conference
co-chaired by Jordan and Sweden in November 2021 in support of UNRWA are a
critical step. This year’s return of the United States as a UNRWA partner and donor
is also a positive step forward.
34/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Lebanon has a new Government and is trying to put the political, financial and
economic processes of recovery on track after more than a year of political gridlock
and a debilitating financial crisis. A team from the International Monetary Fund is
in Beirut holding talks with the Lebanese authorities on how to move forward on
fixing Lebanon’s finances with the help of the international community. Discussions
are also under way on how to resolve the outstanding problems in relation to energy,
electricity and supplies. The approval last month of a road map involving Lebanon,
Egypt, Jordan and Syria to supply natural gas to my country is a positive development
that will help ease the power shortages that have heavily affected peoples’ lives
in Lebanon.
There is determination to move Lebanon out of its unprecedented crisis and
get it back on a sustainable recovery path. It will not be easy, but with the help of the
international community and friends, Lebanon can regain its political and financial
health and once again become a magnet in the region.
There was an unfortunate event last week in Beirut involving a shooting at
a demonstration that killed five demonstrators and injured others. The country is
trying to contain the ramifications of this incident and move towards unity and
reconciliation. The consensus in Lebanon is that there should never be a return to
communal infighting and that all political differences should be resolved through
dialogue. We hope that people’s legitimate political demands will be met through
implementing much-needed reforms and through a democratic and transparent
process that leads to the preservation of Lebanon’s independence and sovereignty.
There is also agreement that differences over judicial issues should be resolved
through a process sanctioned by the Constitution, which guarantees the independence
of the judiciary, as Prime Minister Najib Azmi Mikati affirmed this week. This has
paved the way for the judiciary to find a solution to a contentious judicial issue
related to the port explosion.
The Lebanese people have learned from years of wars that dialogue is the
shortest and most effective way to solve problems and live together in peace and
security. They will continue to do so despite the current difficulties.
Lebanon welcomes the unanimous adoption, on 30 August, of resolution
2591 (2021), which extended for one year, without changes, the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Lebanon thanks all Security
Council members for their invaluable unanimous support of this resolution, which is
providing assistance to the Lebanese army.
We cannot stress enough the stabilizing role of UNIFIL in the south of
Lebanon and the region. We reiterate our support for UNIFIL’s leadership and staff
and for the thousands of women and men peacekeepers from over 40 countries
working in the mission. We are grateful to all the troop-contributing countries. We
extend our sincere condolences to the Government and the people of Ghana, but
most importantly to the family of Sergeant Sekyere Mansfield, who died while doing
his honourable duty in the service of peace in UNIFIL this week.
Cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces remains
strong and robust. Lebanon remains committed to the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) in its entirety and continues to condemn the daily Israeli violations of
Lebanese sovereignty by air and ground.

21-1550135/53

S/2021/884

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
I thank the President for convening today’s open debate. Malaysia aligns
itself with the statements delivered by the representative of Oman on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Cooperation (annex 18) and the representative of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (annex 1). Allow me to highlight
several points in my national capacity.
We have heard time and again the expression of support by the international
community for a two-State solution. Yet it is regrettable that Palestinian statehood
is being denied, including its right to hold full membership status in the United
Nations.
We must remind ourselves that despite the absence of a large-scale war,
the Palestinians continue to live under brutal occupation and within a repressive
blockade. Their fundamental rights are denied while illegal settlements are being
expanded.
Israeli settlements are illegal under international law. Israel’s systematic
oppression of Palestinians and its discriminatory policies are also tantamount to
crimes of apartheid. One cannot advocate human rights and condemn other injustices
while at the same time ignoring Israeli atrocities towards the Palestinians. The
Security Council must not turn a blind eye to this. It is high time for accountability.
Malaysia reiterates its call for the Security Council to revisit the
recommendation contained in the Secretary-General’s 2018 report, A/ES-10/794, on
the deployment of United Nations-mandated armed forces or unarmed observers to
improve the protection of Palestinians.
President Abbas’s call for Israel to end its occupation within a year in the
recent general debate (see A/76/PV.12 and A/76/332/Add.7, annex III) must be taken
seriously. It is more urgent than ever for the Security Council, and especially the
Middle East Quartet, to create the necessary conditions for peace talks between the
relevant parties and restart them. We must not rely on the status quo as there is no
guarantee that a surge of bloodshed will not happen again.
Malaysia will not waiver in its commitment to and support for the Palestinian
people in realizing their inalienable rights to self-determination and independence.
Our position is clear — only a negotiated political settlement achieving a two-State
solution can create sustainable peace, based on internationally agreed parameters,
international law and relevant United Nations resolutions.
While advocating an urgent political and peaceful solution to the conflict,
Malaysia also calls on the international community to support humanitarian efforts
to ease the conditions of the Palestinian people, including through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). On 14
October 2021, Malaysia pledged $1 million as a long-term contribution to UNRWA,
in support of predictable and sustainable funding for the Agency. In addition, we also
announced an additional bilateral contribution amounting to 5 million Malaysian
ringgits for rebuilding a clinic in Gaza.

36/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to thank Kenya for its successful presidency of the
Security Council this month.
On this occasion, the Kingdom of Morocco reiterates its position with regard
to the Palestinian question, based on the two-State solution, through the creation
of a Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, as well as its attachment to negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli
parties as the only way to achieve a final, lasting and comprehensive settlement to
this conflict.
In His capacity as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, His Majesty King Mohammed VI pays great attention to the
Palestinian issue and continues to firmly insist on the need to preserve the special
status of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and respect the freedom to practice religious
rites for followers of the three monotheistic religions, as well as the Muslim aspect
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa mosque.
I wish to recall the Al-Quds Call, signed by His Majesty King Mohammed
VI and His Holiness Pope Francis, during His Holiness’s visit to Morocco in March
2019, aimed at promoting and enhancing the specific multi-faith character of the
holy city, its spiritual dimension and its particular identity.
Morocco reiterates its support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its mandate. UNRWA
plays a vital role in supporting education, health, and social services for 5.7 million
of Palestinian refugees and continues to do so, especially in the challenging
circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
For its part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive field arm
of the Al-Quds Committee continues to support development plans and projects
in Palestine and the holy city in order to promote the economic empowerment of
the Palestinian people. In August 2021, the Gaza Strip inaugurated the Al-Quds
specialty hospital, which has mainly been financed by the Kingdom of Morocco. It
has a capacity of 102 beds and several specialty wings, including a 10-bed intensive
care unit and an obstetrics and gynecology section.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that the Kingdom of Morocco places the
Palestinian cause at the top of its priorities and remains faithful in its attachment to
the achievement of the two-State solution, with Palestine and Israel, living side by
side in peace and security.

21-1550137/53

S/2021/884

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Oman to the United Nations
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of States members of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Vice-Chair of
OIC group.
This meeting is being held while the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory is dramatically deteriorating. In fact, Israel, the occupying Power, has been
escalating its violations against the Palestinian people, leading to civilian casualties,
including among children, and violations against religious shrines and Islamic
sanctities, at the forefront of which is Al-Aqsa mosque, which has continuously
been the target of attacks, provocations and daily incursions by Israeli settlers, in an
attempt to speed up the implementation of Israel’s illegal plan of temporal and spatial
division of this holy shrine.
Moreover, we witnessed with shock the recent Israeli desecration of Islamic
cemeteries, including the Ma’man Allah/Mamilla and Al-Yusufiya cemeteries, in
Jerusalem, the opening of the so-called Museum of Tolerance in parts of the Ma’man
Allah/Mamilla cemetery and the exhumation of Muslim graves that are more than
1,000 years old. Such heinous practices against sacred places wound the feelings of
hundreds of millions of Muslims across the globe. Such actions could also have farreaching and devastating consequences that would further complicate the horizon
and transform Jerusalem into a capital of hatred, fanaticism and violence instead of
the beacon of tolerance, peace and harmonious coexistence that it must be.
In that regard, we reaffirm the responsibility of the international community
to end such Israeli illegal actions, provide protection for Jerusalem, its citizens and
holy sites and preserve its historical and legal status. There are many relevant United
Nations resolutions to that effect, including those adopted by the Security Council,
and they must be upheld and implemented.
The OIC has repeatedly drawn the international community’s attention to
the acceleration of Israel’s illegal policies of settlement construction, as well as the
seizure and demolition of Palestinian homes and structures. Among others, the recent
Israeli illegal plan to build 10,000 settlement units at the site of the Qalandia airport,
north of occupied East Jerusalem, is another illegal act that constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions and could
undermine the territorial integrity, viability and contiguity of the Palestinian State
and, consequently, the possibility of the two-State solution on the pre-1967 borders.
In that regard, it is necessary to recall resolution 2334 (2016), by which the
Council, inter alia, unequivocally reiterates, in paragraph 2,
“its demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
that it fully respect all of its legal obligations in this regard”.
We call on this international body to ensure the full compliance of Israel, the
occupying Power, with its legal obligations under international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
While recognizing with appreciation the bold efforts being made by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
to meet the basic needs of the 5.8 million Palestine refugees registered with the
Agency, we express our deep concern about the recurring financial shortfalls that
inevitably affect UNRWA services and risk an interruption of services, which would
have serious consequences for the refugee community, the host countries and the
38/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

entire region. We are confident that solidarity and joint action to mobilize resources
will contribute to reducing the difficulties that the Agency is encountering, ensure
that it is able to uphold its mandate and help mitigate the hardships of the Palestine
refugees.
The absence of any serious political and legal action by this body to enforce
its standing resolutions that aim to end the decades-long Israeli occupation is neither
acceptable nor sustainable, and it contradicts the Council’s duties under the Charter
of the United Nations. Such a passive attitude would no doubt further prolong the
historic injustice, deepen the political impasse in the peace process, exacerbate the
humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian people and contribute to destabilizing an
already-fragile region.
In that regard, the OIC urges this international body to help restore hope and
confidence in peace in the region. The OIC also renews its invitation to all parties
to align their policies, stances and efforts with their obligations under international
law. Similarly, it expresses the hope that the international community will engage
in meaningful efforts towards reviving the peace process, with a view to achieving
a just and comprehensive solution based on the internationally agreed parameters,
including the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the OIC’s support for, and solidarity
with, the Palestinian people in their struggle to achieve their inalienable national
rights, including the right to return, self-determination and their independent State
on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

21-1550139/53

S/2021/884

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the
United Nations
Pakistan welcomes the convening of this open debate of the Security Council
on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The nineteenth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) , covering the period from 12 June to 27 September, reveals
that violence between Israel and the Palestinians has continued and often escalated.
Twenty-seven Palestinians were killed, including two women and five children,
and 4,814 were injured, including 10 women and 530 children. The demolitions and
seizure of Palestinian properties have also continued in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.
Those actions are a disturbing codicil to the Israeli aggression against the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque last May, which inflamed tensions and triggered the most serious
outbreak of hostilities between Palestinians and Israel in several years. The security
environment created by Israel’s persistent acts of aggression is extremely volatile. It
could lead to another escalation of hostilities at any time.
Many States and entities appear to have lost hope for a just and peaceful
settlement of the conflict. Yet it is vital not to lose sight of the legal, political and
moral dimensions of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
First, I believe there is no question in anyone’s mind that Israel’s actions
in the occupied Palestinian lands are all grave violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international law, including international humanitarian law,
exemplified by the seizure of land and properties for Israeli settlements, the violence
against unarmed Palestinian children, women and men, the blockade of Gaza and the
desecration of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Secondly, there is no moral, legal or political equivalence between Israel, the
occupying State, and the occupied and oppressed Palestinian people. The Palestinian
struggle for self-determination and the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions is legitimate; the Israeli repression of the occupied Palestinian
people is illegitimate. Neither can any equivalence be drawn between Israel’s
military and occupation forces — which number among the most powerful in the
world — and Palestinians armed with little more than stones and defiant courage.
Thirdly, the perpetuation of Israeli occupation will not bring peace to the
Holy Land. As history has shown, although the Palestinians are dispossessed and
disempowered by Israel and its patrons, every succeeding generation of Palestinians
will persist in seeking its freedoms and fundamental rights, including their right
to self-determination. Israel cannot rule indefinitely over a defiant Palestinian
majority. The peoples of the Arab and Muslim world and other civilized nations will
not tolerate such outcomes.
Fourthly, the two-State solution, involving the establishment of a sovereign,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel within recognized and accepted boundaries, offers the only
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The alternative to a two-State solution is an Israeli apartheid State or, even
worse, the genocide of the Palestinian people. Even a world as morally compromised
as ours will not tolerate either outcome. The peoples of the Arab and Muslim world
and other civilized nations will not contemplate such outcomes. Neither, I believe,
will the people of Israel, with their enduring memories of the Holocaust.
40/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

The entire Middle East and adjacent regions will not see durable peace and
stability while the occupation and oppression of the Palestinian people — and the
similar occupation and aggression of the people of Jammu and Kashmir — continue.
The oppression of the Palestinians, the Kashmiris and other Muslim populations are
a major underlying cause of the rise of extremism and terrorism in recent decades.
Just solutions to such oppression and injustice are essential to defeat and eliminate
the terrorism that has spread across and beyond the Middle East.
It is Pakistan’s sincere hope that Israel and the Palestinians will embrace the
two-State solution, even as some cynics predict that it is already out of reach.

21-1550141/53

S/2021/884

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the United
Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I also
thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing and his tireless efforts, as well as the other
briefers (see S/PV.8883).
Qatar participates in this quarterly open debate based on its belief in the
importance of the Security Council’s mandated responsibility to address the challenges
to peace and security in the Middle East. Despite decades-long consideration of the
Middle East issue, the question remains on the Council’s agenda.
Recent Israeli violations in East Jerusalem, which have included repeated
attacks by the authorities of the occupying Power and settlers on Islamic and
Christian holy sites, in particular at Haram Al-Sharif, and attempts to seize and
demolish Palestinian property, displace Palestinians and illegally annex their land,
are part of a policy of Judaization and illegal settlement and constitute violations of
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). The military escalation
in the Gaza Strip, which has taken hundreds of lives, including those of innocent
children, and exacerbated the deteriorating humanitarian situation of the 2 million
civilians in the besieged Gaza Strip, runs counter to international humanitarian law.
The State of Qatar emphasizes that an ultimate resolution of this situation will
be achieved only in accordance with international law, internationally recognized
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. A solution also requires an end to
occupation in all Arab territories and settlement activities in the occupied territories,
a resolution of the refugee problem and the exercise by the Palestinians of their
inalienable rights, including the right to self-determination and the establishment
of an independent State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with the vision of a two-State solution, which the international
community has agreed is the only way out of the conflict. For the time being, the
ceasefire must be maintained, and the humanitarian and economic situation of the
Palestinian people must be addressed so that they can overcome their challenges.
The State of Qatar has sought a restoration of security and stability through
diplomatic initiatives in coordination with the United Nations and friendly countries.
Recognizing the essential need to maintain stability and address the urgent
humanitarian and economic situation, Qatar has begun to increase the humanitarian
relief and development aid it has consistently provided to the Palestinian people,
with His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Amir of the State of Qatar,
sending a $500 million grant for reconstruction in the Gaza Strip. Last September,
the United Nations launched a cash assistance programme to help approximately
100,000 needy families in the Gaza Strip in the form of a $40 million grant from
Qatar to be distributed over four months. The State of Qatar will also continue to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and commends its great efforts, which will be indispensable as long as
refugees remain an issue.
After 10 years of crisis in Syria, Qatar continues to stress that ending it
requires a political solution in accordance with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including the use of chemical weapons. In
the meantime, Qatar continues to provide humanitarian assistance to alleviate the
42/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

suffering of the Syrian people. At this year’s Brussels Conference, Qatar announced
a new $100 million pledge to support the future of Syria and the region.
With respect to Libya, Qatar emphasizes the need to consolidate security,
political and economic progress and to proceed with a Libyan-led political process
supported by the United Nations in order to achieve a sustainable settlement for the
benefit of the Libyan people. The interim Government of National Unity should also
be assisted in carrying out its duties of unifying State institutions, holding free,
fair and comprehensive elections by the deadline and providing basic services and
economic and social development for the Libyan people.
With respect to Yemen, the State of Qatar affirms its firm position in
support of that country’s unity and territorial integrity. It also affirms that the only
way out of the crisis is through negotiations between the Yemeni parties on the
basis of the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2216 (2015).
In conclusion, Mr. President, the State of Qatar will continue to pursue, with a
positive, constructive and sincere approach, the targets advocated by the international
community in order to end the crises and meet the challenges to stability, peace and
security in the Middle East and around the world.

21-1550143/53

S/2021/884

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing. My Government
reaffirms its full support for his tireless efforts and dedication to bring about peace
in the region.
The Republic of Korea expresses its deep concern about the Special
Coordinator’s recent presentation of the report the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016) (see PV.8869) on the continuing violence and hostilities
happening on a daily basis. It is appalling that women, youth and even children
have been victims of frequent violence. A Palestinian boy was killed because he
was throwing a stone. A 1-year-old Israeli child was injured near Jerusalem’s Old
City. This must stop. We call for an immediate end to violence and incitement and
reiterate our appeals for all parties concerned to refrain from provocative acts.
My Government emphasizes the importance of respecting resolution 2334
(2016), international law and related bilateral agreements. Together with the
international community, we strongly believe that dialogue and negotiation are key
to advancing a viable two-State solution. Violence, especially against civilians, can
never be a means to achieve peace. We express our support for efforts to resume
peace talks, including those of the Middle East Quartet in that regard.
Accordingly, the Republic of Korea welcomes continuing engagement between
the Israeli Government and the Palestinian leadership. My delegation takes note
that no new settlement housing plans were advanced or approved during the Special
Coordinator’s latest reporting period.
My delegation looks forward to the expansion of further confidencebuilding measures, which will eventually create a more favourable environment for
dialogue and cooperation. The engagement of women, youth and civil society in the
confidence-building process is also crucial moving forward.
At the same time, intra-Palestinian reconciliation must be reinvigorated. We
reiterate that unity and consensus among the Palestinian people are vital to achieving
peace and an independent, sovereign and democratic State.
My delegation remains deeply concerned about the urgent humanitarian needs
in Gaza and the West Bank. In order to help address that challenge, the Republic
of Korea has so far provided $1.7 million to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the emergency
pooled fund for the occupied Palestinian territory of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). My delegation reaffirms its strong support for
efforts made by UNRWA and OCHA to improve the humanitarian situation in
Palestine, and we call on all parties to ensure full unimpeded humanitarian access
and to respect international law, including international humanitarian law.
We would like to take this opportunity to welcome the fact that parliamentary
elections, which represent a meaningful step towards further stability and development,
were conducted in Iraq without major security incidents. My Government hopes that
the elections will lead to the swift formation of a Government to meet the Iraqi
people’s legitimate needs for a better future.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its commitment to continue its constructive
role in advancing peace and stability in the region in cooperation with the United
Nations and the international community.
44/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Abdallah Al-Mouallimi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month.
The foreign policy of Saudi Arabia is supported by a great legacy of principles,
namely, respect for the sovereignty of States, good-neighbourliness and the resolution
of issues and disputes through dialogue and peaceful means, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and international norms and laws. My country has
consistently emphasized those principles and was among the first States to take such
a practical approach in dealing with issues and conflicts in order to reach the goal for
which the United Nations was established, that is, the maintenance of international
peace and security.
By contrast, occupying Powers and expansionist States in the region are
interested only in achieving their interests, regardless of the threat that poses to the
security and stability of the region and the destruction of the futures of many peoples
of the region.
The Palestinian issue is the biggest challenge facing the region with respect to
achieving stability, security, prosperity and development. My country reiterates its
consistent approach and firm position towards the Palestinian issue and its solidarity
with the Palestinian people in their quest for a just and comprehensive solution to
their cause in accordance with internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative, adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States in 2002, which
calls for the complete withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since
1967 and the establishment of an independent Palestinian State with Jerusalem as
its capital.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its call on the international community
and the Security Council to stand firm against these Israeli policies and to move the
peace process forward to reach an agreement that restores the Palestinian people’s
legitimate rights. A just and comprehensive peace is the strategic choice, not policies
of fait accompli and brute force.
My Government condemns the brutal terrorist attacks by Iranian-backed
Houthi militias on civilians and civilian sites in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
including the attacks on Abha and Jazan airports, which resulted in civilian casualties
of various nationalities. That was a continuation of the approach taken by those
militias against civilians since the beginning of the conflict. More recent examples
include the siege and starvation since last September of more than 37,000 civilians
in the district of Abdiyah, Ma’rib governorate, most of them women, children and
older persons. The sole hospital was targeted with ballistic missiles. The district has
been constantly bombed with heavy weapons and drones. The injured have not been
allowed to leave for treatment. In a particularly heinous crime against humanity,
medical supplies and food aid have been prevented from entering by closing the only
road leading to the district, which suffers from shortages and deficits of all kinds of
basic daily needs due to the blockade.
Saudi Arabia expresses its sorrow and anger that, even as this meeting is being
held today, the Security Council has stood by helplessly, unable to issue a statement
condemning those attacks and practices, which calls into question the effectiveness
of the Council and its ability to fulfil its role.
21-1550145/53

S/2021/884

My country calls on the Council to take the necessary and decisive steps to
prevent the Houthis from endangering civilian lives. We reiterate our full right to
take all the measures necessary to protect the security and stability of the territory,
citizens and residents of Saudi Arabia from any terrorist attacks, in accordance with
its obligations under international law. The Iranian-backed Houthi militia bears
the responsibility for the repercussions of the Yemeni crisis and the worsening of
the humanitarian situation. Those militias continue to prioritize narrow political
interests over the interests of the Yemeni people and the security and stability of
the region.
My Government supports the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen to reach a full ceasefire and begin a comprehensive political
process to reach a solution based on the three terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementing Mechanism, the outcomes of the Yemeni
National Dialogue Conference and resolution 2216 (2015).
Among all the challenges in the Arab region, the Iranian regime’s hostile
behaviour represents a serious and major threat to the security and stability of the
region and to the future and prosperity of its peoples as a result of the ideologies of
hegemony and exclusion espoused by the Iranian authorities.
Interfering in the internal affairs of States, sowing sectarian strife, financing
and supporting extremist and putschist groups and deploying illegal armed militias
are just the tip of the iceberg. The Iranian regime’s subversive and destructive policies
in the region and its attempts to acquire nuclear weapons must be dealt with firmly
in order to avoid further escalation and threats to international peace and security.
My country’s Government therefore stresses the need for the Security Council
to fulfil its responsibility to halt the actions and policies of Iran in the region, prevent
it from acquiring a nuclear weapon and stop it from pursuing its destabilizing
nuclear activities — which threaten international peace and security — including
the development of a ballistic missile system and other aggressive practices.

46/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
My delegation expresses its appreciation to Kenya for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question. We
stress the necessity for these open debates to focus on the situation in Palestine and
Israel and allow the broader United Nations membership an opportunity to engage
on the matter.
South Africa would like to focus its remarks on the following three points:
first, the necessity for bona fide negotiations leading to a two-State solution;
secondly, the continued flagrant disregard for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law; and, thirdly, crimes against humanity and apartheidlike policies and persecution being committed.
South Africa is appalled by the habitual tensions, instability and targeted
aggression that innocent Palestinian men, women and children living in the
occupied Palestinian Territories are subjected to on a daily basis. That systematic
discrimination and repression based on national, ethnic, racial or religious identity
goes against the inherent dignity and equal inalienable rights of all of humankind.
South Africa maintains that international efforts must be geared towards
the realization of the two-State solution, which has been supported by the United
Nations for over seven decades. The two-State solution remains the only path to
ensuring that Palestinians and Israelis can both realize their legitimate aspirations,
living side-by-side in peaceful and secure States, based on the 1967 borders and with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
We must ask ourselves: How, then, can a solution be sought, or a successful
outcome be attained, if one party is advancing in the direction of the international
call for a two-State solution while the other party vehemently pursues an intent of
domination through illegal occupation? It is paramount that negotiations ensue with
sincerity and bona fide intent.
How long will we bear witness to the flagrant violation of Security Council
resolutions by the State of Israel without taking any action. The Security Council
has shown that it is prepared to act in other cases where its resolutions are violated.
Failing to act on Israeli violations perpetuates the argument that some in the Council
are not even-handed when it comes to this matter — and that undermines the
Council’s credibility.
To uphold the integrity of the Security Council, it is imperative that those who
violate Security Council resolutions be held accountable. If the Council wants to be
seen as impartial and as discharging its mandate efficiently, it must act accordingly.
The Council must be consistent in its approach to addressing conflict situations
on its agenda and urge all Member States, across all continents, to adhere to
Council resolutions.
In conclusion, South Africa underscores that the continued struggle of the
Palestinians should leave an indelible mark on the world’s collective consciousness.
As Members of the United Nations, we are tasked with the responsibility to oppose
oppression. Our morality compels us to use our voice in these international platforms
to fight oppression wherever it attempts to creep into the fabric of any society and
plague it with the disease of subjugation, segregation, denial of basic human rights,
destruction and disregard for international law.

21-1550147/53

S/2021/884

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the
United Nations, Bassam Sabbagh
[Original: Arabic]
The question of Palestine remains the central national issue for the Syrian
Arab Republic, which always has, and always will, spared no effort in standing
with the Palestinian people in their struggle to regain their occupied territory and
all their legitimate rights, in particular their right to establish an independent State
on their territory with Jerusalem as its capital, their right to full membership in the
United Nations and the right of Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland, in
accordance with international law and relevant United Nations resolutions, notably
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The war crimes and crimes against humanity that Israel continues to commit in
the occupied Palestinian territory — in particular annexation, settlements, blockades,
the seizure and demolition of homes, population expulsions and forced displacement,
arbitrary detention practices and racial discrimination against Palestinian citizens —
must not be tolerated. In that regard, the Syrian Arab Republic calls for pressure
on Israel to stop its criminal practices against the Palestinian people and to hold
States supporting Israel responsible for the continuation of those crimes and for
Israeli impunity.
The Syrian Arab Republic emphasizes that any resolutions or measures
that are incompatible with the relevant United Nations resolutions and that do not
preserve established Palestinian rights are unacceptable in form and substance and
have no legal effect.
We stress that the humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people necessitates
full support for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East so that it is able to implement its mandates and respond to
the growing humanitarian needs of the Palestinians.
The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms its firm commitment to the return of the
entire Syrian Golan, which has been occupied since June 1967, and stresses that all
resolutions and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to change its natural
and demographic features, or to impose its laws, powers and administration on it,
are null and void and have no legal effect under international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 497 (1981).
The continuation and hysterical repetition of a series of Israeli attacks on the
sovereignty of Syrian territory over the past months constitutes a serious escalation
that threatens peace and security in the Middle East region. The assassination by
gunfire by Israeli occupation authorities of Syrian freedom fighter Midhat Salih
al-Salih from inside the occupied Syrian Golan while he was returning to his home
in the town of Ayn al-Tinah, which faces the occupied town of Majdal Shams, was
a flagrant violation of the 1974 Disengaement of Forces Agreement between Israeli
and Syrian forces and United Nations resolutions on the occupied Syrian Golan.
That is in addition to the hostile statements made by the Prime Minister of
the Israeli occupation entity regarding the expansion of settlements through the
establishment of 7,000 settlement units in the occupied Syrian Golan, with the aim of
increasing the number of settlers from 40,000 to 100,000 as part of efforts to change
the demographic character of the occupied Syrian Golan.
In addition to those statements, on 11 October the so-called Israeli regional
strategic economic development conference was held in the settlement of Haspin,
48/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

located on the ruins of the Syrian village of Khasfayn, in order to perpetuate and
prolong the occupation by establishing more settlement projects in the occupied
Syrian Golan. Israeli occupying forces stormed the village of Majdal Shams and
arrested Syrian citizen Salman Awad at his home after a vigil organized by our
people in the village of Mas’adeh to protest such statements and the accompanying
measures to establish settlement projects on their land, such as the project to build
“wind turbines” on the territory of the villages of Majdal Shams, Ayn Quniyah,
Buqatah and Mas‘adah.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns, in the strongest terms, all those crimes,
hostile practices and provocative statements and emphasizes that they will not
change the established fact that the Golan was, and will remain, Syrian Arab, that it
will inevitably return to the homeland sooner or later and that all actions taken by the
Israeli occupation authorities are null and void and have no legal effect. On a daily
basis, our steadfast people in the occupied Syrian Golan reassert their attachment to
their land as part of their Syrian homeland. They reject the practices of the Israeli
occupation and look forward to the complete liberation of the Golan.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the Security Council to uphold its
responsibilities and pressure the Israeli occupation authorities to stop their violations
against Syrian sovereignty and their illegal practices against Syrian citizens of the
occupied Syrian Golan. Those crimes include killings, arrests, plunder of property,
depriving the residents of the Syrian Golan of natural resources and preventing
the return of those who have travelled for study, work or any other reason to their
cities and towns in the occupied Syrian Golan. Israel must immediately and without
delay open and operate the Qunaytirah crossing, which is the artery connecting our
people in the occupied Syrian Golan to their motherland and the lung with which
they breathe.
The Syrian Arab Republic asserts that it is unacceptable that the United
Nations and the international community continually fail to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to implement the relevant Security Council and United Nations
resolutions and to stop its systematic and gross violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. We also emphasize that this situation
cannot be ended without the removal of the protection provided to Israel inside and
outside the United Nations by the United States of America and its Western allies.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the Security Council to act immediately to deter
Israel from its aggression, oblige it to stop its violations and illegal practices and
ensure that it is held accountable and punished for its rogue conduct.
In conclusion, Syria reiterates its regret that Secretariat reports continue to
ignore the dangerous reality of systematic Israeli practices and violations against
our people suffering under occupation in the Golan. We renew our call for the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, to give the
situation in the occupied Syrian Golan the attention demanded by his mandate and
to include in his reports detailed information on the violations and practices of the
Israeli occupation authorities being perpetrated against our people in the occupied
Syrian Golan.

21-1550149/53

S/2021/884

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate on this
critical issue.
It is regrettable that Israel’s provocative and illegal policies — such as the
expansion of illegal settlements, forced evictions, the destruction of Palestinian
homes, provocations at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the use of disproportionate force against
Palestinian civilians and initiatives to change the demographic and legal status of
Jerusalem — continue unabated.
Israel is advancing its extensive building plans in Givat Hamatos and some
other areas in or around Jerusalem that lie beyond Israel’s 1967 borders. It is widely
reported in the media that the new neighbourhood in Givat Hamatos, with its 1,257
housing units, would become the first new Jewish neighbourhood to be built in
Jerusalem in the past 30 years.
The international community must put pressure on Israel to abandon those
illegal construction plans.
The ruling of an Israeli court, which claimed that Jews have the right to
perform “silent” prayers in the Al-Aqsa Mosque, was yet another provocation in an
attempt to erode the status quo at the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Israel’s recent actions in East Jerusalem and the West Bank, including the
resulting escalation in May, should serve as a wake-up call for the international
community. These unilateral actions fuel crises in the region. We call on Israel to
cease and desist its provocative policies.
“Economic peace” between Israel and Palestine cannot replace the need for a
just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The only viable option to put an end to the sufferings of Palestinian people in
Gaza is by ending the blockade.
For this reason, we reiterate our support for the judicial processes to hold
Israel accountable for its crimes in the occupied territories.
The establishment of an independent, sovereign and contiguous State of
Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital is
the only viable solution to this conflict.
An urgent return to peace negotiations is critical. Indeed, we must accelerate
all efforts to revive the peace process. The Quartet must be revitalized and lead the
efforts towards a new peace process. To that end, we support the call of President
Mahmoud Abbas to hold an international peace conference.
Moreover, the international community should also support the intraPalestinian unity process and elections.
We are concerned by the intention of third countries to open embassies in
Jerusalem or relocate their embassies from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. The status of
Jerusalem remains at the heart of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This fundamental
issue will be one of the most important components of the comprehensive solution
of this conflict. We urge Member States to respect the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions pertaining to the status of Jerusalem.
Of course, we have no objection to the establishment of relations between
third countries and Israel. However, we are concerned that opening or relocating
50/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

embassies to Jerusalem would undermine the parameters of a two-State solution,
including the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative.
The latest escalation in May further aggravated the already dire humanitarian
and economic situation on the ground in Palestine. The untenable humanitarian
conditions, particularly in Gaza, are unacceptable.
The international community cannot turn its back on the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people for freedom and dignity any longer.
Unhindered access to Gaza is of paramount importance.
I assure the Council that Turkey will continue to support the Palestinian
people in their pursuit of realizing our shared aspirations of peace and respect for,
and the protection of, their inherent dignity, rights and freedoms.

21-1550151/53

S/2021/884

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
The United Arab Emirates supports the statement of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
during his briefing to the Security Council last month regarding the importance
of reinvigorating efforts to set a legitimate political horizon to advance the peace
process and achieve a two-State solution, with the State of Palestine living side by
side with Israel in peace, security and mutual recognition.
In that context, the recent period has witnessed positive developments at the
diplomatic level that we hope will contribute to providing the conditions for the
resumption of the negotiation process and trust-building between the parties. We
note the recent high-level meetings between Israeli and Palestinian officials, the
recent visit to the region by the United States envoy for Palestinian and Israeli affairs
and the tripartite meeting among Egypt, Jordan and Palestine to revive the peace
process. The United Arab Emirates welcomes those positive steps and stresses the
importance of maintaining the current momentum to advance peace efforts in the
Middle East.
As a priority, work should continue to maintain the Egyptian-brokered
ceasefire reached between Israel and Palestine following the escalation of violence
in May this year. The United Arab Emirates encourages any initiatives that will keep
tensions low so that we do not witness a new round of violence, whose consequences
could be devastating for the region as a whole. My country also emphasizes the
importance of seeking de-escalation throughout the occupied Palestinian territory.
As data from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicate, there
was an increase in the number of casualties among Palestinians over the past month,
particularly because of increasing violence from settlers against the population.
All illegal actions and practices in the occupied Palestinian territory that
would undermine the two-State solution, including the construction and expansion
of settlements, the confiscation and demolition of Palestinian property and the forced
displacement of the population, particularly in East Jerusalem, must also be stopped.
In that context, the United Arab Emirates stresses the need for Israel to assume its
responsibilities in accordance with international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, including by providing the necessary protection to Palestinian civilians.
We also stress the need to preserve the legal status of the city of Jerusalem
in order to enable Palestinians to exercise their religious rites and to respect the
historical role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as Custodian of the city’s Islamic
and Christian holy places. We emphasize the importance of avoiding any action
that would exacerbate tensions in the Holy City of Jerusalem or affect the historical
arrangements connected with the Al-Aqsa Mosque in particular.
In conjunction with efforts to revive the Middle East peace process, the United
Arab Emirates urges the international community to continue to provide the necessary
support to the Palestinian people, especially given the difficult humanitarian and
economic situation they face, which has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Out of its historic commitment to the Palestinian people, the United Arab
Emirates contributed more than $883 million from 2013 to 2021 to finance vital
sectors and support development efforts in the occupied Palestinian territory and
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. My country has also sent 60,000 vaccine doses and more than 36.6 tons of
52/53

21-15501

S/2021/884

emergency medical assistance to thousands of Palestinian families in the Gaza Strip
to enable them to cope with the pandemic. We are renewing our support for efforts
to advance reconstruction in the Gaza Strip to alleviate human suffering there and
provide economic opportunities, especially for young people, who experience high
levels of unemployment.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its unwavering position of
absolute support for the Palestinian cause and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. We stress that a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to this issue is the
establishment of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State on the 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Peace Conference, the
Arab Peace Initiative and other agreed international terms of reference.

21-1550153/53
