210

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 152
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to consider the idea of elaborating a draft of a second optional
protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, at its
thirty-ninth and fortieth sessions, taking into account the
documents considered by the General Assembly on this
subject as well as the views of Governments thereon, and
to submit a report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the Assembly at its thirty-ninth session;
3. Decides to resume at its thirty-ninth session, under
the item entitled "International Covenants on Human
Rights' ' , consideration of the idea of elaborating a draft of
a second optional protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the
death penalty, with a view to considering what steps may
be taken in this area.
111 th plenary meeting
18 December 1982
l.

37/193.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December
1975,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 136
Recalling also its resolution 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
draw up a draft convention against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in the light
of the principles embodied in the Declaration, and its resolution 32/63 of 8 December 1977,
Recalling further that the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders, in
its resolution l l of 5 September 1980, expressed the belief
that the draft convention should be finalized at the earliest
possible time, 153
Considering that it was not found possible to complete
the work on the draft convention during the thirty-eighth
session of the Commission on Human Rights,
1. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/38 of 7 May 1982, by which the Council authorized
a meeting of an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights for a period of one week prior
to the thirty-ninth session of the Commission to complete
the work on a draft convention on torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to complete as a matter of highest priority, at its thirty-ninth session, the drafting of a convention on torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, with a view
to submitting a draft, including provisions for the effective
implementation of the future convention, to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;

A/371407 and Add. I.
See Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders, Caracas, 25 August-5 September 1980: Report
prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.81.IV.4), chap. I, sect. B.
is2

153

3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
111 th plenary meeting
18 December 1982

37/194.

Principles of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/85 of 13 December I976, in
which it invited the World Health Organization to prepare
a draft code of medical ethics relevant to the protection of
persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment
against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Expressing once again its appreciation to the Executive
Board of the World Health Organization which, at its sixtythird session, in January 1979, decided to endorse the principles set forth in a report entitled "Development of codes
of medical ethics" containing, in an annex, a draft body of
principles prepared by the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences and entitled "Principles of
medical ethics relevant to the role of health personnel in the
protection of persons against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment",
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/27 of 6 May 1981, in which the Council recommended
that the General Assembly should take measures to finalize
the draft Principles of Medical Ethics at its thirty-sixth
session,
Recalling its resolution 36/61 of 25 November 1981, in
which it decided to consider the draft Principles of Medical
Ethics at its thirty-seventh session with a view to adopting
them,
Alarmed that not infrequently members of the medical
profession or other health personnel are engaged in activities
which are difficult to reconcile with medical ethics,
Recognizing that throughout the world signifi;ant medical activities are increasingly being performed by health
personnel not licensed or trained as physicians, such as
physician-assistants, paramedics, physical therapists and
nurse practitioners.
Recalling with appreciation the Declaration of Tokyo of
the World Medical Association, containing the Guidelines
for Medical Doctors concerning Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in relation
to Detention and Imprisonment, adopted by the twenty-ninth
World Medical Assembly, held at Tokyo in October 1975,
Noting that in accordance with the Declaration of Tokyo
measures should be taken by States and by professional
associations and other bodies, as appropriate, against any
attempt to subject health personnel or members of their
families to threats or reprisals resulting from a refusal by
such personnel to condone the use of torture or other forms
of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December I 975, in which it declared any
act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment an offence to human dignity, a denial of the
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and a violation
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 135
Recalling that, in accordance with article 7 of the Declaration adopted in resolution 3452 (XXX), each State shall

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

ensure that the commission of all acts of torture, as defined
in article 1 of that Declaration, or participation in, complicity in, incitement to or attempt to commit torture are offences under its criminal law,
Convinced that under no circumstances should a person
be punished for carrying out medical activities compatible
with medical ethics, regardless of the person benefiting
therefrom, or be compelled to perform acts or to carry out
work in contravention of medical ethics, but that, at the
same time, contravention of medical ethics for which health
personnel, particularly physicians, can be held responsible
should entail accountability,
Desirous of setting further standards in this field which
ought to be implemented by health personnel, particularly
physicians, and by Government officials,
l. Adopts the Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to
the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the
protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Calls upon all Governments to give the Principles of
Medical Ethics, together with the present resolution, the
widest possible distribution, in particular among medical
and paramedical associations and institutions of detention
or imprisonment, in an official language of the State;
3. Invites all relevant intergovernmental organizations,
in particular the World Health Organization, and non-governmental organizations concerned to bring the Principles
of Medical Ethics to the attention of the widest possible
group of individuals, especially those active in the medical
and paramedical field.
111 th plenary meeting
18 December 1982
ANNEX
Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel,
particularly physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees
against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment

Principle I
Health personnel, particularly physicians, charged with the medical care
of prisoners and detainees have a duty to provide them with protection of
their physical and mental health and treatment of disease of the same quality
and standard as is afforded to those who are not imprisoned or detained.

Principle 2
It is a gross contravention of medical ethics, as well as an offence under
applicable international instruments, for health personnel, particularly physicians, to engage, actively or passively, in acts which constitute participation in, complicity in, incitement to or attempts to commit torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. " 4
,,. See the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment (resolution 3452 (XXX), annex), article 1 of which states:
"I. For the purpose of this Declaration, torture means any act by
which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted by or at the instigation of a public official on a person
for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information
or confession, punishing him for an act he has committed or is suspecled
of having committed, or intimidating him or other persons. It does not
include pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to,
lawful sanctions to the extent consistent with the Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
"2. Torture constitutes an aggravated and deliberate form of cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.•'
Article 7 of the Declaration states:
"Each State shall ensure that all acts of torture as defined in article
I are offences under its criminal law. The same shall apply in regard
to acts which constitute participation in, complicity in. in<"itement to or
an attempt to commit torture."

211

Principle 3
It is a contravention of medical ethics for health personnel, particularly
physicians, to be involved in any professional relationship with prisoners
or detainees the purpose of which is not solely to evaluate, protect or
improve their physical and mental health.

Principle 4
It is a contravention of medical ethics for health personnel, particularly
physicians:
(a) To apply their knowledge and skills in order to assist in the interrogation of prisoners and detainees in a manner that may adversely affect
the physical or mental health or condition of such prisoners or detainees
and which is not in accordance with the relevant international instruments;"'
(b) To certify, or to participate in the certification of, the fitness of
prisoners or detainees for any form of treatment or punishment that may
adversely affect their physical or mental health and which is not in accordance with the relevant international instruments, or to participate in
any way in the infliction of any such treatment or punishment which is
not in accordance with the relevant international instruments.

Principle 5
It is a contravention of medical ethics for health personnel, particularly
physicians, to participate in any procedure for restraining a prisoner or
detainee unless such a procedure is determined in accordance with purely
medical criteria as being necessary for the protection of the physical or
mental health or the safety of the prisoner or detainee himself, of his fellow
prisoners or detainees, or of his guardians, and presents no hazard to his
physical or mental health.

Principle 6
There may be no derogation from the foregoing principles on any ground
whatsoever, including public emergency.

37/195.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly.
Having considered the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his Office, 156
as well as the report of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the High Commissioner on the work of its
thirty-third session, 157 and having heard the statement made
by the High Commissioner before the Third Committee on
15 November 1982, 158
Recalling its resolutions 36/l 24 and 36/ 125 of 14 December 1981 ,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian and non-political
character of the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner on behalf of refugees, returnees and displaced
persons of concern to the Office,
Expressing deep concern that the problems of refugees
and displaced persons remain distressingly serious, especially in Africa, Asia and Latin America,
Considering that, despite some encouraging developments, substantial efforts continue to be needed to aid refugees and displaced persons of concern to the Office of the
High Commissioner, in particular thrmigh the promotion of
155
Particularly the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (resolution
217 A (III)), the International Covenants on Human Rights (resolution
2200 A (XXI), annex), the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (resolution 3452 (XXX), annex) and the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders: report
by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. 1956.IV.4),
annex I.A).
156
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirt_v•se\'enth Session.
Supplement No. 12 (A/37/12).
m Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/37/12/Add.l).
"" Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Third Committee, 41st meeting,
paras. 1-7.
