General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

222

6. Reaffirms that, in accordance with the relevant pro­
visions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Dec­
laration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), it is ultimately for the people of Bermuda themselves
to decide on their future political status;
7. Reaffirms the importance of the need to foster na­
tional unity and a national identity and, in that regard, wel­
. comes the steps taken by the local authorities towards the
establishment of a human rights commission;
8. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the administering
Power must ensure that military bases and installations do
not hinder the population of the Territory from exercising
its right to self-determination and independence in conform­
ity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and urges
the administering Power to take all necessary measures to
comply fully with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations relating to military bases and installations in co­
lonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories;
9. Urges once again the administering Power, in co­
operation with the territorial Government, to continue to
take all effective measures to guarantee the right of the
people of Bermuda to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
10. Strongly urges the administering Power, in con­
sultation with the Government of Bermuda, to make every
effort to diversify the economy of Bermuda, including in­
creased efforts to promote agriculture and fisheries;
11. Welcomes the role being played in the Territory by
the United Nations Development Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, spe­
cifically in programmes of agriculture and fisheries, and
urges the specialized agencies and all other organizations
of the United Nations system to continue to pay special
attention to the development needs of Bermuda;
12. Reiterates its call upon the administering Power, in
co-operation with the local authorities, to continue to ex­
pedite the process of "bermudianization" in the Territory
and, in that connection, urges that particular attention be
paid to greater localization of the public service;
13. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to receive a visiting
mission in the Territory at an appropriate time;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue the ex­
amination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a visiting mission to Bermuda at an
appropriate time and in consultation with the administering
Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982
37/23.

Question of the British Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
0
•

Ibid., chaps. III and XXI.

to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to the British
Virgin Islands,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power,8 in which he said that his Gov­
ernment would fully respect the wishes of the people of the
British Virgin Islands in determining the future political
status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy im­
plementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participa­
tion of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the British Virgin Islands, thereby
enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
examination of the situation in the Territory, with a view
to accelerating the process of decolonization for the purpose
of the full implementation of the Declaration,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering Power
for the economic and social development of the Territory,
Taking note of the fact that positive economic develop­
ments have occurred during the period under review, in­
cluding the achievement of a sustained growth in the tourist,
real estate and construction industries,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and bear­
ing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening
further its economy as a matter of priority in order to pro­
mote economic stability,
Noting that the United Nations Development Programme
has made budgetary provisions for the Territory amounting
to $240,000 for the period 1982-1986,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide an
effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the willingness
of the administering Power to receive visiting missions in
the Territories under its administration,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the British
Virgin lslands; 11
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
British Virgin Islands to self-determination and indepen­
dence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, con­
tained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy im­
plementation of the Declaration contained in General As­
sembly resolution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to the
British Virgin Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the admin­
istering Power to create such conditions in the Territory as
will enable the people of the British Virgin Islands to ex­
ercise freely and without interference their inalienable right
to self-determination in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV), as well as all other relevant resolu­
tions of the Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
British Virgin Islands themselves to determine their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration
and reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness among
11

Ibid .. chap. XXI.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Fourth Committee

the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them
in the exercise of their right to self-determination;
6. Calls upon the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected authorities of the territorial Govern­
ment, to take all necessary steps to ensure the full and speedy
attainment of the objectives of decolonization set out in the
Charter and the Declaration and all other relevant resolutions
of the United Nations;
7. Notes the continuing commitment of the territorial
Government to the goal of economic diversification, par­
ticularly in the areas of agriculture, fisheries and small in­
dustries, and calls upon the administering Power, in
consultation with the local authorities, to intensify its efforts
in this regard in order to offset the recent decline in agri­
cultural production;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable right
of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their
natural resources by taking effective measures to ensure their
right to own and dispose of those resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other organiza­
tions of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
take measures to accelerate progress in the social and eco­
nomic life of the British Virgin Islands;
10. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the British Virgin Islands at an appro­
priate time should be kept under review;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue the ex­
amination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the British Virgin
Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982
37/24. Question of the Cayman Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 12
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Cayman
Islands,
Noting the statement of the representative of the admin­
istering Power, 8 in which he said that his Government would
fully respect the wishes of the people of the Cayman Islands
in determining the future constitutional status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy im­
plementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting that, in the period under review, the economy of
the Territory has continued to sustain sound rates of growth,
especially in the tourist, international finance and real estate
industries,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide an
effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
12 Ibid., chaps. Ill, V and XXII.

223

Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the willingness
of the administering Power to receive visiting missions in
the Territories under its administration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and bear­
ing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening
further the economy as a matter of priority in order to pro­
mote economic stability,
l . Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cayman
lslands; 13
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Cayman Islands to self-determination and independence in
conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy im­
plementation of the process of self-determination in ac­
cordance with the Declaration contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to the Cayman
Islands;
4. Notes with appreciation the active participation of
the administering Power in the work of the Special Com­
mittee in regard to the Cayman Islands, thereby enabling it
to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of
the situation in the Territory, with a view to accelerating
the process of decolonization for the purpose of the full
implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the admin­
istering Power to create such conditions in the Territory as
will enable the people of the Cayman Islands to exercise
freely and without interference their inalienable right to self­
determination in accordance with General Assembly reso­
lution 1514 (XV), as well as all other relevant resolutions
of the Assembly;
6. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
Cayman Islands themselves to determine their future polit­
ical status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration and re­
affirms the importance of fostering an awareness among the
people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them in
the exercise of their right to self-determination;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power
for the economic and social development of the Territory
and urges it, in co-operation with the territorial Government,
to render continuing support, to the fullest extent possible,
to the development of programmes of economic diversifi­
cation which will benefit the people of the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable right
of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their
natural resources by taking effective measures to ensure their
right to own and dispose of those resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other organiza­
tions of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
take measures to accelerate progress in the social and eco­
nomic life of the Cayman Islands;
10. Welcomes the continuing assistance provided to the
Territory by the United Nations Development Programme,
amounting to $448,000 for the period I 982-1986;
n Ibid .. chap. XXII.
