United Nations

S/PV.6145

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6145th meeting
Thursday, 18 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Davutoğlu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008)
(S/2008/284)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-37304 (E)

*0937304*

S/PV.6145

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008)
(S/2009/284)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. De Mistura to take a seat at the
Council table.
Before proceeding with the item on the agenda, I
would like to say a few words in my national capacity
about the importance of this meeting from Turkey’s
point of view.
As we all know, Iraq has been on the Security
Council’s agenda for almost two decades now, and this
Chamber has witnessed many significant milestones in
the history of Iraq. For the past six years in particular,
the Security Council has been an important forum,
where the international community has reviewed and
responded to various challenges facing the new Iraqi

2

regime and, in fact, the entire United Nations
membership for that matter. Indeed, this is where the
road map to security and stability in Iraq was devised,
and the commitment of the United Nations and of the
international community to help Iraq along that path
has been reconfirmed time and again.
That said, as Iraq has taken encouraging strides
towards achieving the objectives set forth in numerous
Security Council resolutions and assumed increasing
ownership of its future, the discussions in the Council
have, over time, become more concerned with
stocktaking. That is a welcome development. In fact,
we look forward to a time when Iraq will not be
discussed as an issue of concern for the maintenance of
international peace and security, but where Iraq itself
will contribute to regional and global peace and
security on its own. We feel that we are getting close to
point.
In the light of the foregoing, one may happily see
today’s meeting as a regular discussion on the situation
in Iraq even though today Iraq is passing through a
critical point in time, with various challenges still
standing in the way of a stable and prosperous future.
Iraq’s assumption of security responsibilities from the
Multinational Force MNF-I and the holding of national
elections are two examples that immediately come to
mind.
Thus, reaffirmation of the support of the United
Nations and of the international community at this
particular moment is critical. Indeed, we need to
acknowledge the good work done by the Iraqi
Government and express our readiness and willingness
to stand with them in tackling the challenges that lie
ahead. That is why we have seen these regular debates
on the basis of the Secretary-General’s quarterly
reports as a golden opportunity to convey a strong
message of support by the Council.
Being an able and strategic partner of Iraq, we
felt that Turkey’s presidency of the Council during this
meeting makes it even more meaningful. At least, that
is how we see the situation and that is why I have
travelled to New York for the second time in less than
15 days in order to be present at this important
discussion. I am looking forward to a lively exchange,
where, hopefully, we will unequivocally confirm the
terms of our commitment to the territorial integrity,
unity and political sovereignty of Iraq, living at peace
with itself and its neighbours.

09-37304

S/PV.6145

Without further ado, I resume my functions as
president of the Council and continue with the order of
business.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/284, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1830 (2008).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Staffan de Mistura. On behalf of the
Council, I would like to express our gratitude to
Mr. De Mistura, who is today making his last
appearance before the Council in his capacity as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq.
We appreciate Mr. De Mistura’s capable leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and his
unwavering approach to that challenging work since he
assumed the post in September 2007. We wish him
success in his upcoming work with the World Food
Programme and in all his future endeavours. I now give
the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: You are quite right,
Mr. President. It is an emotional moment for me, so
please forgive me if I say a few more words than I
would normally, in view of the fact that it is my last
opportunity to address the Security Council in my
current capacity as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq.
Eighteen months after starting my fourth
assignment in Iraq and my sixteenth United Nations
mission in the field, I am departing, somewhat proud of
what that Mission has achieved in a short period of
time and of our joint success with the Iraqis in
overcoming what sometimes have appeared to be
difficult challenges. Together we have helped to turn
the page on how the Iraqis view the United Nations and
the international community. Together, we have
contributed to the evolution of Iraq, which can soon
assume a new standing among the world community as
an increasingly stable and sovereign nation.
Every so often the United Nations is given, if
lucky, the chance and the right mandate, political
support and resources to deliver. Every so often the

09-37304

timing, the team, the mission objective and the drive
come together to make it work. I, for one, feel
privileged to have been associated with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) during
two of its most critical and formative years and to have
seen remarkable and unforeseen shifts in the political
and humanitarian landscape in Iraq.
Three dynamics have shaped the course of our
action in Iraq during that period. First, I called for an
expanded mandate with a stronger new resolution,
which came from the members the Security Council.
Secondly, I called for an expanded presence, and
it has been provided with the help of the Iraqi
authorities and all Security Council members.
Thirdly, I called for a new approach, with a
reinforced team as well as a clear directive from the
Secretary-General to be proactive and results-oriented.
That was the first message the Secretary-General gave
me when I took up my assignment. The result is that
we have been proactive in Iraq, particularly in view of
the situation. Our approach has been matched by an
Iraqi Government and a Prime Minister open to
increased United Nations engagement, in consultation
with the Iraqi authorities, and an international
community that is changing its outlook towards Iraq
and even letting the Organization assume, at some
moments and in some areas, a centre-stage role.
More than ever before, the international
community has been working towards common
objectives in Iraq. That has made our lives and our
work much easier. Resolution 1770 (2007) set
parameters broad enough to give us considerable
scope. One of the lessons we learned is that we need a
very strong, broad resolution. The Secretary-General
set the tone, giving us enough flexibility to act on the
ground; the international community and the members
Security Council in particular provided the support for
an enlarged United Nations role; and the Iraqis set the
agenda.
In seeking to combine strategic thinking and
operational solutions, we chose, with the Council’s
blessing, time-sensitive entry points in areas that were
gaining momentum. We could not do everything at the
same time, in spite of the broad scope given us by the
Security Council. We chose those areas in which the
United Nations could make a difference, and not just a
point, and be allowed to act as an honest broker
whenever possible. We sought to be selective and

3

S/PV.6145

incremental in identifying quick wins to build our
credibility, on behalf of the international community,
by trying to demonstrate that we can deliver and by
proving that we can be creative and reliable in the use
of our main asset — international legitimacy.
UNAMI’s strategic priorities were determined,
first, by the need for immediate reaction to emergency
situations, such as returnees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs); and secondly, by anticipation of
impending deadlines that, if not met, could potentially
cause friction. A classic example was the referendum
over Kirkuk and the debate of the timeliness of holding
provincial elections. Our priorities also arose from the
International Compact with Iraq, which has been led
very actively and effectively by Ambassador Gambari,
and from the regional dialogue, human rights and
constitutional support issues.
Together, I believe, we have often turned
challenges and crises into opportunities, thanks to the
energy and stamina of the Iraqis. In an unusual
combination for any integrated mission in such an
operationally challenging environment, UNAMI has at
the same time been acting in emergency mode, with its
political arm working mainly on conflict prevention —
on the Arab-Kurdish file, for instance — while the rest
of the Mission was already working an post-conflict
issues and peacebuilding.
The past two years have seen the Iraqis
progressively fatigued by civil strife, slowly shedding
sectarian divisions, seeking to reconcile after the
horrible and terrible fallout from Samarra, bringing
their differences into the legislative arena, and turning
up in the polls to declare their preference for the
country’s return to normality. The Government and the
Prime Minister have increasingly exercised their
sovereignty, administering a State that enjoys broad
support, as shown in the recent provincial elections.
The Iraqi State is consistently building credible and
independent institutions. The cabinet is functioning,
Parliament is becoming increasingly reliable with a
very active new Speaker, the Independent High
Electoral Commission has gained experience in several
elections and will conduct others in the future, and the
Iraqi Security Forces are increasingly capable.
I need not remind the Permanent Representative
of Iraq, who is an example to us all, that the Iraqi
people have shown remarkable resilience. Iraqis are
now more than ever able to determine the course of

4

events in their own country, in spite of spikes of
violent attacks against innocent civilians, which have
recently been on the rise. These should be viewed as
attempts by isolated elements or groups to produce a
feeling of insecurity, but in my modest opinion they are
not capable of destabilizing the country.
Now more than ever, Iraqis should be helped to
focus on forging a political consensus. They are agreed
that they should keep political dialogue open. The
United Nations initiatives will continue to assist Iraq in
securing those political advances and making sustainable
security and socio-economic gains.
Our first initiative arose in the context of
subsiding sectarian violence, when UNAMI acted
promptly to prevent a new conflict between Arabs and
Kurds, as will be recalled, and to contribute to national
reconciliation by placing the highly controversial issue
of a referendum in Kirkuk in the framework of a
political process rather than as a hostile referendum.
We proposed technical assistance in setting up the
process, and a potential crisis over the impending
expiration of the constitutional article was averted. But
tensions have continued to exist between the two sides.
That is why UNAMI has kept the door of
dialogue open and indicated possible options. It is
indeed encouraging that the parties have now agreed to
come to the table to commence discussions on a future
process based on the elements provided by UNAMI’s
analyses of the disputed areas, set out in a 502-page
document. A high-level task force, which was
established as a follow-up and brought together
Government and Kurdistan regional representatives,
has been launched under United Nations auspices. I am
glad to report that it met on 10 and 16 June. The time is
ripe, and these beginnings of a high-level dialogue
represent a critical step in the right direction. I believe
that UNAMI will continue to contribute to that end.
As to the second initiative, 2009 has been a defining
period as Iraq looks to possible future electoral events, a
census and a series of referendums. Elections have been
the flagship programme of the Mission. With the
provincial elections in January 2009 — notable for their
remarkable absence of violence and the credibility of the
process — UNAMI has worked with Iraqis to produce
four major electoral events since 2005, and will continue
to do so in the upcoming elections.
The United Nations will continue to provide
support for capacity-building in these areas. We shall

09-37304

S/PV.6145

remain diligent in not forcing premature or ill-prepared
events. There are three basic requirements for
referendums and elections: appropriate and complete
legal framework, sufficient funding, and an operational
election commission with the capacity to conduct the
event.
The third initiative was launched when the United
Nations stood poised early to assist with the voluntary
returns of refugees and IDPs, which remains a major
priority for us. The exact number of internally
displaced Iraqis is still not fully determined. Much is
also speculated about returns ahead of parliamentary
elections. To date, 70 per cent of all returns have come
not from abroad, but from within the same governorate
or from within Iraq. The hoped-for return of displaced
populations will depend largely on improved quality of
life, security and opportunities in Iraq. Security is only
one of the many drivers of return in Iraq.
IDPs and refugees are mostly a political rather
than a purely humanitarian challenge. As such, the
problem cannot be solved by large-scale humanitarian
funding directed purely to IDPs and refugees. Iraq is
not in a humanitarian crisis, but has pockets of dire
humanitarian need and displacement, which does not
necessarily or automatically equate with vulnerability.
There are many other vulnerable people in Iraq; that is
why economic support is important. Funding for the
displaced should therefore be packaged within broader
programmes to revitalize jobs and services in conflictaffected communities. The United Nations, and in
particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, will work to ensure that
conditions are in place for voluntary, dignified and
sustainable returns, but should also make special
efforts on displacement-specific issues such as housing
and related legal protections.
As to regional and international partnerships, in
the context of its partnership and engagement with the
international community Iraq would like to shed what
it considers to be externally imposed obligations
related to its future. A new approach is required in the
regional environment.
While the ad hoc mechanism did not gain
sufficient momentum, it had its own purpose for a
period. After a while, however, it seems not to have
gained enough momentum. We have witnessed
constructive engagement and consistent improvement
in bilateral relations with some of Iraq’s neighbours,

09-37304

and that occurred in the context of the regional
environment. A major shift has taken place in a very
constructive way in the strategic partnership between
Turkey, for instance, and Iraq, and other recent
examples we see include Syria’s resuming diplomatic
relations and nominating an ambassador, as many
others have done. Jordan has found new common
ground on refugees and Iran has been indicating to us
that it is ready to discuss cross-border issues with Iraq,
including de-mining.
Additional facilitation is needed, however, to
further increase understanding and trust between Iraq
and its neighbours. I particularly wish to single out
Iraq’s relations with Kuwait. I firmly believe we are at
a critical juncture, in this moment, to be able to
contribute to a significant improvement of the climate
of cooperation, taking into account the concerns of
both countries. With respect to outstanding Chapter VII
mandates, the Iraqi Government feels rightly that the
time to turn the page is long overdue. Kuwait, for its
part, also has rightful claims regarding its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The Iraqi Government has
shown positive signs of increasing cooperation by
inviting, for instance, just in the past few days, a
Kuwaiti delegation to Iraq to pursue the issue of
missing Kuwaitis and by speeding up the deployment
of an Iraqi ambassador to Kuwait. We, for our part, as
UNAMI and as the Security Council, should now exert
every effort in building on the current momentum.
There are various creative options being floated that I
hope will be discussed and elaborated upon by the
Security Council in the near future in this regard.
What is next? The priorities are self-evident:
delivery of basic services; dialogue between the
Kurdistan Regional Government and the Government
of Iraq, leading to a defusing of tensions in Kirkuk and
other disputed areas; preparation for the next elections;
pre-positioning to assist refugees and internally
displaced persons, should they decide to return; the
reintroduction of certain elements into the economy —
for instance, helping the Awakening Councils, or
Al-Sahwa Councils, to reintegrate themselves more
totally into the economy; technical assistance to ensure
that a census is conducted in compliance with
international standards; tackling unemployment by
revitalizing the private sector; providing expertise in
ensuring the passage of a long-overdue hydrocarbon
law as an essential step to increasing oil production

5

S/PV.6145

and revenue; and helping Iraq to rebuild its agriculture
and diversify its heavily oil-dependent budget.

with no separations, no differences and no competition.
I thank in particular my two excellent deputies.

The key word, from the Iraqi point of view and
from the United Nations point of view, is capacitybuilding. Iraq is rich in resources, in people and in
water. They need and they are asking for capacitybuilding. Iraq, despite the fall of oil prices, is rich in
human resources and natural wealth. The Iraqi people
seek decent schools, hospitals and jobs, safe water and
reliable electricity. Provincial elections were run and
won on this platform, and this is likely again to be a
driving factor in future elections. We need to help the
Iraqi Government through capacity-building.

My personal respect goes out to our national
staff, the Iraqi United Nations colleagues, who have
seen many authorities come and go, have been the
backbone of our presence over the years and have
worked tirelessly to restore and rebuild Iraqi
communities. At the same time, we constantly had the
feeling that the international community in Iraq was
not only behind us, but, as members have been proving
and showing all the time, beside us in fact each step of
the way, speaking in one voice and taking a united
approach to the Iraqis’ needs. That has been one of the
strengths of the Mission.

I am confident that, in its own national
development strategy, Iraq will lay out a clear and
inclusive vision for socio-economic revival. This step
is urgent, not just to tackle recent suffering but also to
undo the damage of nearly three decades of conflict
and sanctions.
Capacity-building is also critical in the area of
human rights and the rule of law. While reporting
human rights violations is important, and we will
continue to do so, the United Nations could contribute
more and plans to do more by developing new
mechanisms for human rights protection and
supporting those already in place. We stand ready, for
instance, to offer support to the establishment of a
human rights commission. At the same time, we plan to
provide more technical assistance projects aimed at
monitoring prisons, courts and detention centres.
As we move into this next phase, international
coordination will still be very important. I want
therefore to take this opportunity to thank sincerely all
the donors around this table and elsewhere who have
contributed to the International Reconstruction Fund
Facility for Iraq, which closes its own contributions in
one month.
UNAMI has, in Iraq, a team deeply dedicated to
achieving a more present, visible and mobile United
Nations, working alongside Iraq’s Government. What
we have achieved, we have achieved as a team, thanks
to the support of the Secretary-General, the Iraqi
Government and members of the Security Council.
Here, allow me to thank my team in Iraq for their
personal sacrifices, drive, resolve, integrity and
exemplary commitment to work united under strenuous
circumstances. They are united, a whole country team,

6

I believe that we as a mission managed to build
our credibility on, first, our presence. We now have
many United Nations agencies, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
UNICEF, the World Health Organization, UN-Habitat,
the United Nations Office for Project Services, UNDP
and the World Food Programme, present in Baghdad.
Secondly, our credibility is built on our access,
our ability to talk to all sides, reach out to every
community throughout Iraq and nurture relationships at
the highest level of spiritual and political leadership.
Thirdly, we have our legitimacy, thanks to the
Security Council. We have facilitated solutions that
require mutual concessions by offering both credibility
and international legitimacy.
Fourthly, we have our expertise, what expertise
we have and when we can offer it, building up the
capabilities of national institutions.
In conclusion, the future looks moderately bright,
and there is growing hope for Iraq in the world and
inside Iraq. If the Iraqis can avoid or defuse
tensions — and they are doing so — and if they are
capable of seeing changes in their daily lives through
sustainable security gains, which are taking place,
through the delivery of basic services and through
more political inclusiveness — and we see movement
in that direction — all of these being realistic goals,
then Iraq will flourish.
This afternoon, a movie will be shown here in
this building, a film dedicated to a friend and colleague
of mine, Sergio Vieira de Mello. My colleagues in Iraq
and myself feel that the presentation of this report
coinciding with the fact that we will see this movie

09-37304

S/PV.6145

today has a special relevance to us. I must say frankly
that, when, a year or maybe more ago, in the middle of
blistering heat, sandstorms, 20 rockets a day and,
oftentimes, a lack of movement in the environment, we
would ask ourselves “what on earth are we doing
here?” What helped us to keep going and move
forward was exactly that: seeing the resilience of our
Iraqi friends going forward. We wanted to prove that
all those who died in Iraq, for Iraq, including Sergio,
the many others from many other countries and many
Iraqis, did not die in vain.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his
briefing. I now give the floor to the representative of
Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
thank you for coming back to New York to join us at
this meeting. I would like to also present our thanks to
your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of Russia, for his distinguished efforts
during his presidency in the month of May. Our high
appreciation also goes to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, whom
we are going to miss, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Iraq, and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) team in Iraq and
New York for their tireless work in assisting the
Government and people of Iraq.
Having reviewed the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on UNAMI’s work in Iraq contained in
documents S/2009/102 and S/2009/284, my delegation
would like to make the following comments.
With regard to the political and security sectors,
following the great success achieved by the Iraqi
people in the provincial elections held on 31 January
2009, the political forces that gained the majority of
seats in those elections have formed provincial
councils in 14 of the provinces that held elections. That
is an accomplishment that the Government of my
country considers to be an important step within the
framework of the plan to provide those councils with
increased responsibilities and the power to play an
important role in supporting the federal Government in
the reconstruction of Iraq.
National reconciliation remains a top priority for
my Government. In that context, last March, more than
4 million Iraqis visited the Holy Shrines in the city of
Samarra, in an atmosphere characterized by a spirit of

09-37304

brotherhood and tolerance. There were no breaches of
security during that event, which marked a day of
national unity among Iraqis from different ethnic and
sectarian groups, who overcame the painful past that
had resulted from the bombing of the Holy Shrine in
Samarra on 22 February 2006 and the subsequent acts
of sectarian violence. The reconstruction of the Shrine
symbolizes the process of rebuilding the national fabric
of all components of Iraqi society.
Iraq today is a democratic State that respects
freedoms and is governed by a Constitution. The
principle of the peaceful rotation of power forms the
basis of an open and transparent political process. All
Iraqi political forces operate within that process and
work through constructive dialogue to reach all
important decisions, including on the key issues of
building a federal system, legislation on the
distribution of natural resources, constitutional
amendments and internally disputed borders. That will
lead to the reaching of a political settlement to resolve
most outstanding issues in order to preserve the gains
achieved within the framework of the political process.
The Iraqi people, driven by a belief in their
mission to build a free and democratic Iraq, are
building a democracy through mechanisms based on
ballot boxes and not bullets. The Kurdistan region will
hold council elections this July, while the central
Government is preparing for the parliamentary
elections to be held on 16 January 2010 to reinforce the
political process and build State institutions.
The security situation in Iraq continues to
improve, despite some security violations. Official
statistics indicate that in the period between March and
May 2009 there was a 76 per cent decline in the
number of acts of violence as compared to the same
period in 2008. That improvement attests to the
development of the capability of Iraqi security forces
and to the significant decline in the capabilities of
terrorist groups. The latest figures indicate that Iraqi
security forces have been able to dismantle and destroy
90 per cent of those groups. On 23 April 2009, the socalled Emir of the Islamic State of Iraq, Abu Omar
Al-Baghdadi, was arrested.
The Iraqi Government, in cooperation with the
United States Government, continues to take necessary
measures to take over security responsibilities from
American troops, in accordance with the security
agreement signed between the two countries. Iraq is

7

S/PV.6145

already responsible for 90 of the 138 military sites. By
the end of June 2009, the Iraqi Ministries of Defence
and the Interior will be responsible for an additional
48 military sites.
The process of building Iraqi defence capabilities
to fill the security vacuum created following the
withdrawal of friendly forces continues successfully. It
should be noted that Iraqi security forces have taken
over security responsibilities for the province of
Salahadin, which was the home province of former
dictator Saddam Hussein.
The Council of Ministers has approved the
agreement that was signed between Iraq and the United
Kingdom to protect Iraqi oil platforms and provide
training and support to Iraqi naval forces. We would
like to thank friendly countries that are participating in
the multinational forces and have, for the past six
years, helped Iraq to maintain security and stability.
An essential element of the political process is to
guarantee the Iraqi people’s full enjoyment of their
fundamental rights, as stipulated in the Iraqi
Constitution. To that end, the Iraqi Parliament has
decided to establish an Independent High Commission
for Human Rights to monitor the human rights
situation in Iraq and assist the Ministry of Human
Rights to perform its core functions. The Iraqi
Government also continues to modernize the Iraqi
judicial system in order to harmonize it with the
requirements of the new democratic order in Iraq.
The improved security situation in Iraq and the
Government’s systematic plan for the return of
displaced Iraqis abroad has contributed to an increase
in the number of Iraqis who have returned to the
country. For example, recent statistics indicate a
decrease in the number of Iraqis registered with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees in
Syria, from 224,000 to 207,669. The Iraqi Government
is launching a new programme to ensure the voluntary
return of displaced Iraqis in Jordan and Egypt. It is also
distributing 220 million Iraqi dinars to displaced
Christian families in Hamdania as a form of temporary
assistance until they can return to their home areas.
The Presidential Council ratified the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance on 14 May 2009. On 11 May
2009, it also decided on Iraq’s accession to the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. Lastly,
on 19 March 2009, it passed legislation on

8

compensation for people who have lost body parts
owing to the criminal practices of the former regime.
In the social and economic sectors, the Iraqi
Government is convinced of the importance of foreign
investment in Iraq in helping to rebuild an open
economic system. In that connection, under the direct
sponsorship of the Prime Minister, the Government held a
conference in London, England, on the theme “Invest in
Iraq — 2009”, in order to encourage foreign investment
in the country. The conference was attended by about 400
investors and representatives of governmental bodies and
private companies. The Government presented an
investment plan consisting of about 500 strategic projects
worth approximately $500 billion. Also at the conference,
some 300 companies announced their intention to invest
in Iraq. A similar conference will be held in Washington
this October. Japan will also hold a conference in
Baghdad on the subject of reconstruction in Iraq.
As part of the ongoing efforts by the Iraqi
Government to rebuild Iraq, the Iraqi Council of
Ministers approved a comprehensive plan to
reconstruct service sectors and infrastructure. The
estimated budgetary cost of that plan is about
$65 billion. Under the plan, 38 per cent of the budget
will be allocated to the housing sector, 27 per cent to
the agricultural sector, 14.2 per cent to the
transportation sector, 8.4 per cent to the water and
sanitation sector, 8.5 per cent to the education sector,
5.7 per cent to the health sector and 0.9 per cent to the
communications sector.
Within the framework of the joint efforts between
Iraq and the international community, the Baghdad
Coordination Group for the International Compact with
Iraq held a meeting in Baghdad on 26 May, which
included the participation of the Under-Secretary-General
and Special Adviser on the Iraq Compact, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, to discuss the latest developments and prepare
for the next conference of the International Compact,
which will hopefully take place in Baghdad later this year.
As a part of the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
resolve the ongoing issue of external debt, the
Government recently reached an agreement to settle its
debts with Tunisia and Greece, which amount to
$186 million and $259 million, respectively. The
Government has also settled its debt to trade creditors,
which amounted to $470 million. In that regard, my
Government has renewed its invitation to Arab
countries to cancel the debt owed by Iraq and to settle

09-37304

S/PV.6145

the debt issue as several sisterly and friendly countries
have done based on relevant Security Council
resolutions to assist Iraq, including paragraph 1 of
Security Council resolution 1483 (2003).

Mr. Gordon Brown, British Prime Minister, and France on
5 May 2009 to meet with His Excellency Mr. Nicolas
Sarkozy, President of France and His Excellency
Mr. François Fillon, Prime Minister of France.

As a part of the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
support the most vulnerable social elements in Iraq, a
conference on the orphans of Iraq was held on 15 April
2009 to launch a project for capacity-building,
rehabilitation and coordination among organizations
working with orphans in Iraq. The Iraqi Government
and the World Health Organization have organized a
working group on the role of the media in responding
to the swine flu (H1N1) pandemic. A budget of
approximately $30 million has been allocated to
prevent the spread of the pandemic.

The exchanges of visits led to the signing of
several agreements on bilateral cooperation between
Iraq and friendly countries, including a comprehensive
economic and security agreement with Syria, a joint
declaration of friendship and cooperation between Iraq
and the United Kingdom, a Convention on Economic
and Technical Cooperation between Iraq and the
United Kingdom and a visit by a Deputy Prime
Minister Mr. Rafi Al-Issani to New York, where he met
United States and United Nations officials to talk about
a friendly relationship, economic and trade relations
and reviewed Security Council resolutions at the
United Nations.

The Prime Minister has launched an initiative to
protect the Iraqi heritage and antiquities and in this
regard, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities has
recovered a large number of stolen antiquities.
On the regional and international levels and
within the framework of regional and international
openness, there have recently been several high-level
visits to Iraq, which included His Highness Sheikh
Mohammad Al-Sabah Al-Salem Al-Sabah, Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Kuwait, on
26 February 2009; His Excellency Mr. David Miliband,
British Foreign Secretary, on 26 February 2009; His
Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary General of the
League of Arab States, on 21 March 2009; His
Excellency Mr. Abdullah Gül, President of Turkey, on
23 March 2009; His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Naji
Ottri, Syrian Prime Minister, on 21 April 2009;
Mrs. Hillary Clinton, United States Secretary of State,
on 25 April 2009; Mr. Ali Afsn, Adviser of the
President of Azerbaijan, on 20 May 2009; Mr. Murad
Oozglic, Turkish Special Envoy to Iraq on 25 May
2009; Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-General
and Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
International Compact with Iraq, on 25 May 2009; and
His Excellency Mr. Karel De Gucht, Belgian Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, on
27 May 2009.
In return, the Iraqi President Mr. Jalal Talabani
visited Ankara on 7 March 2009 and Tehran on 27 March
2009. The Prime Minister Mr. Nouri al-Maliki visited
Moscow on 8 April 2009 to meet with his counterpart,
His Excellency Mr. Vladimir Putin, and the United
Kingdom on 29 April 2009 to meet with His Excellency

09-37304

In a recent development, Egypt has nominated
His Excellency Ambassador Sherif Kamal Shahin as
Extraordinary Ambassador to Iraq in Baghdad. The
Iraqi Government’s efforts to build bridges with
friendly countries stems from the sincere wish of the
Government and people of Iraq to establish relations
with all nations of the world in order to build
communication and contribute to the return of Iraq to
its natural place in the international community.
The Iraqi Government has begun consultations
with the Secretary-General to review Security Council
resolutions on Iraq pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1859 (2008). Based on our review of those
resolutions, we have determined that Iraq has fulfilled
all its obligations under those resolutions, with regard
to both the impact of the occupation of Kuwait and
issues related to arms.
I would like to point out a number of obligations
that Iraq has fulfilled with regard to Security Council
resolutions on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait.
Iraq has recognized the State of Kuwait and its borders
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and both States continue to cooperate in the
maintenance of border markers. Iraq has returned the
remains of 236 missing Kuwaitis found in Iraq. Since
2003, Iraq has handed over to Kuwait numerous items
belonging to that country and most recently the
Kuwaiti authorities have received 4,539 audio and
video tapes belonging to the Kuwaiti Ministry of
Information. Next week, the Iraqi Government will
hand over to the Kuwaiti authorities 24 boxes

9

S/PV.6145

containing old currency and stamps. As of April 2009,
Iraq has paid $27.1 billion of the total compensation
due for the invasion of Kuwait. However, $25.5 billon
remains due and that is a heavy burden on Iraq, which
needs the money for services, reconstruction and
development.
As for the area of disarmament, Security Council
resolution 1762 (2007), which ended the mandate of
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), stated that Iraq had
fulfilled all its commitments with regard to
disarmament. Moreover, the letter of the United States
and the United Kingdom annexed to that resolution and
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
dated 22 and 27 June 2007, indicated the complete
destruction of Iraq’s special programmes to produce
weapons of mass destruction.
We hope that the Secretary-General and the
Security Council will assist Iraq in returning to the
international status it held before the invasion of
Kuwait in 1990; an invasion which was one of the most
atrocious crimes committed by Saddam Hussein and
for which the Iraqi people continue to pay a heavy
price.
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude for UNAMI’s role in Iraq and
for Mr. Staffan de Mistura’s support offered at the
Government’s request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms. With the imminent completion of his
responsibilities in Iraq, I wish him all success in his
future endeavours, both personal and professional.
The President: I now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all I would like to welcome the President and to thank
him for his presence and for chairing the meeting
today. I also thank Mr. De Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and a very old
friend, for his briefing to the Council. I take the
opportunity to welcome his courageous and effective
action with his entire team and his commitment to
implement the mandate given to him by the Security
Council. I thank him for — as he stated — contributing
to giving hope to the population of Iraq. At every step
of the way he has been a worthy successor of Sergio
Vieira de Mello and I thank Mr. De Mistura for
mentioning his name today. We think of him, as we

10

think of all of those who lost their lives with him in
Baghdad. Finally and on a more personal note, I can
only say how much I and the Council wish him great
success in his next mission in the city he loves. The
international community still needs him, and the
Council still needs him. For all that he has done, I give
him my personal thanks.
The briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General was very complete. We support its
analyses and share its conclusions. I will raise only
three points. Today, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) plays an essential role in
several areas: first in the area of elections, it has acted
effectively in supporting the Independent High
Electoral Commission to ensure the smooth operation
of elections, which is the best sign of democratic life in
Iraq. After the successful holding of the governorate
council elections on 31 January last, we support the
actions of the mission to organize the parliamentary
and regional elections in Kurdistan on 25 July and the
elections for the Council of Representatives planned
for January 2010. Under its mandate and the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General, the
Mission must also continue to provide its expertise to
the Iraqi Government so as to make progress on the
question of disputed internal borders, especially in the
Kirkuk area. We welcome the analytical reports given
to Iraqi federal authorities and to the regional
Kurdistan Government in order to promote an
agreement among the political actors within Iraq on
this critical issue. It is a difficult problem, but it must
be resolved. We call on all Iraqis involved to display
courage in working toward a solution acceptable to all.
My second point, Mr. President, is to emphasize
that in the last few months in Iraq we have seen
substantial progress in establishing a safe, stable,
democratic, unified and prosperous country, where
human rights and the rule of law are increasingly
respected. France congratulates the Government of Iraq
on its efforts in this area, efforts that the Permanent
Representative of Iraq has just confirmed. We thank the
Permanent Representative for his contribution, which
emphasizes his readiness to work toward the stability
and prosperity of his country. Regardless, from now
on, as was emphasized by the Special Representative,
we must take advantage of this momentum in order to
achieve new progress in improving both the living
conditions of the people of Iraq and the national
reconciliation process. Besides the question of Kirkuk,

09-37304

S/PV.6145

this will require the completion of the constitutional
review process, as well as tangible improvement in
everyday life.
My third and final point, Mr. President, beyond
the primary responsibility of the Government of Iraq
and the important role played by the Mission, is that
we believe that neighbouring States must participate
fully in this effort. So it is in this spirit that we support
the action of the Mission to strengthen a regional
dialogue. We would hope especially that the regional
dialogue conducted by Iraq with its neighbours will
allow it to tackle essential issues such as border control
and the conditions for voluntary, safe and dignified
return for refugees, for which the progress alluded to
just now by the Special Representative is an
encouraging first sign. It is in the interest of States in
the region to get involved in making Iraq permanently
stable. That is why we wish to welcome the Minister
today to the Security Council. The fact that he is
chairing this debate and the agreement that he has
managed to reach the presidential statement of the
Council is a sign of the positive and constructive role
that can be played by a country as important as Turkey.
I will conclude by emphasizing how important it is that
the current positive cycle be able to allow Iraq to fully
recover its sovereignty. Here we would note resolution
1859 (2008), in which we asked the Secretary-General
to prepare a report in consultation with Iraq on the
action necessary to allow them international status
equal to what they had before resolution 661 (1990).
We await this report and are ready to act on that basis
and in the framework of Iraq’s international
obligations, in particular resolutions 773 (1992) and
833 (1993) on the question of the borders with Kuwait,
together with all States concerned. And, as was
indicated by President Sarkozy in Baghdad last
February, Iraq can count on the friendship of France to
work with it on Iraq’s full reintegration into the
international community.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): It is an honour
to have you chairing this meeting today, Mr. President,
and we also welcome the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to the Council.
I would like to express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on developments
in Iraq over the reporting period and underline our
strong support for the vital role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in helping Iraq’s
development as a democratic, inclusive and stable

09-37304

State. In particular, I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. De Mistura in what will be his final appearance
before the Security Council in his role as the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for Iraq. He will be
greatly missed. His leadership and dedicated hard work
have been central to achieving the progress we have
seen in Iraq over the past 18 months. He’s done an
excellent job, and the depth of his commitment was
inspiringly clear in his very moving final remarks just
now. I wish him well in his next posting. In order to
maintain this positive momentum that he has created,
it’s going to be imperative to ensure a smooth and
timely handover to his successor.
Mr. President, the Secretary-General’s report
illustrates that, despite the security challenges, Iraq
continues to make good progress. We welcome the
election of a new Speaker of Parliament. This will now
enable the Council of Representatives to push forward
with discussion of key legislation vital to the future
stability of the country. We also welcome the
formulation of new provincial councils, which follows
the successful provincial elections in January of this
year. They have an important role to play in delivering
the essential services critical to improving the lives of
the Iraqis who voted for them. And we look forward to
the upcoming parliamentary elections in the Kurdistan
region next month and the national elections that will
take place early next year. We urge the Government of
Iraq to ensure that the Independent High Electoral
Commission has sufficient funding to facilitate
successful national elections. As a further sign of
support, the European Union has again offered to send
independent election observers to both of those
elections.
On the issue of human rights, we acknowledge
the good progress that Iraq has made, but agree with
the Secretary-General’s report that more remains to be
done. We strongly urge the Government of Iraq to
ensure that the Independent High Commission for
Human Rights receives adequate funding in the
forthcoming supplementary budget. Mr. President, we
agree with the Secretary-General that fostering
dialogue between all parties on national reconciliation
remains a key priority for Iraq, and welcome the
positive role played by UNAMI in this area. We
encourage all parties to work together in the spirit of
compromise, to make further progress on federalism,
resolving disputed internal boundaries and sharing
natural resources. The international community has

11

S/PV.6145

made clear that it stands ready to offer its full support
for this process, including by facilitating talks between
the parties. Recent political tensions in Mosul and
Diyala are a cause for concern. We hope the talks will
soon begin to reduce these.
We’d also like to express our deepest sympathies
to the Iraqi Parliament and the Iraqi people following
the murder last week of Member of Parliament Hareth
Al-Ubaidi. This was a cowardly act and should not be
allowed to disrupt the political process in which Iraq’s
leaders are engaged. We’re confident the Iraqi people
will continue along the path of democracy and dialogue
in order to overcome violence and sectarianism.
Mr. President, we welcome Mr. De Mistura’s
efforts to improve regional dialogue and cooperation
between Iraq and her neighbours. This is a key
requirement for the development of lasting regional
peace and security. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s report that the International Compact for Iraq
would benefit from a more streamlined approach,
focused on key socio-economic priorities. To this end,
we encourage greater coordination between the
International Compact and international donors such as
the World Bank and the European Union, to ensure that
all assistance provided is complementary and well
targeted. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report on Security Council resolutions relating to Iraq.
Mr. President, I’d like to close with a few words
about the future direction of the United Kingdom’s
relationship with Iraq. This week, our Prime Minister
reiterated once again to our Parliament that the core of
the new relationship we’re building with the Iraqi
people will be based on diplomatic trading and cultural
links. And Ambassador Al Bayati mentioned just now
the joint declaration and convention we concluded
recently with Iraq to that effect. We’ll continue to play
a supportive role in the reconstruction of Iraq. As a
further sign of the normalization in Iraq, and improved
security, United Kingdom combat troops have begun to
draw down. This process will be completed on
schedule by the end of July. Meanwhile, we stand
ready to help build the capacity of the Iraqi armed
forces, and, as Ambassador Al Bayati mentioned, his
Council of Ministers has approved an agreement for
the United Kingdom to help with the protection of Iraqi
oil platforms and provision of training and support to
Iraqi naval forces.

12

The United Kingdom believes a secure,
prosperous and democratic Iraq, at peace with its
neighbours and taking its rightful place in the
international community, remains extremely important
to the strategic and domestic interests of many
countries, in the Middle East and beyond.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
honoured by the Minister’s presence here today at this
important debate.
I want to begin by joining my colleagues in
thanking you, Mr. Special Representative, for your
extraordinary leadership. I know how deeply my
Government, up to and including President Obama, has
been grateful for your service, your enormous
contributions, your personal sacrifice and your success
in this important endeavour. You will be missed. I just
wish to underscore how deep our gratitude truly is. I
also want to thank you for reminding us of the
enormous contributions and sacrifices that so many
have made on behalf of the United Nations, as well as
many other countries, foremost the people of Iraq,
towards the achievement of a sovereign, democratic
and stable Iraq. Your mention of Sergio today is
moving and timely, and we thank you again for that.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and all the men and women of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their
tireless work to support a more peaceful and
prosperous Iraq.
Rooted in our shared strategic interests with the
Government of Iraq, heartened by the heroic service of
thousands of brave Americans and many others, and
mindful of the future of millions of Iraqis, the United
States remains deeply committed to Iraq. As this
Council knows, the United States plans, in accordance
with the United States-Iraq security agreement, to
withdraw its combat troops from Iraq’s cities, towns
and villages no later than the end of this month. That in
turn will pave the way for the withdrawal of all United
States forces by the end of 2011. Our drawdown and
withdrawal, however, in no way diminish our longterm partnership with Iraq. During this transition
period, the United States will continue our firm support
for the Iraqi people as they assume full responsibility
for their sovereign nation. We will continue to build a
strong, lasting, strategic relationship with Iraq, one that
respects the sovereignty and serves the interests of both
our countries.

09-37304

S/PV.6145

As a friend and as a strategic partner, we will
work with Iraq’s Government to strengthen democratic
institutions, uphold the rule of law and develop
peaceful and cooperative relations with its neighbours.
We will also continue to encourage the international
community to deepen its engagement with the
Government of Iraq to further secure and build upon
Iraq’s political, economic and security gains.
The United States would like to acknowledge the
vitally important work that the United Nations is doing
in Iraq. Under the leadership of Special Representative
De Mistura and at the invitation of the Iraqi
Government, UNAMI continues to expand the United
Nations presence and capacity throughout Iraq. From
helping to address disputed internal boundaries to
helping hold free and fair elections, from pursuing
national reconciliation to easing the suffering of
refugees and the displaced, UNAMI continues to play a
critical role in promoting the long-term peace, security
and prosperity of Iraq.
In the days and months ahead, UNAMI’s work
will be critically important. Allow me to highlight just
three areas where its efforts will matter most.
In January, Iraqis chose new provincial councils
in 14 of Iraq’s 18 provinces. That vote was marked by
a heartening and diverse voter turnout and a
significantly improved security climate. Based on that
success, UNAMI will once again provide technical
assistance and advice to Iraq’s Independent High
Electoral Commission as it prepares for two upcoming
votes: the Kurdistan regional government elections in
July, and the Iraqi parliamentary elections in January
2010.
Secondly, UNAMI will also continue to play a
crucial role in supporting efforts to address Iraq’s
disputed internal boundaries. By promoting constructive
dialogue about a mutually acceptable solution, UNAMI is
helping to provide a key requirement for lasting stability
in Iraq, and we call upon all relevant parties to advance
this process in earnest.
Thirdly, UNAMI will provide valuable support to
the Iraqi Government as it facilitates the safe,
voluntary and orderly return of displaced Iraqis. Here,
too, UNAMI’s work is critically important. The
sustainable and voluntary reintegration into Iraqi life of
refugees and internally displaced persons is essential
for the country’s long-term stability. To support and
sustain the return of those uprooted by war and chaos,

09-37304

UNAMI is working with the Iraqi Government to
provide them with security and access to housing, jobs
and basic services. We welcome additional efforts on
this issue by the Government of Iraq.
All of us here can be proud of UNAMI’s
outstanding record of accomplishment. We deeply
appreciate its work and look forward to its continued
success.
The United States firmly supports Iraq’s
continuing development as a sovereign and democratic
nation, a country in which all of its diverse and vibrant
communities can participate freely in political, social
and economic life and in which human rights are
protected, a country that contributes to the peace and
security of the region, a country that is sovereign,
stable and self-reliant.
To build on the progress we have made, regional
and international support for Iraq is essential. We
encourage all countries to help Iraq meet its goals and
to support the Iraqi people as they pursue prosperity
and peace. The United States unequivocally encourages
UNAMI’s work and its expanded footprint in Iraq. My
Government stands ready to continue to assist UNAMI
as necessary, and we encourage all countries to do the
same.
Finally, the United States fully supports the
presidential statement circulated by the Turkish
presidency. It is an important signal of support for
UNAMI and for the people of Iraq.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by hailing your presence with us here
today, Mr. President. We thank you for having
travelled, for a second time this month, to participate in
our work. I wish to thank Ambassador De Mistura in
particular for his work throughout all this time, and for
the work of his colleagues, who together have
contributed to the well-being of the people of Iraq. I
thank him for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/284). I greet Ambassador Al Bayati
warmly and thank him for his valuable briefing.
As Ambassador De Mistura has indicated, there
has been significant progress in Iraq in recent months
in different areas. In particular, we are happy to hear
that the Government of Iraq has strengthened the
electoral processes, based on the experience garnered.
We hope the upcoming elections in Kurdistan and the
parliamentary elections will be inclusive and

13

S/PV.6145

transparent and will include the active participation of
women. These electoral processes are valuable
opportunities, as the Secretary-General said, to
strengthen local governing and to legitimize the
authority of the State throughout the entirety of Iraqi
territory.
Costa Rica wishes to urge the political leaders of
Iraq to continue their work to promote progress for all
their population by way of equitable mechanisms. We
call on them to ensure that all of the fruit of Iraq’s
enormous wealth is distributed among the population.
Along these lines, we urge the United Nations
team in Iraq, as well as the international donors, to
continue to work closely with the Iraqi authorities in
the creation of a normative environment that allows for
the implementation of the necessary reforms in the
public sector and the necessary regulation of the
private sector, so as to facilitate the achievement of the
development goals. Economic, social and political
development also presupposes that governments be
receptive, transparent and responsible in all levels visà-vis their citizens. It is in this context that we believe
that in order to optimize the benefits of public
investment, it is necessary to strengthen the anticorruption policies.
Costa Rica is convinced that improvements in
security cannot be made at the expense of fundamental
freedoms or the full enjoyment and protection of the
human rights on the part of the population of Iraq. We
note with great concern the observations contained in
the most recent report on the human rights situation in
Iraq prepared by UNAMI. We regret that recent
security improvements have not been accompanied by
a strengthening of the rule of law or by a systematic
approach to combating impunity. We are concerned
that despite the establishment of the Independent High
Commission for Human Rights, sufficient budgetary
funds have not been allocated to that body to enable it
to begin its work in 2009. We hope that the Iraqi
authorities will swiftly honour their commitments to
strengthen and broaden the protection of the rights of
the Iraqi population by establishing independent
institutions to monitor and supervise human rights, as
Ambassador Al Bayati stated during the previous
Council debate on UNAMI and reiterated today.
Costa Rica urges that it is of fundamental
importance that Iraq uphold its commitments to human
rights by ratifying key international instruments and

14

ensuring the effective implementation of those it has
already ratified, in particular the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women.
Before concluding, I wish to put on record our
concern with regard to the reported intention to
reinstate the practice of executing convicted
individuals in Iraq. My country, which abolished the
death penalty in 1877 and recently supported an
initiative in the General Assembly promoting a global
moratorium on executions, respectfully urges the
Government of Iraq to suspend such executions. We
are similarly concerned by the paragraphs of the report
noting the lack of reliable information on the prison
population and the overcrowding of detention centres.
We share the concern expressed in the report regarding
the absence of guarantees required by standards with
respect to human rights and fair trials. We should also
like to register our concern at the persistence of
interrogation procedures that, according to the report,
could be tantamount to torture. We hope that the
Government of Iraq will translate its political will into
concrete actions, that it will ratify the Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional
Protocol, as well as the Second Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you as President
of the Council.
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. De
Mistura of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) for his briefing on the situation in Iraq.
We should also like to expression our appreciation of
his work in leading UNAMI and to wish him success in
his new — and in some ways old — job leading the
World Food Programme.
We share the assessment that has been made in
the quarterly report on the work of UNAMI. It is
balanced and provides an overall objective reflection of
the current situation in Iraq, as well as of the ongoing
processes in many areas of political and economic life
in the country, where we have seen some positive
progress. At the same time, we remain concerned by
the security sector situation. Terrorism continues to
pose a threat, as do increased activity of armed groups
and ongoing inter-ethnic and inter-religious tensions.

09-37304

S/PV.6145

Strategically, the work of UNAMI should focus
on continued efforts to foster the process of national
reconciliation, which for now is clearly stalled. We
welcome UNAMI efforts aimed at encouraging Iraqi
leaders to seek mutually acceptable solutions to
political and socio-economic problems and create an
effective government system in which all ethnicities
and religions can participate. Without this, efforts to
normalize the internal political situation, maintain the
territorial integrity of Iraq and establish a just
distribution of income from the exploitation of natural
resources will fail.
One of the principal goals of the United Nations
in Iraq is to act as a coordinating centre for the
stabilization of the country, including efforts to prepare
for the parliamentary elections scheduled for January
next year and the regional elections in Kurdistan in
July. In our view, the future presence of the United
Nations in Iraq depends in a large part on UNAMI’s
effectiveness in facilitating the successful holding of
elections and in assisting the electoral council. We
must strengthen the partnership between UNAMI and
the Government of Iraq by supporting the Government
in taking the lead in stabilizing the internal situation.
At the moment, we must note that the initial
stages of the pre-electoral process have lead to some
internal political tension. The coming of the elections
may well provoke greater religious and interethnic
problems. We therefore welcome UNAMI efforts to
encourage inter-ethnic and inter-religious dialogue and
we call on the Mission to continue to focus its efforts
on this issue.
Despite the progress in the security sector
reported by the Government, we are concerned by the
increase in the number of violent incidents, which rose
by one third in the month of April. We also remain
concerned about the situation in the disputed areas,
where tensions persist between the Kurdish population
on one side and the Turkmen and Arab populations on
the other. There is a positive role for UNAMI to play in
countering these tensions. We look forward to the
official publication of the report by UNAMI on the
disputed areas. It is our view that this document could
be of great value if it maintains a purely analytical and
advisory nature and doesn’t presume to anticipate the
sovereign decisions that must be taken by the Iraqi
people themselves on this issue, which is exceedingly
sensitive to all ethnic and religious groups. In this

09-37304

context, it is important to be informed of Iraqi opinion
on Mission documents.
Another important issue for us is the relationship
between Iraq and its regional neighbours. Without
more cooperation between Baghdad and neighbouring
countries and without the constructive involvement of
those neighbours in an Iraqi settlement process,
achieving security in Iraq will remain difficult. We
welcome UNAMI efforts to support the development of
bilateral relations between Iraq and its neighbours.
In conclusion, the Russian delegation supports
the draft presidential statement reflecting the position
of the Security Council on the questions related to Iraq.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Your Excellency Mr. Davutoglu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, for presiding
over our meeting today. I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura
and the representative of Iraq for their briefings. This is
the last appearance of Mr. De Mistura in the Security
Council in his current capacity as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. I wish to avail myself of this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation for the major
contribution that he has made to aiding peace and
reconstruction in Iraq. I wish to thank him and wish him
every success in his future endeavours.
Earlier this year, provincial elections were held
successfully in Iraq. The Council of Representatives
laid down plans to accelerate its legislative work. The
Iraqi Security Forces have been assuming an increasing
level of responsibility for maintaining peace and
stability in the country. The progress that has been
achieved in all areas in Iraq deserves full recognition.
At the same time, we must not ignore the fact that Iraq
is still confronting multiple challenges in the political,
security, reconstruction, human rights and national
reconciliation areas. Bombing incidents still frequently
occur. The issue of disputed internal boundaries
remains
unresolved.
Economic
recovery
and
reconstruction need greater support from the
international community. Large numbers of refugees
and displaced persons need to return to their homes and
be resettled, and the rights and interests of women and
children must be more effectively secured.
The primary responsibility for the future and
destiny of Iraq rests with the Iraqi Government and
people themselves. For Iraq to have a good future all
the political leaders of Iraq must put the national

15

S/PV.6145

interest above all else and seek reconciliation,
consensus and cooperation. We support efforts by the
Iraqi Government to take measures conducive to the
stability, unity and development of the country, and we
hope that the Iraqi Government and the various parties
in the country can join in continuing to make good
progress in national reconciliation, development of
legislation, accelerated reconstruction and the
protection of human rights. We hope that the Kurdistan
regional Government and the parliamentary elections
will proceed smoothly and successfully.
Progress in the security and political fields can be
fully consolidated only by promoting economic and
social reconstruction. We appeal to the international
community to effectively honour its pledges of
assistance to Iraq and to help Iraq to accelerate its
reconstruction and development. We support reviewing
the priorities of the International Compact for Iraq in
the light of the needs of the current situation. We are
pleased to see that Iraq has been improving and
strengthening its relations with its neighbours in the
region.
Iraq’s improvement of relations with regional
countries is conducive to its stability and
reconstruction and is also in the common interest of the
neighbouring regions. The international community
should acknowledge and continue to encourage and
support Iraqi cooperation with countries in the region
through multiple regional mechanisms and bilateral
initiatives.
Under the leadership of Mr. De Mistura, UNAMI
has achieved good results through gradual and focused
efforts on all fronts to implement its mandate under
resolution 1770 (2007). We expect UNAMI to continue
to strengthen cooperation with the Iraqi Government,
to provide assistance to key elections in Iraq, to make
reasonable and feasible recommendations with regard
to the political dialogue in Iraq and to push for greater
progress in Iraqi national reconciliation.
We also expect UNAMI to continue to coordinate
humanitarian assistance to Iraq, including creating the
necessary conditions for the return, resettlement and
integration of Iraqi refugees and displaced persons. We
also hope that UNAMI will provide greater assistance
to the Iraqi people in the area of human rights.
We support efforts by the United Nations to
continue to expand its presence and activities in Iraq in
the light of that country’s needs. At the same time, we

16

appeal to the parties concerned to take effective
measures to enhance the safety and security of United
Nations personnel.
China supports Iraq’s resumption of its
international status. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral submitting a report pursuant to resolution 1859
(2008).
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/284) on the situation in Iraq and, as he is
completing his post as the Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), to pay tribute to
him for his valuable contribution to the settlement of
the Iraq issue. I also thank the representative of Iraq for
his statement.
Not long ago, we congratulated the Iraqi people
and Government for the achievements made in the
democratization process, in particular the successful
provincial elections and the progressive recovery of
control of their country and destiny. Today, we
encourage the Iraqi Government, whatever difficulties
remain, to persevere in its efforts to preserve that
progress, in particular in national reconstruction and in
the strengthening of its authority throughout its
territory.
In that regard, we are pleased to note that the
Iraqis are sincerely committed to the national
reconciliation process, which, as we know, is the
precondition for the success of all other actions, in
particular the settlement of disputes over internal
boundaries, the sharing of natural resources and the
issue of federalism.
We also welcome the successful elections in the
governorates and their fine organization by the
Independent High Electoral Commission. We hope that
the electoral preparations coming in 2009 and 2010
will, like previous ones, be crowned with success.
However, Iraq continues to face numerous
challenges. For that reason, good coordination and
cooperation among UNAMI, the multinational force
and the Iraqi Security Forces are essential to ensure the
stability of the country. However, it is primarily up to
the Iraqis themselves to work towards strengthening
peace and ensuring a harmonious development of their
country.

09-37304

S/PV.6145

Different factors point to that legitimate
aspiration for peace, hence the recent analytical reports
on the disputes over the internal boundaries in north
Iraq and the technical and logical assistance provided
to the relevant parliamentary committee in order to
work out a consensus on the status of Kirkuk.
Furthermore, we hope that the lessons learned by the
members of the committee from the experience of
Northern
Ireland
will
contribute
to
better
understanding and resolving the issues of powersharing, political reform and reform of the province’s
constitutional status.
The successful unfolding of the national
development strategy is also a very encouraging
indication of efforts for Iraq’s recovery, and, in that
context, no one doubts that the adoption in February
2009 in Naples of a new approach towards
international assistance will bolster that strategy, as
will the decisions of the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes to establish a United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for Iraq from
2011 to 2014 and the planned future review of the Iraq
Compact with the help of the Special Adviser,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari.
In the area of human rights, we welcome the
initiatives taken by the United Nations and the Iraqi
Government to promote gender equality and parity and
to ensure implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Finally, it seems essential to us to stress that
strengthening regional cooperation remains an
important element in the post-conflict strategy in Iraq.
While congratulating the regional actors for their
foresight, we are grateful to UNAMI and the Special
Representative for the efforts made to strengthen
confidence and cooperation among the countries of the
region.
Peace and stability in Iraq are essential to calm in
the region and the world as a whole. No effort must
thus be spared so that lasting security is quickly
restored in that country.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first of all
thank you, Your Excellency, for assuming the
presidency of this very important meeting. I would also
like to thank Special Representative De Mistura for his
briefing and commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for its unwavering
commitment to assist the people of Iraq in rebuilding
their country. I would also like to express Austria’s

09-37304

appreciation
for
your
extraordinary
personal
dedication, courage and leadership, in particular in
promoting dialogue and national and political
reconciliation. I would also like to thank the
representative of Iraq for his statement.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report
(S/2009/284) national reconciliation remains the main
priority for a stable and peaceful Iraq. We welcome the
recent initiative of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to launch a high-level dialogue
between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
regional Government on the disputed internal
boundaries. It is of very great importance that leaders
on all sides focus on national reconciliation in the runup to the Kurdistan regional elections next month and
the national elections in January 2010.
On the issue of power-sharing, property and
demography in Kirkuk, we welcome the assistance that
UNAMI has provided to the parliamentary committee.
We regret that the committee has not yet been in a
position to report back on progress. We expect
continued and genuine commitment on the part of all to
resolving the outstanding issues concerning the
allocation of Government posts.
In view of budgetary challenges due to the
economic crisis and declining oil revenues, national
and regional leaders need to overcome the deadlock on
the regulation of the hydrocarbon sector. This would
also be very beneficial to encouraging foreign
investment in the country. The signing of the
memorandum of understanding on energy cooperation
with the European Union would be equally beneficial
in that regard.
The recent rise in indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, including by suicide bombers, is a stark
reminder of the fragility of the hard-won security
gains. Manifold challenges persist.
We are encouraged that Iraq’s internally displaced
continue to return to their communities. At the same
time, we share the Secretary-General’s view that
increased efforts towards integration, resettlement and
return are critical to allow for sustainable returns in
safety and dignity. This would also convey the message
to the more than 1.5 million Iraqi refugees abroad that
they, too, can have a future back home. We recognize
the immense efforts of the Syrian and Jordanian
Governments to accommodate Iraqi refugees.

17

S/PV.6145

As UNAMI’s human rights report underlines,
additional steps to strengthen the rule of law and end
impunity are necessary. We are encouraged by Iraq’s
commitment to strengthening the protection of human
rights. We therefore hope that the recommendations
contained in the report — in particular those relevant
to the protection of women, children and vulnerable
groups — will be implemented as soon as possible.
The Independent High Commission for Human Rights
could and should make an important contribution to
these endeavours. We therefore very much hope that
the Iraqi authorities will soon make it possible for the
Commission to begin its important work.
We welcome the progress made towards Iraq’s
ratification of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, and hope that it will provide fresh impetus
to the reform of the criminal justice system. We urge
Iraq to reinstate the moratorium on executions
observed since August 2007. I also wish to recall the
statement of the European Union on this subject.
Austria and the European Union stand ready to
support Iraq’s efforts to strengthen respect for human
rights and the rule of law, including by translating the
national strategy to combat corruption into action.
These efforts are essential to rebuilding the trust of the
Iraqi people in their institutions. The equal
participation of women will be critical if that goal is to
be achieved. As Iraqi Security Forces assume
increasing levels of responsibility, we would
particularly encourage engaging women in the police
and in the army.
Let me underline Austria’s firm commitment to
supporting the efforts of the people and the
Government of Iraq to make the country democratic,
unified and prosperous. We therefore also support the
early conclusion of a partnership and cooperation
agreement between Iraq and the European Union. We
hope for a further strengthening of Iraq’s
re-engagement with its neighbours, in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions, and early progress
in negotiations — including, I wish to underline,
bilateral negotiations — towards the resolution of
outstanding bilateral issues.
Finally, let me say that we are grateful to you, Sir,
and to the United States of America for preparing
today’s draft presidential statement. It has our full
support.

18

Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
honoured, Sir, by your presence here today as you
preside over the work of the Security Council. My
delegation welcomes you once again.
Like other delegations, we wish to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his detailed briefing. We
take this opportunity to acknowledge his work at the
helm of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We are convinced that he will be equally
successful in his future responsibilities. We wish him
all the best.
We also wish to thank Ambassador Hamid
Al Bayati for his detailed statement, which clearly
reflected the progress that has recently been made in
his country.
Following the latest review of United Nations
activities in February, the Iraqi Government has
pursued its efforts to strengthen democracy, exert
effective control over the national territory, and
improve security and the living conditions of the Iraqi
people. We must not only praise those efforts, but also
encourage the Government of Iraq to continue along
the same line, with the support of the international
community, in particular as it faces important electoral
deadlines in late 2009 and early 2010. That will
certainly strengthen the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Iraq and ensure the right of its
people freely to determine their economic and political
future. It will also allow them effectively to control
their natural resources.
In that respect, we note with satisfaction that
significant progress has been made in recent months in
various sectors of Iraq’s national life. In the electoral
field, the successful and peaceful holding of provincial
elections on 31 January confirmed the commitment of
the Government and the people of Iraq to democracy
and strengthened local institutions, which will improve
the people’s standards of living. The work of the
Independent High Electoral Commission is deserving
of special recognition. With the support of the Iraq
authorities, UNAMI and the international community,
it ensured that the elections were held in optimal
conditions, thus guaranteeing the legitimacy and
impartiality of the results. The fruitful cooperation
between the High Commission, the Government and
UNAMI should continue throughout the preparation for
the regional elections in July and the parliamentary
elections in January 2010.

09-37304

S/PV.6145

On the political scene, the election in April of the
new Speaker of Parliament will promote progress on
outstanding legislative and constitutional matters. It
will also help to strengthen the foundations of national
reconciliation, which is of high priority for Iraq, as
Ambassador Al Bayati noted.
With respect to security, in February we
welcomed the entry into force of the bilateral security
agreement between the Governments of Iraq and the
United States. The agreement is the basis for the
transfer of responsibilities to the Iraqi Security Forces.
On the issue of sovereignty, we note with
pleasure that United States troops have begun to
withdraw from their former bases, while Iraqi forces
are increasing their participation in and responsibility
for ensuring domestic security, pursuant to the bilateral
security agreement. The process is of great importance
to Mexico, which has always favoured the
strengthening of Iraq’s sovereignty and spoken up on
behalf of its autonomy.
At the regional level, the Government has
demonstrated its ability to consolidate and strengthen
relations with its neighbours and laid the groundwork
for bilateral relations with the countries of the region.
We therefore welcome the decision to incorporate the
strengthening of regional relations into the priorities of
the International Compact with Iraq, with the support
of UNAMI. Moreover, thanks to UNAMI’s
interlocutory role, dialogue has begun on the disputed
internal borders and the status of Kirkuk. Such
dialogue is critical to establishing lasting peace in the
country and has recently borne fruit, as Mr. De Mistura
indicated.
Iraq’s current situation is the complete antithesis
of that which prevailed in previous years. However, as
in all reconstruction processes, important pending
challenges hinder national reconciliation and the
country’s economic development. We are particularly
concerned about the frequent and massive
indiscriminate attacks that have claimed numerous
civilian casualties. We firmly condemn such
unacceptable practices of intimidation and join the
Secretary-General in urging Iraqis not to succumb to
them. We trust in the Iraqi Security Forces to confront
the armed groups inciting sectarian violence and to
exert gradually increasing control throughout Iraqi
territory while safeguarding human rights.

09-37304

In this respect, my delegation shares the concern
expressed
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2009/284) with regard to the decision to reinstate
the death penalty, which Mexico is opposed to. We
invite the Iraqi authorities to suspend this practice. We
also call for particular attention to be paid to respect
for the rights of women.
In addition, we welcome the establishment of the
Independent High Commission for Human Rights,
which will make it possible to progressively address
these challenges. We also welcome the proposal for
United Nations support to contribute to the
consolidation of that Commission. We hope that the
necessary funds for the financing of the Commission
will be provided soon. This would contribute to
strengthening the capacity of Iraqi institutions in the
area of human rights protection and would establish
better practices for the treatment of detainees and
judicial processes, including fair trials and due process.
The persistent lack of security in the country has
generated a constant flow of internally displaced
persons and refugees, undermining the long-term
development of the country. For this reason, we are
pleased to note the fact that, since the beginning of
2008, nearly 50,000 families have returned to their
places of origin. We invite the Iraqi authorities to
continue to cooperate with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in order to
ensure the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons in the best possible conditions while ensuring
respect for their dignity.
Reconstruction and the economic development of
the country are essential for a solution to all of the
remaining problems and are intimately bound to an
improvement in security conditions and the
strengthening of institutions and of the rule of law. The
support of UNAMI and the international community
should be channelled towards these aspects in order to
consolidate future development in Iraq. We welcome
recent initiatives by the Government of Iraq to
strengthen its economic and social development.
In this respect, Mexico has contributed, through
the Central Emergency Response Fund, to addressing
the health epidemics that have affected more than
10,000 people in the country. Mexico is one of the
biggest supporters of this programme.
I would like to conclude by recognizing the work
of UNAMI personnel and the important role that this

19

S/PV.6145

Mission has played in substantially improving the
living conditions of Iraqis. Its presence has allowed for
the consolidation of an independent and sovereign
Government and has facilitated assistance to the
humanitarian and reconstruction work to be done.
In the future, UNAMI will have the opportunity
to continue to support Iraq in crucial initiatives such as
the International Compact for Iraq, the holding of
regional and national elections, the national assistance
strategy and the issue of human rights. The future of
Iraq and the well-being of Iraqis depend on the
determination of its Government and the support of the
international community in facing these remaining
challenges.
For all of these reasons, we thank the presidency
of the Council for having prepared the draft
presidential statement, to which my delegation fully
adheres.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
expressing our pleasure, Mr. Minister, for having you
personally here to preside over this meeting. I would
also like to extend our warm welcome to Mr. De
Mistura and to thank him for the briefing he provided
to us today as well as for his personal engagement,
leadership and achievements in Iraq. I wish him all the
best in his future work.
Croatia welcomes the ongoing United Nations
contribution to the promotion and consolidation of
peace, stability, democracy, human rights and
development in Iraq. In view of their approaching
departures from their respective functions, I would like
to use the opportunity to express once again Croatia’s
appreciation to Mr. De Mistura and his Deputy,
Mr. Shearer, for their hard work and for the dedicated
personal efforts they have invested in carrying out the
mandate of the Mission.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) continues to play a vital role in Iraq. Its
expanding engagement and presence provides valuable
support to the Iraqi Government and the people of Iraq
in addressing the remaining challenges. We salute the
efforts that the Special Representative and his team are
investing in facilitating political dialogue, notably their
good offices on the issue of disputed internal
boundaries and the status of Kirkuk. Also, we value
their role in assisting national and regional dialogue,
offering expertise on unresolved constitutional issues
and providing electoral and human rights support.

20

Croatia fully stands behind the messages
contained in the draft presidential statement that the
Council is about to adopt today, reaffirming its support
for UNAMI and for the people and Government of Iraq
in their efforts to rebuild a stable, secure and
democratic country.
Iraq has made remarkable progress over recent
years. The provincial election held earlier this year, the
first one to be Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned, augurs well
for the country’s future. We are also encouraged by the
successful start of voter registration in Kurdistan. We
see those electoral processes as a manifestation of a
broader trend, one in which Iraqis are increasingly
taking responsibility for their own affairs. Moreover,
they have set in motion local democratic processes,
which should be channelled into the national dialogue.
We call on the leadership of Iraq to make the
most of those recent positive trends on both the
political and the security levels and to translate this
momentum into national reconciliation that will lead to
lasting peace and stability and economic and social
development. We hope that this will generate tangible
improvements that will be felt in the daily lives of
ordinary Iraqis, thus locking in the progress achieved.
National reconciliation, as Mr. De Mistura and
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/284), have
rightly emphasized, remains the most pressing
challenge. Ultimately, only a political settlement can
guarantee the irreversibility of recent positive trends
and achievements. We call upon Iraqi leaders to rise
above sectarian interests, to apply themselves to
dialogue and to search for compromise solutions,
notably on the crucial questions of hydrocarbons
legislation, constitutional review and internal
boundaries.
Croatia strongly supports UNAMI’s focus on the
issues of boundaries and the status of Kirkuk,
appreciates its initiative and analytical input, and hopes
to see early progress.
We welcome the strengthening of the security
sector and the continued expansion of the authority of
Iraqi security forces throughout the country. However,
the recent wave of sectarian and terrorist violence and
increasing tensions in several areas give rise to serious
concerns. Croatia strongly condemns the recent terrorist
attacks. The extremists’ agenda should not be allowed to
derail Iraq from the path of peace and democratic
transformation. This threat only underscores the urgency

09-37304

S/PV.6145

of advancing the reconciliation agenda, as it is innocent
civilians who continue to bear the brunt of indiscriminate
violence.
Croatia is apprehensive about the multifaceted
challenges facing the Government of Iraq, including
reconstruction and economic growth. As the report
rightly observes, resources should be spent in areas
that will make a lasting difference to social and
economic revival. We understand that there are still
pockets of serious humanitarian needs, and we
appreciate the Government’s efforts to address the
situation of refugees, displaced persons and returnees.
Creating jobs and infrastructure is essential to bringing
about a tangible sense of progress for the people of
Iraq, together with an underlying sense of peace and
stability. We expect the Government of Iraq to build on
the recent security improvements and welcome its
efforts aimed at ensuring good governance and the rule
of law, including recent steps to combat corruption.
Regional cooperation and constructive dialogue
with Iraq’s neighbours remain critical components in
long-term stabilization. Conversely, durable peace and
stability in Iraq remain critical for regional security,
which in turn is critical for international security. We
are encouraged by intensified high-level bilateral
contacts and support continued engagement by
UNAMI in promoting bilateral cooperation initiatives
as well as regional engagement.
As Iraq progressively assumes full sovereignty,
Croatia fully supports the view that it has become
necessary for the Council to re-examine the set of
obligations imposed on the country under the regime of
Saddam Hussein and to realign Iraq’s international
legal standing in accordance with its new
circumstances. As the Council is about to begin the
review process in accordance with resolution 1859
(2008), we are ready to work with others towards
achieving durable solutions that will duly reflect this
new reality.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to say how
pleased we are at seeing you, Mr. President, personally
presiding over this meeting, which reflects your great
interest in the situation in Iraq. We would also like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his extensive briefing
and for all his efforts as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Iraq. We acknowledge and
commend the excellent role played by the United

09-37304

Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) under
his leadership. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Hamid Al Bayati, Permanent Representative of Iraq,
for his valuable statement.
UNAMI has done substantial work in the period
under review. It has had great success despite all the
challenges and difficulties it faces, especially in the
area of security. We would therefore like to underscore
the need to strengthen the role of the United Nations
and its specialized agencies in Iraq as an alternative to
the presence of foreign troops in Iraq.
Also in this period, Iraq has made great progress
on the political front by holding local elections in
14 provinces in January, including elections for
provincial councils. In that regard, we should like to
acknowledge and commend the efforts of UNAMI and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
support the Independent High Electoral Commission
and to resolve disputes about internal boundaries in
Iraq. We hope that tensions in the area of Kirkuk can
be brought to an end and that a political solution can be
achieved in line with Iraq’s Constitution that satisfies
all parties and strengthens the unity of all segments of
Iraqi society.
We urge the Mission and the Special
Representative to continue their neutral role, so as to
build confidence between the parties, encourage
national reconciliation and help to promote dialogue.
We also urge them to work in consultation with the
Iraqi Government to achieve consensus among all
parties on disputed matters and to establish lasting
security throughout Iraq, which is a prerequisite for
development and prosperity.
The ongoing tensions and military operations in
the period under review once again lead us to reiterate
that the continued presence of occupation forces, under
whatever format, will be a cause for continued
instability. The withdrawal of such forces will
contribute to achieving national reconciliation, which
is essential for Iraq’s stability, reconstruction and
prosperity, as well as an important element in
promoting and strengthening relations with its
neighbours. Withdrawal would also contribute to
reducing the level of support enjoyed by armed groups
and factions, especially those that claim that they are
operating against foreign troops in Iraq.
In that regard, I would like to mention paragraph
48 of the report (S/2009/284) of the Secretary-General,

21

S/PV.6145

which refers the readiness of the Iraqi Security Forces
to take over responsibilities from the multinational
forces. We hope that that process will be expedited.
The Secretary-General’s report also states that
there is a possibility that Iraq’s budget deficit for the
2008 fiscal year could reach $15.9 billion. Were that to
occur, it would be the highest deficit in the past six
years. That could hinder or delay reconstruction and
impede the implementation of Iraqi Government
policies. We hope that the rise in the price of oil may
contribute to reducing or completely eliminating that
figure. In that regard, we would like to emphasize that
it is important that the countries that led the invasion of
Iraq bear the responsibility for financing the special
international funds set up to assist the country.
On the humanitarian front, we note with
satisfaction the ongoing return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. However, we continue to be very
concerned about the fact that there are still millions of
Iraqi refugees outside the country, especially in
neighbouring States. We hope that the Iraqi
Government and United Nations agencies will give top
priority to the issue of the return of refugees and
provide the necessary contingencies and conditions for
that to occur.
In spite of the relative progress made in the area
of human rights, we continue to be concerned about
certain incidents that have resulted in the deaths of
several civilians and politicians, as we are about
killings and attacks against various groups in Iraqi
society.
We are also very concerned about the fact that
more than 15,000 persons are being detained by the
occupying forces and that Iraqi authorities have
rearrested some of them as soon as they are freed from
detention facilities under the control of foreign forces.
Iraqi authorities hold those people under difficult
circumstances, without having secured arrest warrants
against them from the judiciary and without giving
them fair trials. We hope that that will change soon.
The situation in Iraq today is very different from
what it was when resolution 661 (1990) was adopted.
The time has come for the Security Council to take the
necessary steps to allow Iraq to resume the
international and legal status it enjoyed before that
instrument was adopted.

22

Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish to join
others in welcoming you to the Council once again,
Mr. President, as well as to thank you for personally
chairing today’s meeting. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for his briefing on the situation in Iraq and the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). I congratulate him on his leadership of the
Mission during a very challenging period in UNAMI’s
operations. We wish him every success in his new
position. I also thank Ambassador Al Bayati of Iraq for
his contribution to our discussions today.
For the past six months, we have seen a
consistent positive trend in the overall political and
security situation in Iraq. Serious efforts have been
made to form provincial councils in 14 governorates
and to strengthen local governance institutions
following the successful provincial elections earlier
this year. A new Speaker of Parliament has been
elected, putting an end to a four-month hiatus and
opening up prospects for progress on pending
legislation needed for the country’s recovery. The
strengthened ability of the Iraqi Security Forces to
assume greater security responsibilities serves to
prepare the ground for further security improvements
under Iraq’s sovereignty. The fact that returns of
internally displaced persons are continuing at a steady
rate, despite the rise in violence, reflects the restored
confidence of the population.
High-level visits to and from Iraq have enhanced
the country’s international relations, above all with
neighbouring partners. We are, however, mindful of the
multiple challenges that Iraq is facing. Those include,
inter alia, the recent surge of indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, alongside regular attacks against the
Iraqi Security Forces and the multinational force in
many parts of the country; the delicate reconciliation
process, further complicated by the difficult economic
situation, with a budget deficit projected at 27 per cent
this year; the worrisome rates of poverty and
unemployment and the outbreaks of disease and food
insecurity, all of which are making the livelihood of
fragile groups of the population, such as women,
children, internally displaced persons and refugees,
even more vulnerable.
In that context, it is crucial for the Government of
Iraq and its citizens to strengthen the progress recorded
so far, move ahead on the course of national
reconciliation, reconstruction and reintegration, resolve

09-37304

S/PV.6145

the status of Kirkuk and other disputed internal
administrative boundaries, push forward the constitutional
review process, reach an accord on income-sharing
arrangements, and prepare for the elections in Kirkuk,
possible referendums, district and sub-district elections,
the national parliamentary elections this year and other
key electoral events next year.
All these issues cannot be dealt with in isolation
and will require the goodwill and firm commitment of
all concerned stakeholders. We call upon all parties in
Iraq to rise above their partisan interests and to work
with one another in the spirit of reconciliation, good
faith and cooperation with a view to reaching
compromise solutions that would allow the country to
march ahead under a common vision and along the
track of peace.
Given
the
fact
that
the
International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq will come to a
close by the end of this year, the International Compact
for Iraq is approaching its third year of
implementation, and international financing for
reconstruction and development is diminishing, we
endorse the imperative need expressed in the Paris
Declaration to ensure ownership, accountability and
transparency of aid. We believe that international and
regional assistance should be better coordinated to help
Iraq address its national socio-economic priorities, and
that this should be done through every related
mechanism, be it the International Compact for Iraq,
the United Nations Development Group Iraq Trust
Fund, the Paris Declaration principles, the expanded
ministerial meetings, or the regional working groups
on energy, refugees and security.
We commend the courageous work of UNAMI in
Iraq as mandated by Security Council resolutions 1770
(2007) and 1830 (2008). We welcome the decision by
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to
start with a full United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for Iraq from 2011 to 2014, in
line with Iraq’s National Development Strategy. We
also welcome the Secretary-General’s announcement
that he will soon present to the Security Council a
report on the review of all Security Council resolutions
pertaining specifically to Iraq, in accordance with
resolution 1859 (2008).
As Iraq is in the midst of a critical transition
period, we reiterate Viet Nam’s commitment to
contributing practically to the reconstruction of Iraq.

09-37304

Finally, we thank the delegation of Turkey for
proposing the draft presidential statement, which we
are ready to support.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I welcome you, Sir, and
salute the fact that you are presiding over this meeting
personally. The fact that you have come to chair the
meeting shows the significance which the presidency
attaches to this very meeting. My delegation thanks
Mr. De Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his
encouraging briefing and Mr. Al Bayati, the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, for his statement.
Uganda welcomes the overall progress and
improvement in the political and security situation in
Iraq. We commend the reconciliation efforts
spearheaded by Prime Minister al-Maliki, aimed at
bringing together all Iraqis, including former Baath
Party members. We are convinced that the durable
peace and stability that we all seek will come only
through the leadership of the Iraqi people, supported by
the international community. We therefore welcome the
agreements reached on the selection of the new
Speaker of Parliament, and encourage different
sections of the Iraqi society to build on this and other
achievements to create a more stable and peaceful Iraq.
We congratulate the people of Iraq for holding
successful and largely peaceful provincial elections,
which also enabled the selection of governors and their
deputies. We commend the Independent High Electoral
Commission for the work done in organizing the
elections.
As Iraq prepares for Kurdistan regional
government elections in July 2009 and national
parliamentary elections in 2010, we call upon the
Electoral Commission to build on the achievements
gained in organizing successful provincial elections.
We commend UNAMI’s continued assistance to the
Iraqi people and the Iraqi Government in that regard.
My delegation appreciates UNAMI’s continued
work in support of the Government of Iraq to help
create conducive conditions for the safe return of Iraqi
refugees and the resettlement of internally displaced
persons. We welcome the important regional
developments characterized by high-level visits
between Iraq and other countries of the region during
the reporting period. The security, stability and

23

S/PV.6145

development of Iraq are inextricably linked to the
peace, stability and development of the region.
There are still challenges to be addressed in order
to consolidate the gains so far made. We note that the
resolution of the disputed internal boundaries remains
among the indispensable elements for lasting peace in
Iraq. We encourage Iraqi leaders to work more closely
together in a spirit of national unity and to adopt
political, constitutional and legislative measures to
address the challenges.
Finally, Uganda extends its appreciation to Mr. De
Mistura for his work and good leadership of UNAMI. We
commend all of the United Nations staff in Iraq for their
contributions towards the stability and security of Iraq.
Uganda supports the draft presidential statement that has
been prepared by the United States and Turkey to convey
the Security Council’s position on the situation in Iraq.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Sir, for presiding over today’s
Council meeting.
I thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for a useful
briefing. Also, as all my colleagues have mentioned,
this will be the last time Mr. De Mistura will appear
before the Council in his capacity. I wish to add my
voice to express our deep and profound gratitude to
him for completing his very difficult tasks under
challenging circumstances and for his many years of
dedicated work for the cause of the United Nations. I
also think all members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) should be
congratulated for their great work.
I would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Al Bayati today for his very useful statement and for
his report of the progress that the Iraqi people and
Government have made so far.
We are pleased with the positive developments
during this period, including the election of the new
Speaker of Parliament and the formation of provincial
councils. It is encouraging that Iraq continues to make
such progress, but obviously many challenges remain.
We agree with many of our colleagues that national
reconciliation is the most important challenge for the
stability of the country. We very much welcome that
Prime Minister al-Maliki is calling for a renewal of the
national reconciliation effort.
A representative and inclusive democratic process
will be an essential basis for national reconciliation.

24

The preparations for the Council of Representatives
elections are under way. We hope that there will be a
higher turnout than for earlier elections and that this
time the electoral process will be well established as a
norm for Iraq’s people, that political grievances and
differences are to be dealt with not with bullets but
through the ballot box. We support the important role
that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) plays in assisting the Independent High
Electoral Commission.
The disputed internal boundaries are another
important issue for national reconciliation. UNAMI has
made a valuable contribution by providing analytical
reports. We hope that the reports will support the Iraq’s
people in coming to an agreement on the disputed
internal boundaries issue, including the status of
Kirkuk.
Those issues will have implications for the
Constitution. We believe UNAMI can also play a
useful role in helping the Iraqi people resolve these
complex interrelated issues.
In the area of security, we note that the recent
security incidents clearly indicate that the gains
achieved in this area continue to be precarious. The
United States forces will leave Iraqi cities at the end of
June. We hope that the Iraqi forces will step up to the
challenge of maintaining security themselves.
Another important issue is Iraq’s relations with
its neighbours. We appreciate that UNAMI provides
support to advance bilateral cooperation with Iraq’s
neighbours. We also look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General’s report, as requested with
resolution 1859 (2008).
With regard to economic recovery, we welcome
the strong initiatives by Iraq’s people in the country’s
efforts for recovery, reconstruction and development.
The fluctuation in oil prices poses a challenge to Iraqi
Government’s budget. But we are confident that the
Government can meet the challenges. Japan has
provided $1.7 billion in grant aid, and we have just
exchanged notes with the Iraqi Government to provide
official development assistance through a loan up to
$2.43 billion for 12 projects in areas of transportation,
energy, industrial plants and irrigation.
Japan is committed to assisting Iraqi people
together with other members of the international
community. We are very confident that Foreign

09-37304

S/PV.6145

Minister Zebari’s visit to Japan will not only solidify
our bilateral relations, which are already excellent, but
will also provide a useful opportunity for constructive
dialogue on the important challenges that Iraq faces
today.

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey.

by fear, frustration and hatred, the Iraqi people are now
trying to make a leap forward with hope, confidence
and empathy. And they are feeling good about it. That
is because democracy is seen in action at both national
and local levels. The security situation is improving
despite spikes of violence by extremist elements. There
is a growing awareness among political parties to
engage in a national dialogue. And more importantly,
there is an increasing sense of ownership on the part of
the Iraqi people.

I would first like to join others in thanking
Special Representative Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
insightful presentation, but more so for his unrelenting
and keen efforts at the helm of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Indeed, during
his rather short tenure, he energized the entire United
Nations team in assisting the Iraqi Government and
people in their quest for peace and stability. This took
place at a critical point in time, when Iraq’s need for
United Nations assistance was perhaps greater than
ever. Under his able leadership UNAMI has played a
most constructive role. It provided expertise and
analysis, bridged differences and helped bring about
positive change.

These are not modest achievements, given where
Iraq was only six years ago. But they are no reason to
be complacent, either. We must not let our optimism
outrank realism in our assessments for the future of
Iraq. It is still at a critical point in its transformation
into a stable and democratic State. As a matter of fact,
Iraq is on the verge of yet another defining phase in its
history. For instance, the parliamentary elections
coming up at the beginning of next year will be a
crucial turning point in Iraq’s young democracy. In
view of the irregularities experienced during the last
elections, the impartiality and professionalism of the
Independent High Electoral Commission will certainly
be one of the keys to a successful election process.

However, the job of the United Nations is still far
from over. In the months and years ahead there will be
an equally pressing need for it to continue to support
Iraq. We hope that Mr. De Mistura’s successor will
carry the flag even further.

But more significantly, the political process itself
is fraught with serious pitfalls in the run-up to the
elections. Given the considerable and rather
confrontational differences among the political parties,
efforts towards national reconciliation become all the
more important at this critical stage. In particular,
ethnic and sectarian harmony in Iraq requires close
attention. Differences along these lines have to be
addressed within the framework of a meaningful
national dialogue, in a way that will strengthen the
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
strong support for the Government and people of Iraq.

Of course, not only the United Nations but the
entire international community, first and foremost the
Iraqi Government and people themselves, should rise
to the occasion. We must all collectively ensure that
Iraq embarks upon an irreversible path towards lasting
peace, security and prosperity. It is still a tall order to
reach that point, but we have no other option. For a
united and democratic Iraq, assuming its rightful place
within the community of nations will constitute a true
success for all of us.
Given what has been achieved in the past six
years, we have good reason to be optimistic. Indeed,
not long ago, doomsday scenarios of all sorts
abounded. Today, despite many risks still ahead of us,
we see the light at the end of the tunnel.
I myself have been a witness to that evolution.
Indeed, I have been to Iraq a few times in this past six
years, and every time I go back I observe changes in
the right direction. After years of dictatorship plagued

09-37304

Likewise, settlement of the status of Kirkuk and
the broader question of disputed administrative
boundaries also presents a pressing priority. Thus the
ongoing political and legislative processes should be
intensified with a view to rapidly resolving this
sensitive issue. As a microcosm of Iraq, Kirkuk could
and should be a stimulus for national reconciliation.
The peaceful transfer of security responsibilities
to the Iraqi Security Forces poses yet another
challenge, for the extremist elements will try to exploit
this transition to create chaos and fear. We have already
started to see the first signs of this threatening
development. This is why the training and equipment

25

S/PV.6145

of the Iraqi Security Forces should be at the highest
possible level at this critical phase leading up to the
elections and beyond.
On top of these concerns, fair and just
implementation of the amnesty law, facilitation of the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
adoption of the long-overdue laws on hydrocarbon
resources and revenue sharing, building confidence and
cooperation with neighbouring countries, strengthening
regional dialogue and, last but not least, combating
terrorism originating in Iraq and emerging from it are
also among the issues that require urgent and constant
attention.
At this point, I would like to stress that the fight
against terrorism demands full cooperation within the
international community, but more so among the
neighbouring countries. In fact, it is an obligation by
which all Members of the United Nations are strictly
bound. In the case of Iraq, Turkey fully respects that
obligation and expects both Iraq and its neighbours to
do the same.
Finally, and maybe for the rather longer term,
achieving a solid consensus based on the Constitution
is imperative for Iraq to become a truly functioning
democracy. A unifying constitution that enjoys national
consensus is the basis of any democratic system. In
Iraq too, the Constitution should reflect a social
contract that all parties could embrace and unite
around.
As can be seen, the road ahead is not an easy one.
Given the manifold challenges, it will certainly be a
bumpy ride. But I have full confidence that the Iraqi
people and Government will come out of this process
with flying colours.
The responsibility of the international community
is to stand in solidarity with Iraq in tackling these
daunting tasks. Indeed, we must all help the Iraqis take
the right steps along this road. This is why we are glad
to see that the divisions within the international
community which prevailed in the early stages of the
post-Saddam era have now given way to a strong and
joint commitment to supporting Iraq’s desire for peace,
security and prosperity.
The United Nations is certainly an integral part of
this collective effort and it must continue to play its
useful role. United Nations assistance in resolving the
question of disputed administrative boundaries and the

26

status of Kirkuk, in particular, is of great importance.
The reports prepared by UNAMI on this matter provide
a good basis to build upon. We now expect all parties
in Iraq to engage in an inclusive dialogue that will
yield a consensual solution to this sensitive issue.
On the other hand, the International Compact
with Iraq also provides an excellent framework for the
international community’s engagement with Iraq, in
tune with the priorities set by the Iraqi Government
itself. Thus, we must constantly review and update the
Compact to maintain its effectiveness. This is
particularly important given that the global financial
crisis and the sharp fall in oil prices have had a rather
serious impact on Iraq’s economy.
For its part, Turkey will continue to support the
development and reconstruction of Iraq. As a matter of
fact, Turkey has long provided a significant conduit for
the flow of humanitarian and economic assistance to
Iraq. Today, the volume of bilateral trade is also rapidly
rising. The Turkish-Iraqi High-level Strategic Council
led by our Prime Ministers provides firm guidance and
impetus to the diversification and advancement of our
economic cooperation.
On the political front, too, the frequency of highlevel bilateral visits can in itself be seen as an
indication of the exemplary nature of our relationship.
Indeed, we enjoy good relations with all the political
actors in Iraq, and that enables us to play an effective
role in encouraging national reconciliation.
Furthermore, the recently signed bilateral military
training agreement is yet another clear example of the
deepening cooperation between our countries. Through
this agreement, we shall provide extensive training to
the Iraqi Security Forces in order to strengthen their
ability to cope with increased security responsibilities
at a critical time.
In short, I would like to reiterate once again that
Turkey will spare no effort to help the Iraqi people
achieve the peace and prosperity they deserve. As a
neighbour, we see this as our responsibility. Our
centuries-old ties of common history and culture create
an unbreakable bond between us and among all
segments of the Iraqi society, ranging from Arabs to
Kurds, Turkmen to Assyrians, Shiites to Sunnis. They
are all our brothers and sisters, whose security and
welfare is as dear to us as our own.

09-37304

S/PV.6145

Let me emphasize once again our fine belief that
Iraq has a bright future, which is now within reach. We
are confident that the Iraqi people will achieve that
future by acting in unison and rising above their ethnic
and sectarian differences. For our part, we promise to
be with them at every step of this honourable journey. I
should like to conclude on this rather high note.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of Iraq has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): I have no comment other
than to thank you, Sir, for having taken the trouble to
travel to New York again during such a short period to
preside over this meeting.
I should like to express my thanks and gratitude,
as well as the thanks of the Iraqi Government and
people, to Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We will miss him.
He has done a commendable job in helping Iraq and
the Iraqi people. I hope that the United Nations will
continue to help Iraq and its people in their affairs,
working towards a democratic, pluralistic and stable
Iraq.
The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, and
emphasizes the importance of the stability and
security of Iraq for its people, the region and the
international community.

for Iraq (UNAMI) in advising, supporting and
assisting the Iraqi people and Government to
strengthen
democratic
institutions,
advance
inclusive
political
dialogue
and
national
reconciliation, facilitate regional dialogue, aid
vulnerable groups, strengthen gender equality,
promote the protection of human rights, including
through the work of the Independent High
Commission for Human Rights, and promote
judicial and legal reform.
“The
Security
Council
encourages
UNAMI’s continued work, in coordination with
the Government of Iraq, to help create conditions
conducive to voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of Iraqi refugees and internally
displaced persons, and welcomes further attention
to this issue by all concerned.
“The Security Council underscores UNAMI’s
important role in supporting the Iraqi people and
Government to promote dialogue, ease tension, and
develop a just and fair solution for the nation’s
disputed internal boundaries, and calls upon all the
relevant parties to participate in an inclusive
dialogue to this end.
“The
Security
Council
emphasizes
UNAMI’s efforts to assist the Iraqi Government
and the Independent High Electoral Commission
in the development of processes for holding
elections. The Security Council strongly endorses
UNAMI’s continued assistance to the Iraqi people
and Government in preparation for the upcoming
elections.
“The Security Council congratulates departing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura on his strong leadership of
UNAMI, and expresses deep gratitude to all the
United Nations staff in Iraq for their courageous and
tireless efforts.”

“The Security Council commends the
important efforts made by the Government of Iraq
to strengthen democracy and the rule of law, to
improve security and public order and combat
terrorism and sectarian violence across the
country, and reiterates its support to the people
and the Government of Iraq in their efforts to
build a secure, stable, united and democratic
country, based on the rule of law and respect for
human rights.

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/17.

“The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

09-37304

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

27
