A/77/456

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 26

Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Shalini Gungaram (Mauritius)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “Advancement of women” and to allocate
it to the Third Committee.
2.
The Third Committee heard introductory statements and held interactive
dialogues and a general discussion on the item at its 7th to 10th and 15th meetings,
on 4, 6 and 11 October 2022, and considered proposals and took action on the item at
its 46th and 50th meetings, on 10 and 15 November 2022. An account of the
Committee’s consideration of the item is contained in the relevant summary records.1
3.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following
documents:
(a) Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women on its seventy-ninth, eightieth and eighty-first sessions (A/77/38);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General on intensifying efforts to end obstetric
fistula within a decade (A/77/229);
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on trafficking in women and girls: crises
as a risk multiplier (A/77/292);
(d) Report of the Secretary-General on the intensification of efforts to
eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls (A/77/302);
(e) Report of the Secretary-General on intensifying global efforts for the
elimination of female genital mutilation (A/77/312);
__________________
1

22-27052 (E)

A/C.3/77/SR. 7, A/C.3/77/SR.8, A/C.3/77/SR. 9, A/C.3/77/SR.10, A/C.3/77/SR.15,
A/C.3/77/SR. 46 and A/C.3/77/SR.50.

061222

*2227052*

A/77/456

(f) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women and girls, its causes and consequences
(A/77/136).
4.
At the 7th meeting, on 4 October, the Assistant Secretary-General and Deputy
Executive Director for Policy, Programme, Civil Society and Intergovernmental
Support of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women made an introductory statement and responded to questions posed and
comments made by the representatives of Latvia, Norway, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Chile, China, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
European Union, Mexico, the United States of America and Malaysia.
5.
At the same meeting, the Assistant Secretary-General and Deputy Executive
Director for Programme of the United Nations Population Fund made an introductory
statement and responded to questions posed and comments made by the
representatives of Norway, Mexico, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Colombia.
6.
Also at the same meeting, the Chair of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women made an introductory state ment and responded to
questions posed and comments made by the representatives of Spain, Japan, Malaysia,
Germany, Mexico, Chile, Portugal and the European Union.
7.
Also at the 7th meeting, the Chair of the Working Group on discrimination
against women and girls made an introductory statement and responded to questions
posed and comments made by the representatives of Costa Rica, Malaysia, the United
States of America, Mexico, Belgium, the European Union, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Syrian Arab Republic.
8.
At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on violence against women and
girls, its causes and consequences made an introductory statement and responded to
questions posed and comments made by the representatives of Romania, Cuba, the
Russian Federation, Australia, the Netherlands, Mexico, Colombia, Lebanon, Ireland,
Belgium, the United States of America, Luxembourg, Estonia (on behalf of the Nordic
and Baltic countries), Slovenia, Liechtenstein, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Canada, the Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq, Pakistan, India, Brazil,
Qatar and the European Union, as well as by the observer for the Sovereign Order of
Malta.
9.
At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the representative of the United States of
America made a statement with regard to the draft resolutions before the Committee.
10. At the 50th meeting, on 15 November 2022, the representative of Guatemala
made a statement with regard to draft resolutions under agenda items 26 and 64 (a).

II. Consideration of proposals
A.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.21/Rev.1 and amendments thereto
contained in documents A/C.3/77/L.56, A/C.3/77/L.57,
A/C.3/77/L.58, A/C.3/77/L.59, A/C.3/77/L.60, A/C.3/77/L.61,
A/C.3/77/L.62, A/C.3/77/L.63 , A/C.3/77/L.64 and A/C.3/77/L.65
11. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a
revised draft resolution entitled “Intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate all
forms of violence against women and girls: gender stereotypes and negative social
norms” (A/C.3/77/L.21/Rev.1), which was submitted by Albania, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational

2/56

22-27052

A/77/456

State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of). Subsequently, Andorra, El Salvador, Fij i, Israel, the
Marshall Islands, Nepal, Palau, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Serbia, Seychelles,
South Africa, Tunisia and Türki̇ ye joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
12. At the same meeting , Angola, the Bahamas, the Central African Republic,
Equatorial Guinea, Morocco, Papua New Guinea and South Sudan joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
13. Also at the same meeting, the representative of the Netherlands made a
statement and orally revised draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.21/Rev.1 by inserting a new
preambular paragraph after the fourteenth preambular paragraph.
Action on the amendments contained in documents A/C.3/77/L.56,
A/C.3/77/L.57, A/C.3/77/L.58, A/C.3/77/L.59, A/C.3/77/L.60, A/C.3/77/L.61,
A/C.3/77/L.62, A/C.3/77/L.63, A/C.3/77/L.64 and A/C.3/77/L.65
14. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the Chair (Dominican Republic) drew
the attention of the Committee to the amendments to draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.21/Rev.1 submitted by Guatemala, as contained in document
A/C.3/77/L.56; by the Russian Federation, as contained in documents A/C.3/77/L.57 ,
A/C.3/77/L.58, A/C.3/77/L.59 and A/C.3/77/L.60; by Egypt, Libya, Nigeria, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia and Yemen, as contained in documents
A/C.3/77/L.61 and A/C.3/77/L.62; by Egypt, Libya, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia and
Yemen, as contained in documents A/C./3/77/L.63 and A/C.3/77/L.65; and by Egypt,
Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia and Yemen, as contained
in document A/C.3/77/L.64.
15. At the same meeting, the representative of Guatemala made a statement in
connection with the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.56.
16. Also at the same meeting, the representative of the Russian Federation made a
statement in connection with the amendments contained in documents A/C.3/77/L.57 ,
A/C.3/77/L.58, A/C.3/77/L.59 and A/C.3/77/L.60.
17. Also at the 46th meeting, the representative of Egypt made a statement in
connection with the amendments contained in document A/C.3/77/L.61 ,
A/C.3/77/L.62, A/C.3/77/L.63, A/C.3/77/L.64 and A/C.3/77/L.65, and announced the
withdrawal of the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.63 following the
oral revision of draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.21/Rev.1.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.56
18. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the Committee was informed that Nigeria
had joined in sponsoring the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.56.
19. At the same meeting, Cameroon joined in sponsoring the amendment.

22-27052

3/56

A/77/456

20. Also at the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 95 to 36, with 31 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia,
Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Congo, Djibouti,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Madagascar, Namibia, Oman, Philippines, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, South Sudan,
Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.57
21. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the Committee was informed that Belarus
and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined in sponsoring the amendment contained in
document A/C.3.77/L.57.
22. At the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded vote
of 96 to 30, with 35 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Belarus, Cameroon, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, India, Iran (Islami c
Republic of), Iraq, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Senegal, Singapore, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Viet Nam.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
4/56

22-27052

A/77/456

Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Le sotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Brita in and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Central
African Republic, Congo, Djibouti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Namibia, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.58
23. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the Committee was informed that Belarus
and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined in sponsoring the amendment contained in
document A/C.3.77/L.58.
24. At the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded vote
of 99 to 37, with 27 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Belarus, Cameroon, Central African Republic, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakh stan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Senegal,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colo mbia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nor th
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay.

22-27052

5/56

A/77/456

Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Congo,
Djibouti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Madagascar, Maldives,
Mali, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
South Sudan, Suriname, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Yemen.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.59
25. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the Committee was informed that
Belarus, Egypt and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined in sponsoring t he amendment
contained in document A/C.3.77/L.59.
26. At the same meeting, Cameroon joined in sponsoring the amendment.
27. Also at the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 104 to 41, with 18 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People ’s Democratic
Republic, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh, China, Congo, Djibouti, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Madagascar, Oman, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, South Sudan, Suriname, Togo, United Arab Emirates.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.60
28. At the 46th meeting, the Committee was informed that Belarus and the Syrian
Arab Republic had joined in sponsoring the amendment contained in document
A/C.3.77/L.60.
29. At the same meeting, Cameroon, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Senegal joined
in sponsoring the amendment.
6/56

22-27052

A/77/456

30. Also at the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 95 to 49, with 18 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Trinidad and
Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerla nd,
Tunisia, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Bangladesh, China, Congo, Djibouti, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Madagascar, Oman, Paraguay, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South
Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, United Arab Emirates.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.61
31. At the 46th meeting, the Committee was informed that Algeria, Belarus and the
Syrian Arab Republic had joined in sponsoring the amendment contained in document
A/C.3/77/L.61.
32. At the same meeting, Cameroon joined in sponsoring the amendment.
33. Also at the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 95 to 38, with 26 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Libya, Mali, Mauritania,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen, Zimbabwe.

22-27052

7/56

A/77/456

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, China, Congo, Djibouti,
Guatemala, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People ’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Philippines, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Singapore, South Sudan, Su riname,
Tajikistan, Togo, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.62
34. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee was informed that
Algeria, Belarus, the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined in sponsoring
the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.62.
35. At the same meeting, Senegal joined in sponsoring the amendment.
36. Also at the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 95 to 49, with 17 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
8/56

22-27052

A/77/456

Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Angola, Central African Republic, China, Congo, Djibouti, Jamaica, Kenya,
Kiribati, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, South Sudan, Suriname, Togo, Tunisia.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.64
37. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee was informed that
Algeria, Belarus and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined in sponsoring the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.64.
38. Also at the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 88 to 57, with 14 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Türki̇ ye,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Irela nd, United States
of America, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Central African Republic, China, Congo, Djibouti, Kiribati, Lao People ’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Mauritius, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Suriname, Togo, Viet Nam.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.65
39. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee was informed that
Algeria, Oman, the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined in spons oring the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.65.

22-27052

9/56

A/77/456

40. At the same meeting, Cameroon, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Senegal joined
in sponsoring the amendment.
41. Also at the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 86 to 61, with 14 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, GuineaBissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Central African Republic, China, Congo, Djibouti, India, Kenya,
Kiribati, Madagascar, Paraguay, Philippines, Samoa, Suriname, Togo.
42. Before the votes on the amendments, statements in explanation of vote were
made by the representatives of France, Czechia (on behalf of the European Union) ,
Indonesia, Argentina, Finland (on behalf of the Nordic and Baltic countrie s), Japan,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, the Sudan, Iraq, Senegal and Australia (also on behalf of Canada, Ireland,
Liechtenstein, New Zealand, Norway and Switzerland).
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.21/Rev.1, as orally revised and as a whole
43. At its 46th meeting, on 10 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.21/Rev.1, as orally revised, by a recorded vote of 166 to none, with 14
abstentions (see para. 61, draft resolution I). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgar ia,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
10/56

22-27052

A/77/456

Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jord an, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Türki̇ ye, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republi c of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Belarus, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea, Gabon, Gambia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libya,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Russian Federation, Solomon Islands, Syrian Arab
Republic.
44. Before the vote, the representatives of the Russian Federation, Guatemala and
the Islamic Republic of Iran made statements in explanation of vote, and the
representatives of the Netherlands (also on behalf of France ), Argentina, Czechia (on
behalf of the European Union), Colombia, Chile, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay made statements.
45. After the vote, the representatives of Eritrea, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia (on behalf
of the Gulf Cooperation Council), Libya, Iraq, Nicaragua, Indonesia, Mali, Pakistan,
Egypt, Belarus, Bangladesh, Cameroon, China, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Yemen,
Nigeria, the Sudan and Mauritania made statements in explanation of vote, and the
representatives of Australia (also on behalf of Canada, Iceland, Liechtenstein, New
Zealand, Norway and Switzerland), Mexico and Canada, as well as the observer for
the Holy See, made statements.

B.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.6/Rev.1
46. At the 50th meeting, on 15 November 2022, the Committee had before it a
revised draft resolution entitled “Trafficking in women and girls”
(A/C.3/77/L.6/Rev.1), which was submitted by Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Austria, Belarus, Botswana, Cabo Verde, Canada, the Central African Republic, the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Honduras, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Uganda, the
United States of America and Uruguay. Subsequently, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,

22-27052

11/56

A/77/456

Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Maldives, Malta, the Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia,
Türki̇ ye, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
47. At the same meeting, the Bahamas and Tajikistan joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
48. Also at the same meeting, the representative of the Philippines made a
statement.
49. Also at the 50th meeting, the Committee
A/C.3/77/L.6/Rev.1 (see para. 61, draft resolution II).

adopted draft resolution

50. Before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of Senegal and Australia. After the adoption, statements were made
by the representatives of Belarus, Hungary, Italy, Saudi Arabia (also on behalf of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman and Qatar), Yemen, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Algeria, as well as by the observer for the Holy See.

C.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.18/Rev.1
51. At the 50th meeting, on 15 November 2022, the Committee had before it a
revised draft resolution entitled “Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of
female genital mutilation” (A/C.3/77/L.18/Rev.1), submitted by Algeria, Angola,
Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, China, the Comoros, the Congo, Côte D’Ivoire, Cuba, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Honduras, Israel, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua,
the Niger, Nigeria, Peru, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia
and Zimbabwe. Subsequently, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, Türki̇ ye, the United
States of America and Viet Nam joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
52. At the same meeting, Albania, the Bahamas, Haiti and Timor-Leste joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
53. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Burkina Faso, on behalf of the
Group of African States, made a statement.
54. Also at the 50th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.18/Rev.1 (see para. 61, draft resolution III).

12/56

22-27052

A/77/456

55. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of Saudi Arabia (also on behalf of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman and Qatar)
and Mexico, as well as by the observer for the Holy See.

D.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.22
56. At the 50th meeting, on 15 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Intensification of efforts to end obstetric fistula” (A/C.3/77/L.22 ),
which was submitted by Senegal (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of African States). Subsequently, Andorra,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States o f America,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
57. At the same meeting, Albania, the Bahamas, Haiti and North Macedonia joined
in sponsoring the draft resolution.
58. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Senegal, on behalf of the Group
of African States, made a statement.
59. Also at the 50th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.22
(see para. 61, draft resolution IV).
60. Before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of Japan, the Republic of Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the re presentatives
of Saudi Arabia (on behalf of the Gulf Cooperation Council), Mexico and Malaysia.

22-27052

13/56

A/77/456

III. Recommendations of the Third Committee
61. The Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
Intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of
violence against women and girls: gender stereotypes and negative
social norm
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/143 of 19 December 2006, 62/133 of 18 December
2007, 63/155 of 18 December 2008, 64/137 of 18 December 2009, 65/187 of
21 December 2010, 67/144 of 20 December 2012 and all its previous resolutions on
the elimination of violence against women, as well as its resolutions 69/147 of
18 December 2014, 71/170 of 19 December 2016, 73/148 of 17 December 2018 and
75/161 of 16 December 2020 on the intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms
of violence against women and girls,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action, 2
Reaffirming also the obligation of all States to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and reaffirming further that discrimination on the
basis of sex is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 3 the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 4 the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 5 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 7 and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto, 8
Reaffirming further the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women,9 the Beijing Declaration 10 and Platform for Action,11 the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development 12 and the
outcomes of their review conferences, and the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples,13
Welcoming the commitment to achieve gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 14
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4 Ibid.
5 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6 Ibid., Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
7 Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
8 Ibid., vols. 1577, 2171, 2173 and 2983, No. 27531.
9 Resolution 48/104.
10 Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
11 Ibid., annex II.
12 Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
13 Resolution 61/295, annex.
14 Resolution 70/1.
1
2

14/56

22-27052

A/77/456

and in the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at
its sixty-sixth session 15 and previous sessions, recognizing that women play a vital
role as agents of change for sustainable development, and acknowledging that
achieving gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls is crucial to
making progress across all Sustainable Development Goals and targets,
Recalling all previous agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the
Status of Women, including at its sixty-fifth session, on 26 March 2021, on women’s
full and effective participation and decision-making in public life, as well as the
elimination of violence, for achieving gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls,16 and at its fifty-seventh session, on 15 March 2013, on the
elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls, 17 taking
note of all international, regional and national initiatives in this regard, such as the
Generation Equality Forum, which was convened by the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and co-chaired by
France and Mexico, in partnership with civil society,
Recalling also the commitment to eliminate all forms of violence against all
women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual
and other types of exploitation, contained in Sustainable Development Goal 5, in
particular targets 5.2 and 5.3, the commitment to promote peaceful and inclusive
societies for sustainable development, provide access to jus tice for all and build
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels, contained in Sustainable
Development Goal 16, and the commitment to leave no one behind,
Acknowledging the importance of combating trafficking in persons in order to
prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls, and in this regard
stressing the importance of the full and effective implementation of the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime,18 as well as of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, 19 and reaffirming the obligation to take or strengthen
measures, including through bilateral or multilateral cooperation, to alleviate the
factors that make women and girls vulnerable to trafficking, such as poverty,
underdevelopment and lack of equal opportunity,
Deeply concerned about the continued prevalence of violence against women
and girls in all its different forms and manifestations worldwide, offline and online,
which is underrecognized and underreported, particularly at the community level, and
its pervasiveness, which reflects discriminatory norms that reinforce stereotypes,
including gender stereotypes and negative social norms, and gender inequality and
the corresponding impunity and lack of accountability, reiterating the need to
intensify efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against all women and
girls in the public and private spheres in all regions of the world, and re -emphasizing
that violence against women and girls violates, and impairs their full enjoyment of,
all human rights,
Emphasizing that domestic violence against women and girls of all social strata
across the world is a violation, abuse or impairment of the enjoyment of their human
rights and fundamental freedoms and, as such, is unacceptable, and gravely concerned
__________________

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2022, Supplement No. 7 (E/2022/27),
chap. I, sect. A.
16 Ibid., 2021, Supplement No. 7 (E/2021/27), chap. I, sect. A.
17 Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
18 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
19 Resolution 64/293.
15

22-27052

15/56

A/77/456

that domestic violence, including intimate partner violence and marital rape, remains
the most prevalent and least visible form of violence,
Deeply concerned by the impact of historical and structural inequalities, unequal
power relations, gender stereotypes and negative social norms, perceptions and
customs and disregard for women and girls’ dignity, integrity and autonomy, that are
among the primary causes of gender-based violence and harmful practices against
women and girls and that reinforce the lower status of girls and adolescent girls in
society,
Recognizing that violence against women and girls is one of the fundamental
social, political and economic means by which the position of women with respect to
men is regarded as subordinate and their stereotyped roles are perpetuated, and that
this violence is rooted in gender stereotypes and negative social norms, such as the
ideology of men’s entitlement and privilege over women, and perceptions of
masculinity, including the need to assert male control or power, le ading to the
justification, normalization, condonement and perpetuation of violence and
stigmatization of victims and survivors,
Recognizing also the challenges and obstacles to eliminating discriminatory
attitudes, gender stereotypes and negative social norms that perpetuate multiple and
intersecting forms of discrimination against women and girls, and stressing that
challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of international standards and
norms to eliminate gender inequality,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing reports of grave abuses and violence
committed against migrant women and girls, including gender-based violence, sexual
violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, domestic violence, gender-related killing of
women and girls, including femicide, racist and xenophobic acts and expressions,
discrimination, abusive labour practices, exploitative conditions of work and
trafficking in persons, including forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar
to slavery, while taking into account the particular difficulties in accessing justice that
may be faced by women migrant workers and acknowledging the challenges in
recognizing their positive contributions,
Expressing its concern that incidents of racial and religious intolerance,
discrimination and related violence against women and girls, because of negative
racial and religious stereotyping, continue to rise around the world, and condemning,
in this context, any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, and urging States to take effective
measures, consistent with their obligations under international human rights law, to
address and combat such incidents,
Deeply concerned that women and girls with disabilities face an increased risk
of violence based on stereotypes that dehumanize, infantilize, objectify, exclude or
isolate them,
Reaffirming the right to freely choose a spouse, to enter into marriage only with
free and full consent and to have control over and to decide freely and responsibly on
matters relating to sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free of
coercion, discrimination and violence, and recognizing that equal relationships in
matters of sexual relations and reproduction, including full respect for dignity,
integrity and autonomy, are key to preventing and eliminating all forms of violence
against all women and girls,
Recognizing that stereotypes portraying the role and the value of women solely
as mothers and wives may contribute to discrimination and violence against women
and girls, and in particular against widows, female heads of household, single and
divorced women, women without children and women experiencing infertility,
16/56

22-27052

A/77/456

Recognizing also that those who are exposed to or experience violence in
childhood are at increased risk of becoming perpetrators of violence against women
and girls and more likely to experience violence later in life, and therefore
recognizing the need to address the root causes of violence, includin g gender
stereotypes and negative social norms, in order to help to stop the intergenerational
cycle of violence,
Recognizing further the contributions of family members in combating violence
against women and girls, including domestic violence, and that in preventing such
violence family members can play an important role, and emphasizing men ’s
responsibilities as partners, parents and caregivers in the equal sharing of unpaid care
and domestic work, as a means of enabling women to increase their particip ation in
decision-making in public life and in the labour market,
Expressing concern at institutional and structural discrimination against all
women and girls, such as laws, policies, regulations, programmes, administrative
procedures or structures, services and practices that directly or indirectly restrict
access to institutions, property and landownership, inheritance, nationality, health
care and services, education, justice, women’s employment and access to credit,
which place them at increased risk of violence, and compound the violence
experienced, and constitute a major impediment to their full, equal, meaningful and
effective participation in society, as well as economic and political life,
Recognizing that women’s poverty and lack of empowerment, as well as their
marginalization resulting from their exclusion from social and eco nomic policies and
from the benefits of education and sustainable development, can place them at
increased risk of violence, and that violence against women and girls impedes the
social and economic and therefore the sustainable development of communities and
States, as well as the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and other internationally agreed development goals,
Recognizing also the importance of relevant International Labour Organization
standards related to the realization of women’s right to work and rights at work which
are critical for women’s full and effective participation and decision-making in public
life and the elimination of violence, recalling the decent work agenda of the
International Labour Organization and the International Labour Organization
Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, and noting the importance
of their effective implementation,
Stressing the need to eliminate gender stereotypes and negative social norms in
the world of work that condone violence against women and girls, including through,
but not limited to, quality education, training and awareness -raising campaigns,
associated with a change in attitudes and increased knowledge about sexual
harassment, particularly among men and boys, as well as ensuring equal pay for work
of equal value and reaffirming the necessity of recognizing, valuing, reducing and
redistributing unpaid care and domestic work,
Recognizing that many women who are pregnant and/or mothers face
discrimination in the workplace based on gender stereotypes and negative social
norms, and noting that such discriminatory attitudes can negatively affect all women
in the world of work,
Recognizing also that educational opportunities, as well as equal access to
gender-responsive education addressing consent, respecting boundaries and what
constitutes unacceptable behaviour and how to report it, are effective ways to prevent
and eliminate violence against women and girls, to combat gender stereotypes and
negative social norms, and to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls, women’s formal employment and economic opportunities and their
22-27052

17/56

A/77/456

active participation in economic, social and cultural development, governance and
decision-making,
Recognizing further the need to provide or strengthen human rights education
and training for health-care workers, the police, law enforcement officers and prison
staff, and other relevant professions, so as to combat gender stereotypes and negative
social norms that condone violence against women and girls,
Recognizing that images, videos and other content in the media and digital
contexts of women and girls and violence against them, in particular those that depict
rape, sexual exploitation or sexual slavery, are factors contributing to the continued
prevalence of such violence, and that the arts, media and other forms of
communication can exacerbate, maintain or combat gender stereotypes and negative
social norms,
Recognizing also that the growing impact of violence against women and girls,
including sexual harassment and abuse, in digital contexts, especially on social media,
its impunity and the lack of legislative and preventive measures and remedies
underline the need for action by Member States, in partnership with relevant
stakeholders, and that such violence may include stalking, death threats and threats
of sexual and gender-based violence, as well as related trends against women and
girls in digital contexts, such as trolling, cyberbullying and other forms of
cyberharassment, including unwanted verbal or non -verbal conduct of a sexual
nature, arbitrary or unlawful surveillance and tracking, trafficking in persons,
extortion, censorship and the hacking of digital accounts, mobile telephones and other
electronic devices, limiting women’s equal participation in public life, including
through discrediting or silencing women and girls, compromising their health,
emotional and psychological well-being and safety and/or inciting other violations
and abuses against them,
Noting the fact that several countries have criminalized the non -consensual
online dissemination of intimate or sexually explicit images of adult persons, ensuring
that victims do not have to rely solely on other criminal law provisions,
Alarmed by the fact that violence against women and girls, including genderrelated killings of women and girls, also known as femicide, which constitutes an
extreme form of violence against women and girls, is among the least punished crimes
owing to, inter alia, gender bias among the judiciary and law enforcement, and
recognizing the key role of the criminal justice system, including law enforcement
officials, in preventing and responding to violence against women and girls, including
in ending impunity for such crimes,
Underscoring that gender stereotypes and negative social norms, including
when leading to shame or stigma, and all forms of discrimination, including structural
discrimination, as well as discriminatory legal, practical and structural barriers to
access to justice and legal services, a lack of information and awareness, the fear of
reprisals, gender bias in the judiciary and law enforcement, risk of revictimization,
harassment and possible retribution, persisting impunity, insufficient recourse fo r
victims of violence against women and girls, and negative economic consequences,
such as loss of livelihood or reduced income for women, prevent many women and
girls from reporting or acting as witnesses and from seeking redress and justice for
these crimes,
Recognizing that women human rights defenders, politicians, journalists and
other media workers, and women in leadership positions that challenge accepted
sociocultural norms, traditions, perceptions and stereotypes, including gender
stereotypes and negative social norms, are at greater risk of facing certain forms of
violence, and gravely concerned that impunity for violations and abuses against them
18/56

22-27052

A/77/456

persists owing to factors such as a lack of reporting, documentation, investigation and
access to justice, social barriers and constraints with regard to addressing sexual and
gender-based violence and the stigmatization that may result from such violations and
abuses,
Deeply concerned that all women and girls, especially in developing countries,
including small island developing States, and particularly those in vulnerable
situations, are often disproportionately affected by the adverse impacts of climate
change, environmental degradation, biodiversity loss, extreme weather events and
natural disasters and other environmental issues, which may exacerbate existing
structural inequalities as well as violence against women and girls and harmful
practices, including the incidence of child, early and forced marriage and female
genital mutilation, and emphasizing the lack of sufficient data and understanding of
the impact of climate change and environmental degradation on violence against
women and girls,
Recognizing that all women and girls, especially victims and survivors of all
forms of violence, including sexual and gender-based violence, living in areas
affected by complex humanitarian emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism and
conflict, have particular needs, including regarding their physical, mental, sexual and
reproductive health, and that global health threats, climate change, more frequent and
intense natural disasters, conflicts, violent extremism as and when conducive to
terrorism, and related humanitarian crises and the forced displacement of people
threaten to reverse much of the development progress made in recent decades and
have particular negative impacts on women and girls that need to be comprehensively
assessed and addressed,
Stressing that men and boys need to support and take concrete actions for more
equal power relations, and therefore stressing the need to fully engage men and boys
as strategic partners, allies and beneficiaries in achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls and in preventing and eliminating all forms of
sexual and gender-based violence, including by combating gender stereotypes and
negative social norms, such as patriarchal masculinity, sexism and misogyny,
Recognizing the need to promote the full, effective, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all their diversity and women ’s and girls’ rights’
organizations and women’s organizations, including victims and survivors of
violence, in the development, implementation and evaluation of gender-responsive
policies, regulations and legislation designed to prevent and eliminate all for ms of
violence against women and girls and to allow civil society to operate freely and
safely,
1.
Strongly condemns all forms of violence against all women and girls,
which often occur in a continuum and throughout the life course, and their persistence
and pervasiveness, recognizing that they are an impediment to the achievement of
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and to the full
realization of their human rights;
2.
Stresses that “violence against women and girls” means any act of
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence, that results in, or is likely to
result in, physical, sexual, psychological or economic harm or suffering to women
and girls, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of li berty,
whether occurring in public or in private life, online and offline, and notes the
economic and social harm caused by such violence;
3.
Urges States to strongly condemn all forms of violence against women and
girls, both offline and online, and reaffirms that they should not invoke any custom,
tradition or religious consideration to avoid their obligations with respect to its
22-27052

19/56

A/77/456

elimination and should pursue, by all appropriate means and without delay, a policy
of eliminating all forms of violence against women, as set out in the Declaration on
the Elimination of Violence against Women;
4.
Calls upon States to address multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination, which place women and girls at greater risk of exploitation, violence
and abuse, to implement measures to prevent and eliminate gender stereotypes, negative
social norms, attitudes and behaviours that cause or perpetuate discrimination and
violence against women and girls and to ensure their participation and leadership in
society;
5.
Urges States to take comprehensive, multisectoral, coordinated, effective
and gender-responsive measures to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against
all women and girls and to address structural and underlying causes and risk factors,
including by:
(a) Designing and implementing legislation and policies to prevent and
eliminate all forms of violence and harmful practices against all women and girls,
including sexual and gender-based violence, domestic violence, including intimate
partner violence and marital rape, online violence, sexual harassment, gender-related
killing of women and girls, including femicide and female infanticide, child, early
and forced marriage and female genital mutilation, and to end impunity for such cases;
(b) Addressing and eliminating the root causes of gender inequality, including
all forms of discrimination against women and girls, patriarchal values, unequal
power relations, gender stereotypes and negative social norms, perceptions and
customs and harmful social norms, attitudes and behaviours, which justify, normalize,
condone or perpetuate violence against women and girls and stigmatize victims and
survivors;
(c) Preventing and eliminating, in all public and private spheres,
discrimination, gender stereotypes, negative social norms, attitudes and behaviours
and unequal power relations by which women and girls are regarded as subordinate
to men and boys, and that underlie and perpetuate male domination, by designing and
implementing gender-responsive policies, regulations and legislation that are aimed
at eliminating discriminatory attitudes and social and cultural patterns of conduct that
condone violence against all women and girls;
(d) Addressing and eliminating gender stereotypes and negative social norms
that perpetuate racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
which reveal themselves in a differentiated manner for women and girls and can be
among the factors leading to a deterioration in their living conditions, poverty,
violence, multiple forms of discrimination and limitation or denial of their human
rights;
(e) Eliminating gender stereotypes and negative social norms that can lead to
violence against migrant women and girls, including women migrant workers, by
addressing the structural and underlying causes of all forms of violence against them,
including through education and the dissemination of information to combat
misinformation and stigma against them, by acknowledging their positive
contributions, thereby combating negative perceptions of them, and by raising
awareness of gender equality issues and promoting their economic empowerment and
access to decent work;
(f) Taking measures to empower women by, inter alia, strengthening their
economic autonomy and ensuring their full, effective, equal and meaningful
participation in society and in decision-making processes by adopting and
implementing social and economic policies that guarantee women full and equal
access to opportunities, resources and basic services such as quality educatio n and
20/56

22-27052

A/77/456

training and affordable and adequate public and social services, as well as full and
equal access to financial, natural and productive resources and decent work, equal
pay for work of equal value, and full and equal rights to own and have access to a nd
control over land and other property, and guaranteeing women ’s and girls’ inheritance
rights, and taking further appropriate measures to address the increasing rate of
homelessness of and inadequate housing for women in order to reduce their
vulnerability to violence;
(g) Enacting or strengthening and enforcing laws and policies to eliminate all
forms of violence and harassment against women of all ages in the world of work,
including by eliminating gender stereotypes and negative social norms;
(h) Adopting measures to recognize, reduce and redistribute women ’s and
girls’ disproportionate share of unpaid care, informal and domestic work and to tackle
the persisting feminization of poverty, including through poverty eradication
measures, labour policies, public services and social protection programmes, and to
address the discrimination and gender inequality, including gender stereotypes and
negative social norms, attitudes and behaviours and unequal power relations in which
women and girls are viewed as subordinate to men and boys, that are at the root of
these imbalances;
(i) Ensuring the promotion and protection of the human rights of all women
and their sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights in accordance with
the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development, the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their
review conferences, including through the development and enforcement of policies
and legal frameworks and the strengthening of health systems that make universally
accessible and available quality, comprehensive sexual and reproductive health -care
services, commodities, information and education, including safe and effective
methods of modern contraception, emergency contraception, prevention programmes
for adolescent pregnancy, maternal health care such as skilled birth attendance and
emergency obstetric care, which will reduce obstetric fistula and other complications
of pregnancy and delivery, safe abortion where such services are permitted by national
law, and prevention and treatment of reproductive tract infections, sexually
transmitted infections, HIV and reproductive cancers, recognizing that human rights
include the right to have control over and decide freely and respo nsibly on matters
related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free from
coercion, discrimination and violence;
(j) Developing and implementing programmes that aim to prevent and eliminate
gender disparities in enrolment and gender stereotypes and negative social norms in
education systems, curricula and materials, whether derived from any discriminatory
practices, social or cultural attitudes or legal and economic circumstances;
(k) Implementing, in partnership with all relevant stakeholders, effective
violence prevention and response activities in schools and communities, educating
children from a young age regarding the importance of treating all people with dignity
and respect, and designing educational programmes and teaching materials that
support consent, non-violent behaviour, respect for boundaries and what constitutes
unacceptable behaviour and how to report it, that eliminate gender stereotypes and
negative social norms, build self-esteem and informed decision-making and
communication skills and promote the development of respectful relationships based
on gender equality, inclusion and respect for human rights;
(l) Developing policies and programmes with the support, where appropriate,
of international organizations, civil society and non-governmental organizations,
giving priority to formal, informal and non-formal education programmes, including
scientifically accurate and age-appropriate comprehensive education that is relevant
22-27052

21/56

A/77/456

to cultural contexts, that targets stereotyped gender roles and promotes the values of
gender equality and non-discrimination, including positive masculinities, and that
provides adolescent girls and boys and young women and men in and out of school,
consistent with their evolving capacities, and with appropriate direction and guidance
from parents and legal guardians, with the best interests of the child as their basic
concern, information on sexual and reproductive health and HIV prevention, gender
equality and women’s empowerment, human rights, physical, psychological and
pubertal development, including menstrual health, and power in relationships
between women and men, to enable them to build self-esteem and foster informed
decision-making, communication and risk reduction skills and to develop respectful
relationships, in full partnership with young persons, parents, legal guardians,
caregivers, educators and health-care providers, in order to, inter alia, enable them to
protect themselves from HIV infection and other risks;
(m) Removing barriers, including political, legal, cultural, social, economic,
institutional and religious ones, preventing women ’s full, equal, effective and
meaningful participation in leadership and political and other decision -making
positions, taking into account that promoting women to leadership positions may
significantly reduce the risk of violence against women and girls and promoting the
full, effective, equal and meaningful participation of women and women ’s
organizations, including victims and survivors of violence, in the development,
implementation and evaluation of gender-responsive policies, regulations and
legislation designed to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women and
girls and to allow civil society to operate freely and safely without fear of intimidation
or reprisals;
(n) Preventing, addressing and prohibiting gender-based violence, including
sexual harassment, against all women and girls in public and political life, including
women in leadership positions, journalists and other media workers, feminists and
women human rights defenders, including through practical steps to prevent threats,
harassment and violence, and to combat impunity by ensuring that those responsible
for violations and abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence and threats,
including in digital contexts, are promptly brought to justice and held accountable
through impartial investigations;
(o) Promoting the full, equal and meaningful participation and leadership of
young women and, as appropriate, adolescent girls in decision-making processes by
addressing gender-specific barriers and by promoting and enabling spaces where they
can express their views of all matters relevant to them, ensuring their full and equal
access to quality education, technology and skills development, leadership and
mentorship programmes, increased technical and financial support, and protection
from all forms of violence and discrimination;
(p) Preventing, addressing and prohibiting all forms of discrimination,
intimidation, harassment and violence, both offline and online, that prevent women
and girls from fully enjoying all their human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
taking all measures to address the gender digital divide and ensure equal access of
women and girls to information and communications technology design and
consumption, promoting digital, media and information literacy and connectivity to
enable the participation of all women and girls in education and training, while noting
with concern that new technological developments can perpetuate existing patterns
of inequality and discrimination, including in the algorithms used in artificial
intelligence-based solutions;
(q) Adopting and implementing effective measures to encourage the media to
eliminate discrimination against women and girls, including the harmful and
stereotypical portrayal of women or specific groups of women, from their activities,
22/56

22-27052

A/77/456

practices and output, including those perpetuated by advertisements, online and in
other digital environments, that foster gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and
inequality, and to refrain from presenting women and girls as inferior beings and
exploiting them as sexual objects and commodities;
(r) Mainstreaming a gender perspective in the conceptualization, d evelopment
and implementation of digital technologies and related policies and promote the
participation of women in order to address violence and discrimination against
women and girls in digital contexts, inter alia by encouraging digital technology
companies, including Internet service providers, to respect standards and implement
transparent and accessible reporting mechanisms;
(s) Taking appropriate measures for the prevention of all forms of violence,
intimidation, threats and attacks against women online and through digital
technologies, and to protect them in online spaces, and considering adopting laws,
policies and practices that protect them from defamation and hate speech while also
respecting their human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(t) Ensuring that, in armed conflict and post-conflict situations and in natural
disaster situations, the prevention of and response to all forms of violence against
women and girls, including sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence, are prioritized and effectively addressed and are centred on victims
and survivors, while respecting the rights and prioritizing the needs of survivors,
including groups that are particularly at risk or may be specifically targeted, including
through the investigation, prosecution and punishment of perpetrators and the
strengthening of national justice mechanisms to end impunity, the removal of barriers
to women’s and girls’ access to justice, the establishment of complaint and reporting
mechanisms and the provision of support and services to victims and survivors;
(u) Addressing gender stereotypes and negative social norms in order to create
an enabling environment for women’s and girls’ empowerment in the context of
climate change, environmental degradation and disasters, including in situations of
response to extreme weather events;
(v) Engaging, educating, encouraging and supporting men and boys to be
positive role models for gender equality and to promote respectful relationships, to
refrain from and condemn all forms of discrimination and violence against women
and girls, to increase their understanding of the harmful effects of violence for the
victim/survivor and society as a whole, and to ensure that they take responsibility and
are held accountable for behaviour, including for behaviour that perpetuates gender
stereotypes and negative social norms, including misconceptions about masculinities
that underlie discrimination and violence against women and girls, and that men and
boys take responsibility for their sexual and reproductive behaviour and for equitable
sharing of responsibilities with respect to care and household work;
(w) Designing, implementing and regularly monitoring the impact of national
policies, programmes and strategies that address the roles and responsibilities of men
and boys, including through combating social-cultural norms and traditional and
customary practices that condone violence against all women and girls, counteracting
attitudes by which women and girls are regarded as subordinate to men and boys or
as having stereotyped gender roles that perpetuate practices involving violence or
coercion, and aiming to ensure the equal sharing of responsibilities within households
in unpaid care and domestic work, including through p arental leave policies, and
increased flexibility in working arrangements which would facilitate the equal
sharing of responsibilities;
(x) Recognizing the importance of working with men and boys to combat
gender stereotypes and negative social norms and unequal power relations, ensuring
22-27052

23/56

A/77/456

that all policies and programmes on preventing and ending violence against women
and girls aimed at engaging men and boys are designed and promoted with the
ultimate objectives of ensuring that the concerns of all women an d girls, their rights,
their empowerment, their safety and their voices and women ’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in decision-making and political agendas at all levels are
prioritized;
(y) Holding persons in positions of authority, whether in public or private
environments, such as teachers, religious and community leaders, traditional
authorities, politicians and law enforcement officials, accountable for not complying
with and/or upholding laws and regulations relating to violence against women and
girls, in order to prevent and respond to such violence in a gender-responsive manner,
to end impunity and to avoid the abuse of power leading to violence against women
and girls and the revictimization of victims/survivors of such violence;
6.
Also urges States to take immediate and effective action to prevent and
respond to all forms of violence against women and girls and to support and protect
all victims and survivors by:
(a) Exercising due diligence and ensuring legislation to prevent, invest igate,
prosecute and hold to account the perpetrators of all forms of violence against women
and girls, to eliminate impunity and to provide for effective access to appropriate
remedies and reparations for victims and survivors, ensuring the protection of women
and girls, including adequate enforcement of civil remedies, orders of protection and
criminal sanctions, and the provision of shelters, mental health and psychosocial
services, counselling, health-care services and other types of support services, in
order to avoid revictimization, promoting an empowering environment, and in doing
so contributing to the enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by
women and girls subjected to violence;
(b) Removing all barriers to women’s access to justice and accountability
mechanisms and ensuring that they all have access to information about their rights
as well as effective legal assistance so that they can make informed decisions
regarding, inter alia, legal proceedings and issues relating to family law, and also
ensuring that they have access to just and effective victim-centred remedies for the
harm that they have suffered, including formal and appropriate informal justice
mechanisms, as provided for by national legislation and, where necessary, th e
adoption of national legislation, bearing in mind that victims and survivors may be
subjected to further discrimination or reprisals;
(c) Providing relevant, comprehensive and victim-centred legal protection in
full respect of human rights to support and assist victims and survivors of all forms
of violence, in a gender-responsive manner, including victim and witness protection
from reprisals for bringing complaints or giving evidence, within the framework of
their national legal systems, including, as appropriate, legislative or other measures,
such as addressing gender stereotypes and negative social norms throughout the
criminal and civil justice system and law enforcement, taking into account women
and girls facing multiple and intersecting forms of d iscrimination;
(d) Ensuring that services and programmes designed to protect women and
girls from violence are accessible to women and girls with disabilities, including those
living in institutionalized settings, who are particularly vulnerable to violen ce,
including by ensuring that facilities for such services and programmes are accessible,
and disability is mainstreamed in materials and training courses addressed to
professionals working on violence against women;
(e) Establishing comprehensive, coordinated, interdisciplinary, accessible and
sustained multisectoral services, programmes and responses for all victims and
24/56

22-27052

A/77/456

survivors of all forms of violence, including sexual harassment, that are adequately
resourced, that are, when possible, in a language that they understand and in which
they can communicate and that include effective and coordinated action by, as
appropriate, relevant stakeholders, such as the police and the justice sector, as well as
providers of legal aid services, health services, shelters, medical and psychological
assistance counselling services and protection, and, in cases of girl victims and
survivors, ensuring that such services, programmes and responses take into account
the best interests of the child;
(f) Establishing and/or strengthening law enforcement, health and social
workers’ and counsellors’ response protocols and procedures to ensure that all
appropriate actions are coordinated and taken to protect and respond to the needs of
victims of violence, to identify acts of violence and to prevent their recurrence or
further acts of violence and physical and psychological harm, ensuring that services
are responsive to survivors’ needs, including by providing access to female health care providers, police officers and counsellors if requested, and ensuring and
maintaining the privacy of victims and the confidentiality of their reporting;
(g) Taking and implementing further measures to ensure that all officials,
including those in leadership positions, responsible for implementing policies and
programmes aimed at preventing violence against women and girls, protecting and
assisting victims and investigating and punishing acts of violence receive training on
gender equality and women’s and girls’ empowerment, to raise their awareness of
gender-specific needs, as well as of the underlying causes and the short - and longterm impact of violence against women and girls, and training on gender-responsive
investigation of crimes of violence against women and girls;
7.
Encourages States, in efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence
against women and girls, to work in partnership with the private sector and civil
society, including women’s, young women’s, youth-led and community-based
organizations, organizations of and led by persons with disabilities, faith-based
organizations, rural, Indigenous and feminist groups, women human rights defenders,
women journalists and media workers and trade, labour and other professional unions,
as well as other relevant stakeholders, and to support initiatives undertaken by them,
including by allocating adequate financial resources, aimed at promoting gender
equality and inclusion and eliminating violence against women and girls;
8.
Also encourages States to systematically collect, analyse and disseminate
data disaggregated by sex, age and other parameters relevant in national contexts,
including, where appropriate, administrative data from law enforcement officials, the
health sector, the judiciary and other relevant sectors, to consider developing
methodologies to collect data on all forms of violence against women and girls,
including sexual harassment, in, inter alia, digital contexts, in order to monitor all
forms of such violence, such as data on the relationship between the perpetrator and
the victim and geographical location, with the involvement of national statistical
offices and, where appropriate, in partnership with other actors, including law
enforcement agencies, in order to ensure high-quality, reliable and timely
disaggregated data and gender statistics to effectively review and implement laws,
policies, strategies and preventive and protective measures, while ensuring and
maintaining the privacy and the confidentiality of the victims ;
9.
Urges the international community, including the United Nations system
and, as appropriate, regional and subregional organizations, to support national efforts
to promote gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls in order to
enhance international efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against all women and
girls, through, inter alia, official development assistance, other appropriate assistance
as well as South-South and triangular cooperation, such as facilitating the sharing of
22-27052

25/56

A/77/456

guidelines, methodologies, lessons learned and best practices, taking into account
national priorities;
10. Stresses the need to continue to take and strengthen the measures necessary
to ensure that no individual working within the United Nations system, including its
agencies, funds, programmes and entities, is involved in sexual harassment, too often
perpetrated against those affected by humanitarian crises, and calling upon the United
Nations system to intensify its efforts in this regard to ens ure zero tolerance for such
violence;
11. Underscores the critical importance of protecting all persons affected by
humanitarian crises, in particular women and children, from any form of sexual
exploitation and abuse, including those perpetrated by human itarian personnel,
welcomes the determination of the Secretary-General to fully implement the United
Nations policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse, stresses that
victims and survivors should be at the core of such efforts, notes the si x core
principles relating to sexual exploitation and abuse adopted by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee, and encourages Member States to make greater efforts to
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse and to ensure that perpetrators
are held accountable;
12. Stresses that, within the United Nations system, adequate resources should
be assigned to UN-Women and other bodies, specialized agencies, funds and
programmes responsible for the promotion of gender equality, the empowerment of
women and the human rights of women and girls and to efforts throughout the United
Nations system to prevent and eliminate violence against women and girls, including
sexual harassment, calls upon the United Nations system to make the necessary
support and resources available, and takes note with appreciation in this regard of the
contribution of the Spotlight initiative;
13. Also stresses the importance of the Secretary-General’s Global Database
on Violence against Women, expresses its appreciation to all those States that have
provided the Database with information regarding, inter alia, their national policies
and legal frameworks aimed at eliminating violence against women and girls and
supporting victims of such violence, strongly encourages all States to reg ularly
provide updated information for the Database, and calls upon all relevant entities of
the United Nations system to continue to support States, at their request, in the
compilation and regular updating of pertinent information and to raise awareness of
the Database among all relevant stakeholders, including civil society;
14. Calls upon all United Nations bodies, entities, funds and programmes and
the specialized agencies and invites the Bretton Woods institutions to intensify their
efforts at all levels to eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls and to
better coordinate their work, with a view to increasing effective support for national
efforts to prevent and eliminate sexual harassment;
15. Requests the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on violence
against women and girls, its causes and consequences to submit an annual report to
the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session a report containing:
(a) Information provided by the United Nations bodies, funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies on their follow-up activities to implement
resolution 75/161 and the present resolution, including on their assistance to States in
their efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls;

26/56

22-27052

A/77/456

(b) Information provided by States on their follow-up activities to implement
the present resolution;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to present an oral report to the
Commission on the Status of Women at its sixty-seventh and sixty-eighth sessions,
including information provided by the United Nations bodies, funds and programmes
and the specialized agencies on recent follow-up activities to implement resolutions
73/148 and 75/161 and the present resolution, and urges United Nations bodies,
entities, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies to contribute promptly
to that report;
18. Decides to continue its consideration of the elimination of all forms of
violence against women and girls at its seventy-ninth session under the item entitled
“Advancement of women”.

22-27052

27/56

A/77/456

Draft resolution II
Trafficking in women and girls
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially
trafficking in women and children, which constitutes a serious crime and a grave
offence to human dignity and physical integrity, a violation and abuse of human rights
and a challenge to sustainable development and which requires (a) the impl ementation
of a comprehensive approach that includes partnerships and measures to prevent such
trafficking, to prosecute and punish the traffickers, to effectively identify, protect and
support the victims of such trafficking and to intensify international cooperation and
other prevention efforts and (b) a criminal justice response proportionate to the
serious nature of the offence,
Recalling all international conventions that deal specifically with or address
issues relevant to the problem of trafficking in women and girls, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 1 and the Protocols
thereto, in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 and the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 3 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional
Protocol thereto,5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and the Optional
Protocol thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 7 and
the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation
of the Prostitution of Others,8 as well as relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions and the Human
Rights Council on the issue,
Recognizing the crucial importance of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, which provides an
internationally agreed definition of the crime of trafficking in pers ons aimed at the
prevention of trafficking in persons, the protection of victims and the prosecution of
the perpetrators,
Recalling the resolution entitled “Launch of the review process of the
Mechanism for the Review of the Implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto ”,9 adopted at the
tenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, held in Vienna from 12 to 16 October 2020,
Welcoming the 2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, 10 adopted by the
General Assembly at its high-level meeting during the seventy-sixth session, in which
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
3 Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
4 Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5 Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
6 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7 Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
8 Ibid., vol. 96, No. 1342.
9 CTOC/COP/2020/10, sect. I.A, resolution 10/1.
10 Resolution 76/7, annex.
1
2

28/56

22-27052

A/77/456

Member States reiterated, in the strongest possible terms, the importance of
strengthening collective action to end trafficking in persons,
Reaffirming the provisions pertaining to trafficking in women and girls
contained in the outcome documents of relevant international conferences and
summits, in particular the strategic objective on the issue of trafficking in persons
contained in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth
World Conference on Women 11 and the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, 12
Reaffirming also the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 13 and the
commitments made by world leaders at the United Nations summit for the adoption
of the post-2015 development agenda, and in this regard acknowledging that the 2030
Agenda, inter alia, addresses the elimination of all forms of violence against all
women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking in persons
and sexual and other types of exploitation; the eradication of forced l abour, modern
slavery, trafficking in persons and child labour; and the ending of abuse, exploitation,
trafficking in persons, all forms of violence against and torture of children,
Recognizing the importance of a revitalized global partnership to ensure the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda, including the implementation of the goals and
targets related to ending violence against women and girls and trafficking in persons,
and in this regard taking note with appreciation of Alliance 8.7, the Global Partnership
to End Violence against Children, the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons, and the various initiatives of Member States to contribute to
the global fight against trafficking in persons,
Recalling the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, adopted
at the Intergovernmental Conference in Marrakech, Morocco, on 10 December 2018
and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 73/195 of 19 December 2018,
which addresses, inter alia, the issue of trafficking in persons in the context of
international migration,
Welcoming the convening of the first International Migration Review Forum in
May 2022 as the primary intergovernmental global platform for Member States to
discuss and share progress on the implementation of all aspects of the Global
Compact, and the adoption of its Progress Declaration, 14
Welcoming in particular the efforts of States, United Nations bodies and
agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to combat
trafficking in persons, especially trafficking in women and children, including the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons adopted by the General Assembly in its reso lution 64/293 of 30 July 2010
and the 2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
Recognizing the urgency of combating trafficking in persons in all its forms,
including for the purposes of forced or compulsory labour, including of women migrant
workers, and in this regard taking note of the adoption by the International Labour
Conference on 11 June 2014, at its 103rd session, of the Protocol to the Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and of the Forced Labour (Supplementary Measures)
Recommendation, 2014 (No. 203), of the International Labour Organization,
__________________

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
12 Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
13 Resolution 70/1.
14 Resolution 76/266, annex.
11

22-27052

29/56

A/77/456

Welcoming, in the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status
of Women at its sixty-sixth session,15 the provisions pertaining to trafficking in
women and girls, inter alia, the commitment of Governments to eliminate, prevent
and respond to all forms of violence against all women and girls in p ublic and private
spaces, online and offline, such as sexual and gender-based violence, including
trafficking in persons and modern slavery and other forms of exploitation; and to
support and fund research and analysis to better understand the impacts of c limate
change, environmental degradation and disasters on women and girls, including in
relation to trafficking in persons,
Noting with appreciation the efforts, including of the human rights treaty bodies
and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, other relevant special procedure mandate holders of
the Council involved in trafficking in persons issues, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and United Nations agencies and
other concerned intergovernmental and governmental organizations, within their
existing mandates, as well as civil society, to address the crime of trafficking in
persons, and encouraging them to continue doing so and to share t heir knowledge and
best practices as widely as possible,
Noting the relevant contributions of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children, 16 and her work in integrating a gender- and
age-specific perspective throughout her mandate, in relation to the issue of trafficking
in persons,
Acknowledging the inclusion of gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court,17 which entered into force on 1 July 2002,
Bearing in mind the obligations of States to exercise due diligence to prevent
trafficking in persons, to investigate, prosecute and punish perpetrators of trafficking
in persons and to protect and empower victims, and that not doing so may violate and
impair or nullify the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the
victims,
Seriously concerned that an increasing number of women and girls are being
trafficked within and between regions and States, as well as within and between
developed and developing countries, and recognizing that trafficking in persons
disproportionately affects women and girls and that men and boys are also victims of
trafficking in persons, including for sexual exploitation and for the purpose of organ
removal,
Highlighting the need to incorporate a victim-centred and trauma-informed, and
gender- and age-sensitive approach, taking into account the specific needs of women
and girls with disabilities, into all anti-trafficking efforts, and recognizing that women
and girls are particularly vulnerable to trafficking in persons for the purposes of
sexual exploitation and abuse, harmful practices, including child, early and forced
marriage, as well as forced labour and other forms of exploitation,
Recognizing that pervasive gender inequality, poverty, unemployment, lack of
access to quality education, lack of socioeconomic opportunities, gender-based
violence, discrimination, including multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination,
marginalization and persistent demand are among the underlying causes that make
women and girls at heightened risk of trafficking in persons,
__________________

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2022, Supplement No. 7 (E/2022/27),
chap. I, sect. A.
16 Most recently A/77/170.
17 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
15

30/56

22-27052

A/77/456

Recognizing also the need to adopt or strengthen legislative or other measures,
such as educational, social or cultural measures, including through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation, to discourage the demand, which fosters all forms of
exploitation of persons, especially women and children, that leads to trafficking in
persons,
Recognizing further the role that men and boys can play as agents of change in
addressing the harmful impact of gender stereotypes and negative social norms and
in preventing sexual and gender-based violence and trafficking in persons, and
underlining the need to educate and engage men and boys for this purpose ,
Recognizing the heightened risk of trafficking of women and girls in
humanitarian crisis situations, including in conflict and post -conflict environments,
natural disasters, including those that result from adverse impacts of climate change,
pandemic situations, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and
other emergency environments, as well as the devastating consequences for women
and girls in such circumstances, and noting in this regard the Migrants in Countries
in Crisis initiative and the Agenda for the Protection of Cross-Border Displaced
Persons in the Context of Disasters and Climate Change, resulting from the Nansen
Initiative, while recognizing that not all States are participating in them,
Recognizing also that in armed conflict, trafficking in persons, including for the
purposes of sexual exploitation and forced labour, can be prevalent, and in this regard
expressing deep concern over its negative impacts on victims of trafficking in
persons, and bearing in mind the need to respect the human rights of women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict situations,
Recognizing further the need to reinforce efforts regarding the provision of
relevant documents, such as birth registration documents, in order to lower the risk
of women and girls of being subjected to trafficking in persons and to help to identify
victims of trafficking in persons,
Recognizing that, despite the progress made, challenges to preventing,
prosecuting and combating trafficking in women and girls and to prote cting and
assisting the victims of trafficking in persons remain and that further efforts should
be made to adopt and implement adequate legislation and other measures and to
continue improving the collection of reliable data disaggregated by income, sex, age,
race, ethnicity, migration status, nationality, disability, geographic location and other
characteristics relevant in national contexts and other relevant factors and of statistics
that would allow proper analysis of the nature, extent and risk factor s of trafficking
in women and girls,
Recognizing also that further work is required both to better understand the link
between migration and trafficking in persons and to develop more effective responses
to eliminate the risk of trafficking in persons in the migration process in order to, inter
alia, further efforts to protect women migrant workers from all forms of violence,
discrimination, exploitation and abuse,
Concerned about the misuse of information and communications technologies,
including the Internet, social media and online platforms, for the purpose of recruiting
for the exploitation of the prostitution of others, including for exploiting women and
children and for child sexual abuse material, paedophilia and any other forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse of children, as well as for child and forced marriage
and forced labour, while acknowledging the role that information and
communications technologies can play in reducing the risk of sexual abuse and
exploitation, including by empowering women and children to report such abuses,

22-27052

31/56

A/77/456

Recognizing the potential of information and communications technologies,
including the Internet, social media and online platforms, to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons, in particular trafficking in women and children, and to assist
victims,
Concerned about the increasing activities of transnational criminal
organizations and others that profit from trafficking in persons, especially trafficking
in women and children, without regard to dangerous and inhu man conditions and in
flagrant violation of national laws and international standards,
Noting with concern that women and girls are also at heightened risk of
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal, and in this regard recalling
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 25/1 of 27 May
2016, entitled “Preventing and combating trafficking in human organs and trafficking
in persons for the purpose of organ removal”, adopted by the Commission at its
twenty-fifth session,18
Recognizing that victims of trafficking in persons are particularly exposed to
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and that women and
girl victims are often subject to multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and
violence, including on the grounds of their gender, age, ethnicity, disability, culture
and religion or belief, as well as their origin, and that those forms of discrimination
themselves may fuel trafficking in persons,
Noting with concern that some of the demand fostering sexual exploitation,
labour exploitation and the illegal removal of organs is met by trafficking in persons,
and recognizing that trafficking in persons is fuelled by high profits for traffickers
and demand that fosters all forms of exploitation,
Acknowledging that women and girl victims of trafficking in persons, owing to
pervasive and persistent gender inequality, are further disadvantaged and
marginalized by a general lack of information on or awareness and recognition of
their human rights and by the stigmatization often associated with trafficking in
persons, as well as by the obstacles they meet in gaining access to accurate
information and recourse mechanisms in cases of the violations and abuses of their
rights, and that special measures are required for their protection and to increase their
awareness,
Taking note of the Kyoto Declaration on Advancing Crime Prevention, Criminal
Justice and the Rule of Law, adopted in March 2021,19 which expresses the
importance of strengthening efforts to prevent, counter and combat trafficking in
persons, including by supporting data collection and sharing as appropriate, through
relevant technical assistance by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
addressing factors that make people vulnerable to trafficking, detecting and
dismantling trafficking networks, including in supply chains, discouraging demand
that fosters exploitation leading to trafficking, ending impunity of trafficking
networks, conducting financial investigations and usin g special investigative
techniques under the conditions prescribed by domestic law, and protecting victims
of trafficking in persons,
Recognizing the importance of implementing a victim-oriented approach to
prevent and counter all forms of trafficking in persons for the purpose of exploitation,
including the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual
exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery,
__________________

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2016, Supplement No. 10 (E/2016/30),
chap. I, sect. D.
19 Resolution 76/181, annex.
18

32/56

22-27052

A/77/456

servitude or the removal of organs, where appropriate, in accordance with the
provisions of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children,
Reaffirming the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation mechanisms and initiatives, including information exchanges on best
practices, of Governments, intergovernmental and civil society organizations, the
private sector and other relevant stakeholders, to address the problem of trafficking
in persons, especially trafficking in women and children,
Reaffirming also that global efforts, including international cooperation and
technical assistance programmes, to eradicate trafficking in persons, especially
trafficking in women and children, demand the strong political commitment,
coordinated and coherent efforts and active cooperation of all Governments of
countries of origin, transit and destination,
Recognizing that policies and programmes for prevention, protection,
rehabilitation and recovery, repatriation and reintegration sho uld be developed
through a gender- and age-sensitive, comprehensive and multidisciplinary and
multicultural approach, taking into account the needs of victims with concern for their
security and privacy and respect for their full enjoyment of human rights and with the
involvement of all relevant actors in countries of origin, transit and destination,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General, 20
which provides information on measures by States and activities within the United
Nations system to tackle trafficking in women and girls;
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the information submitted by Member
States and United Nations entities on measures and activities undertaken to combat
trafficking in women and girls, and urges Member States and United Nations entities
that have not done so to submit the requested information for inclusion in the report
of the Secretary-General;
3.
Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on trafficking in persons, especially women and children; 21
4.
Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to, as a matter of priority, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, taking into consideration
the central role of those instruments in the fight against trafficking i n persons, and
urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully and effectively;
5.
Urges Member States to consider signing and ratifying, and States parties
to implement, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Optional Protocol thereto, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto 22 and the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 23
as well as the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29)24 and the Protocol thereto,
the Labour Inspection Convention, 1947 (No. 81),25 the Migration for Employment
__________________

A/77/292.
A/77/170 and A/HRC/50/33.
22 United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171, 2173 and 2983, No. 27531.
23 Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
24 Ibid., vol. 39, No. 612.
25 Ibid., vol. 54, No. 792.
20
21

22-27052

33/56

A/77/456

Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97),26 the Discrimination (Employment and
Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111),27 the Minimum Age Convention, 1973
(No. 138),28 the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975
(No. 143),29 the Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181),30 the
Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182),31 and the Domestic
Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189),32 of the International Labour Organization;
6.
Urges Member States, the United Nations and other international, regional
and subregional organizations, as well as civil society, including non -governmental
organizations, the private sector and the media, to fully and effectively implement the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons 33 and the activities outlined therein;
7.
Welcomes the efforts of Governments, United Nations bodies and agencies
and intergovernmental, regional, subregional and non-governmental organizations to
prevent and address the particular problem of trafficking in women and girls and invites
them to further enhance their efforts and cooperation, including by sharing their
knowledge, technical expertise and best practices as widely as possible, and encourages
Member States to strengthen cooperation among all relevant actors to identify and
disrupt illicit financial flows stemming from trafficking in women and girls;
8.
Takes note with appreciation of the outcome document of the Regional
Ministerial Conference on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn of Africa,
known as the Khartoum Declaration, and calls for its effective implementation,
including through technical cooperation and capacity-building, by the United Nations
and the international community;
9.
Encourages the Commission on the Status of Women to consider addressing
the needs of, inter alia, women and girls subjected to trafficking in persons at its sixtyseventh and sixty-eighth sessions, within the framework of the priority themes;
10. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other
stakeholders to observe the World Day against Trafficking in Persons, in the context of
the need to raise awareness of the situation of victims of trafficking in persons and for
the promotion and protection of their rights, and as an opportunity to promote the
empowerment of survivors of trafficking in persons;
11. Encourages the United Nations system to mainstream, as appropriate, the
issue of trafficking in persons, especially trafficking in women and girls, into its broader
policies and programmes aimed at addressing economic and social development, human
rights, the rule of law, good governance, education, health, h umanitarian action and
natural disaster and post-conflict reconstruction;
12. Welcomes the continued focus given by the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to ending violence
against women and girls and to increasing women’s equal access to economic
opportunities, as well as its work on building effective partnerships for the
empowerment of women and girls, which will contribute to the efforts to combat
trafficking in persons;
__________________

Ibid., vol. 120, No. 1616.
Ibid., vol. 362, No. 5181.
28 Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14862.
29 Ibid., vol. 1120, No. 17426.
30 Ibid., vol. 2115, No. 36794.
31 Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
32 Ibid., vol. 2955, No. 51379.
33 Resolution 64/293.
26
27

34/56

22-27052

A/77/456

13. Calls upon Governments to intensify their efforts to prevent and address,
with a view to eliminating, the demand that fosters the trafficking of women and girls
for all forms of exploitation and in this regard to put in place or to enhance preventive
measures, including legislative and punitive measures to deter exploiters of trafficked
persons, as well as ensure their accountability;
14. Recalls the basic principles on the right to an effective remedy for victims
of trafficking in persons; 34
15. Calls upon Governments to strengthen measures aimed at achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and their equal and full
enjoyment of all human rights, women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
all spheres of life, free from all forms of discrimination, and their leadership in
society, including through education, economic empowerment, gender-sensitive
social protection and promoting an increase in the number of women assuming
decision-making roles in both the public and private sectors, to take further
appropriate measures to address the increasing rate of homelessness of and inadequate
housing for women and girls in order to reduce their risk of being trafficked and, in
that regard, to improve the collection and use of disaggregated data and gender
statistics to inform such measures;
16. Also calls upon Governments to take appropriate preventive measures to
address the underlying causes as well as risk factors that increase the risk of
trafficking in persons, such as poverty, including the feminization of poverty, gender
inequality, gender stereotypes and negative social norms, including discrimination,
gender-based violence, violence against women and girls, including impunity for such
violence, and the persistent demand that fosters all forms of trafficking and the goods
and services produced as a result of trafficking in persons, as well as other factors
that encourage the particular problem of trafficking in women and girls for
exploitation, including in prostitution and other forms of commercialized sex, forced
marriage, including child, early and forced marriage, forced labour and organ
removal, in order to prevent and eliminate such trafficking, including by
strengthening existing legislation, with a view to providing better protection of the
rights of women and girls and punishing perpetrators, including public officials
engaging in or facilitating trafficking in persons, through, as appropriate, criminal
and civil measures;
17. Calls upon Governments, the international community and all other
organizations and entities that deal with conflict, post-conflict, disaster and other
emergency situations to address the heightened risk of women and girls to trafficking
in persons and exploitation and associated gender-based violence, inter alia, that
perpetuated by traffickers in digital spaces, and to prevent the trafficking of affected
women and girls through all such national, regional and international initiatives;
18. Urges Governments to devise, enforce and strengthen effective genderresponsive and age-sensitive measures to combat and eliminate all forms of
trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual an d economic exploitation, as
part of a comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy that integrates a human rights
perspective, and to draw up, as appropriate, national action plans in this regard;
19. Also urges Governments to ensure that the prevention of and responses to
trafficking in persons continue to address the specific needs of women and girls and
their participation in and contribution to all phases of preventing and responding to
trafficking in persons, especially in addressing specific forms of exp loitation, such as
sexual exploitation, and, in this regard, to ensure women ’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in decision-making at all levels, inter alia, in the development,
__________________
34

22-27052

A/69/269, annex.
35/56

A/77/456

implementation, monitoring and evaluation of anti-trafficking legislation, policy and
programmes, continuing implementation of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Trafficking Protocol thereto, as an essential
component of the peacemaking, stabilization and reconstruction process;
20. Further urges Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental,
non-governmental and private sector organizations, to support and allocate resources
to strengthen preventive action, in particular, education for all, on human rights,
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, self-respect and mutual
respect, and campaigns carried out in collaboration with civil society and the private
sector to increase public awareness of the issue at the national and grass -roots levels,
including awareness-raising campaigns against trafficking in persons and slavery,
including modern slavery, targeted at groups that are at increased risk of becoming
victims of trafficking in persons, as well as at those who may fuel the demand that
contributes to trafficking in persons;
21. Reiterates the importance of continued coordination among, inter alia, the
Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, on the sale and sexual exploitation of children,
including child prostitution, child pornography and other child sexual abuse material,
and on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, in
order to avoid unnecessary duplication in their activities in the fulfilment of their
mandates;
22. Urges Governments to strengthen measures to eliminate sex tourism
demand, especially for children, through all possible preventive actions, including
legislative measures and other relevant policies and programmes, and to develop age appropriate educational and training programmes and policies aimed at preventing
sex tourism and trafficking in persons, giving special emphasis to the protection of
young women and children;
23. Reaffirms the central role of the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the global fight against trafficking in persons, particularly in
providing technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, to implement the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children;
24. Calls upon Member States to take into consideration the challenges
presented by new methods of recruiting victims of trafficking in persons, such as the
misuse of the Internet, social media and online platform service providers by
criminals, in particular for recruiting children, to take measures to develop targeted
awareness-raising campaigns, including for law enforcement, front-line service
providers and at-risk industries, to identify the signs of trafficking in persons, and to
develop specialized training for law enforcement and criminal justice practitioners;

36/56

22-27052

A/77/456

25. Encourages Member States to establish or strengthen national
programmes and to engage in bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation, including by forging regional initiatives or plans of action, 35 to address
the problem of trafficking in persons through, inter alia, enhancing information sharing, collecting data disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migration
status, disability, geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national
contexts, specific data collection and other technical capacities and mutual legal
assistance, coordinating with a view to dismantling criminal networks involved in
trafficking women and girls, and combating corruption and the laundering of proceeds
derived from trafficking in persons, including by collaborating with financial
institutions, and to ensure, as appropriate, that such agreements, programmes and
initiatives are particularly responsive to the problem of trafficking in persons as it
affects women and girls;
26. Urges all Governments to criminalize all forms of trafficking in persons,
recognizing its increasing occurrence for the purpose of the exploitation of the
prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services,
slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs, as well as
for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation and abuse and sex tourism, and to
bring to justice and punish the offenders and intermediaries involved, including public
officials involved with trafficking in persons, whether local or foreign, through the
competent national authorities, either in the country of origin of the offender or in the
country in which the abuse occurs, in accordance with the due process of law, as well
as to penalize persons in authority found guilty of sexually assaulting victims of
trafficking in persons in their custody;
27. Urges Governments, in accordance with their respective legal systems, to
take all appropriate measures, including through policies and legislation, to facilitate
access to justice and protection for victims of trafficking in persons that is not
conditional on their participation in criminal proceedings, as well a s to ensure that
victims of trafficking in persons are protected from prosecution or punishment for
acts those victims have been compelled to commit as a direct consequence of having
been subjected to trafficking in persons and that the victims do not suff er from
revictimization as a result of actions taken by Government authorities, and encourages
Governments to prevent, within their legal framework and in accordance with
national policies, victims of trafficking in persons from being prosecuted or punishe d
as a direct consequence of their illegal entry or residence;
28. Invites Governments to consider establishing or strengthening a national
mechanism, with the participation of civil society, as appropriate, including
non-governmental organizations, such as women’s organizations, and survivors of
__________________
35

22-27052

Such as the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational
Crime, the Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking, the Action Plan for the
Asia-Pacific region of the Asian Regional Initiative against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children (see A/C.3/55/3, annex), the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Convention Against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, the initiativ es of the
European Union on a comprehensive European policy and programmes on trafficking in human
beings, as expressed in the European Union plan on best practices, standards and procedures for
combating and preventing trafficking in human beings, adopted in December 2005, the activities
of the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Preventing and Combating
Trafficking in Women and Children for Prostitution, the Organization of American States
Meeting of National Authorities on Trafficking in Persons, the Agreement on the Cooperation of
the Commonwealth of Independent States in Combating Trafficking in Persons, Human Organs
and Tissues, the Inter-American Programme for the Prevention and Eradication of Commercial
Sexual Exploitation and Smuggling of and Trafficking in Children, and the activities of the
International Labour Organization and the International Organization for Migration in this field.
37/56

A/77/456

trafficking in persons, to ensure a holistic and coordinated approach to anti -trafficking
policies and measures, to encourage the exchange of information and to report on
data, underlying causes, factors and trends in trafficking in persons, especially
trafficking in women and girls, and to include data on victims of trafficking in persons
disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migration status, disability,
geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts;
29. Invites the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women
and children, to continue to cooperate with international, regional and national
mechanisms to combat trafficking in persons, in consultation with Governments,
relevant treaty bodies, special procedures, the specialized agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, civil society, including non -governmental
organizations, national human rights institutions and other sources, including victims
of trafficking in persons or their representatives, as appropriate;
30. Calls upon Governments and relevant United Nations bodies to take
appropriate measures to raise public awareness on addressing the root causes that lead
to all forms of exploitation of at-risk women and girls, in particular those in
vulnerable situations, to eliminate the demand that fosters all forms of exploitation,
including sexual exploitation and forced labour, to publicize the laws, regulations and
penalties relating to this issue and to emphasize that trafficking is a serious crime;
31. Calls upon Governments to allocate resources, as appropriate, to provide
access to appropriate programmes for the physical, psychological and social recovery
of victims of trafficking in persons, including sexual and reproductive health-care
services that include affordable treatment, care and support services for HIV/AIDS
and sexually transmitted infections, free of stigma and discrimination, as well as
comprehensive information and voluntary counselling, and to take measures to
cooperate with intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide for
the social, medical and psychological care of the victims in ways that protect their
privacy and identity;
32. Also calls upon Governments to promote the empowerment of women and
girls, including survivors of trafficking in persons, in all stages of humanitarian
response and to consider providing adequate access to redress;
33. Encourages Governments, in line with their obligations under
international law, to prevent, combat and eradicate trafficking in persons in the
context of international migration, including by identifying and supporting victims of
trafficking in persons, and to cooperate with relevant stakeholders to undert ake or
strengthen campaigns to inform migrants, including migrant women and girls, of the
risks associated with trafficking in persons;
34. Strongly urges Governments to ensure coherence between the laws on and
measures responding to migration, labour and trafficking in persons to protect the
human rights of migrant women and girls throughout the migration and employment
process as well as the repatriation process, when applicable, and to provide effective
protection against trafficking in persons;
35. Invites States, together with relevant United Nations entities, to undertake
further research into the links between migration and trafficking in persons to guide
the development of age-sensitive and gender-responsive policies and programmes
that address the vulnerability of women and girl migrants;
36. Encourages Governments to review and strengthen, as appropriate, the
enforcement of relevant labour and other laws within their territories or jurisdictions
that are aimed at, or have the effect of, requiring business enterprises, including
recruitment agencies, to prevent and combat trafficking in persons in supply chains,
and to periodically assess the adequacy of such laws and address any gaps;

38/56

22-27052

A/77/456

37. Invites the business sector to consider the adoption of ethical codes of
conduct to ensure decent work and to prevent any form of exploitative practices that
foster trafficking in persons;
38. Encourages Governments to intensify collaboration with non-governmental
organizations, including women’s organizations, to develop and implement genderresponsive and age-sensitive programmes for effective counselling, training and
reintegration into society of victims of trafficking in persons and programmes that
provide shelter and helplines to victims or potential vic tims in ways that protect their
privacy and identity;
39. Urges Governments to provide or strengthen training for, and to raise
awareness among, law enforcement, judicial, immigration and other relevant officials
on the prevention and combating of trafficking in persons, including the sexual
exploitation of women and girls, and including in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, and in this regard calls upon Governments to ensure that the treatment of
victims of trafficking in persons, especially by law enforcement officials, immigration
officers, consular officials, social workers, health service providers and other first
response officials, is victim-centred and trauma-informed and conducted with full
respect for the human rights of those victims and with gender and age sensitivity and
observes the principles of non-discrimination, including the prohibition of any form
of discrimination;
40. Invites Member States to provide training for law enforcement and border
control officials, as well as medical personnel, in identifying potential cases of
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal;
41. Invites Governments to take steps to ensure that criminal justice
procedures and witness protection programmes are responsive to the particular
situation of women and girls subjected to trafficking, and that they are supported and
assisted, as appropriate, in making complaints to the police or other authorities,
without fear and with due regard for the protection of their privacy and their identity,
and are available, when required, to the criminal justice system, and to ensure that
during this time they have access to gender- and age-sensitive protection and, as
appropriate, social, medical, financial and legal assistance, including the possibility
of obtaining compensation for damages suffered;
42. Emphasizes the need to establish firewalls between immigration checks
and labour inspections, and/or to ensure that labour inspections are conducted in such
a way that does not put potential victims of trafficking in fear of immigration
authorities or offences;
43. Invites Governments to intensify efforts aimed at the speedy disposition of
cases of trafficking in persons and, in cooperation with, inter alia, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, to devise, enforce and strengthen systems and
mechanisms for combating trafficking in persons;
44. Also invites Governments to encourage media providers, including
Internet, social media and online platform service providers, to adopt or strengthen
self-regulatory measures to promote the responsible use of media, particularly the
Internet, with a view to eliminating the exploitation of women and children, in
particular girls, which could foster trafficking in persons;
45. Encourages Governments to develop and implement strategies that
promote safe access to media and to information and communications technologies
in order to prevent and eradicate trafficking in women and girls, including increasing
women’s and girls’ digital literacy and access to information;
46. Invites the business sector, in particular the tourism, travel and
telecommunications industries, relevant recruitment agencies and mass media
22-27052

39/56

A/77/456

organizations, to cooperate with Governments in eliminating trafficking in women
and children, in particular girls, including through the dissemination by the media of
information regarding the dangers of trafficking in persons, the means used by
traffickers, the rights of persons subjected to trafficking in persons and the services
available to them;
47. Stresses the need for the systematic collection of disaggregated data
including, as appropriate, in humanitarian responses, in line with do -no-harm
principles, and in this regard takes note of the publication of the Global Report on
Trafficking in Persons, prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
and the development of common methodologies and internationally defined
indicators to make it possible to develop relevant and comparable figures, and
encourages Governments to enhance information-sharing and data-collection
capacity as a way of promoting cooperation to combat trafficking in persons;
48. Invites Governments, United Nations bodies, agencies and special
mechanisms, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the private
sector to continue collaborative and joint research and studies on trafficking in women
and girls that can serve as a basis for policy formulation or change;
49. Invites Governments, with the support of the United Nations, when
necessary, and other intergovernmental organizations, taking into account best
practices, to formulate training manuals and other informational materials and to
provide training for law enforcement, judicial and other relevant officials and medical
and support personnel, with a view to sensitizing them to the special needs of women
and girl victims of trafficking in persons;
50. Calls upon Governments, and encourages relevant intergovernmental
bodies and international organizations, to ensure that military, peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel deployed in conflict, post-conflict and other emergency
situations are provided with training on conduct that does not promote, facilitate or
exploit trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual exploitation, and to raise
the awareness of such personnel about the potential risks that victims of conflict and
other emergency situations, including natural disasters, face of being subjected to
trafficking in persons;
51. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,36 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 37 and the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to
include information and disaggregated statistics on trafficking in women and girls as
part of their national reports to the respective committees, as applicable;
52. Invites States to continue to contribute to the United Nations voluntary
trust fund on contemporary forms of slavery and to the United Nations voluntary trust
fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
53. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session a report that compiles information on successful interventions
and strategies, as well as the gaps, in addressing the gender dimensions of the problem
of trafficking in persons and provides recommendations on the strengthening of
human rights-based, victim-centred and gender- and age-sensitive approaches within
comprehensive, multidimensional, multicultural and balanced efforts to address
trafficking in persons, including in the prosecution of traffickers and protection of
victims, and including in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
__________________
36
37

40/56

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Ibid.
22-27052

A/77/456

Draft resolution III
Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female
genital mutilation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/117 of 9 December 1998, 56/128 of 19 December
2001, 67/146 of 20 December 2012, 68/146 of 18 December 2013, 69/150 of
18 December 2014, 71/168 of 19 December 2016, 73/149 of 17 December 2018 and
75/160 of 16 December 2020, Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 51/2
of 9 March 2007,1 52/2 of 7 March 2008 2 and 54/7 of 12 March 2010 3 and Human
Rights Council resolutions 27/22 of 26 September 2014,4 32/21 of 1 July 2016,5 38/6
of 2 July 2018,6 44/16 of 17 July 2020 7 and 50/16 of 8 July 2022 8 and all relevant
agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,9
Reaffirming also that the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 10 the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 11 and
all relevant conventions, together with the optional protocols thereto, as appropriate,
constitute an important contribution to the legal framework for the protection and
promotion of the human rights of women and girls,
Reaffirming further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 12 which
reaffirms that all human rights, including the right to development, are universal,
indivisible, interdependent and interrelated, the Beijing Declaration 13 and Platform
for Action,14 the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”,15 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development 16 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for
Social Development 17 and their 5-, 10-, 15- and 20-year reviews, as well as the United
Nations Millennium Declaration,18 and the commitments relevant to women and girls
made at the 2005 World Summit19 and reiterated in Assembly resolution 65/1 of
__________________

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2007, Supplement No. 7 (E/2007/27),
chap. I, sect. D.
2 Ibid., 2008, Supplement No. 7 (E/2008/27), chap. I, sect. D.
3 Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and E/2010/27/Corr. 1), chap. I,
sect. D.
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigenda (A/69/53/Add. 1, A/69/53/Add. 1/Corr. 1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A.
5 Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.
6 Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. VI, sect. A.
7 Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/75/53), chap. V, sect. A.
8 Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/77/53), chap. VIII, sect. A.
9 Resolution 217 A (III).
10 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
11 Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
12 A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
13 Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
14 Ibid., annex II.
15 Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
16 Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
17 Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
18 Resolution 55/2.
19 See resolution 60/1.
1

22-27052

41/56

A/77/456

22 September 2010, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals”, and those made in the outcome document of the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,20
Recognizing the role of local, national, regional, subregional and international
instruments and mechanisms in the prevention and elimination of female genital
mutilation, where they exist,
Recalling the undertakings and commitments on ending female genital
mutilation contained in Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the Protocol to the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
adopted in Maputo on 11 July 2003, which mark a significant milestone towards the
elimination and ending of female genital mutilation,
Recalling also the decision of the African Union, adopted in Malabo on 1 July
2011, to support the adoption by the General Assembly at its sixty -sixth session of a
resolution banning female genital mutilation,
Recognizing that female genital mutilation constitutes irreparable, irreversible
harm and an act of violence against women and girls that impairs and undermines the
enjoyment of their human rights, and recognizing also that it affects many women and
girls who are at risk of being subjected to the practice throughout the world, which is
an impediment to the full achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls,
Reaffirming that female genital mutilation is a harmful practice and a serious
and life-threatening form of violence, constituting a serious threat to the dignity,
health and well-being of women and girls, including their physical, mental, sexual
and reproductive, and maternal health, as well as to the health of children, including
infants and adolescents, that it has no documented health benefits, that it may give
rise to possible adverse obstetric, prenatal and post-partum outcomes and may
increase vulnerability to hepatitis C, tetanus, sepsis, urine retention and ulceration, as
well as to fatal consequences for the mother and child, and that the elimination of this
harmful practice can be achieved as a result of a comprehensive movement that
involves all public and private stakeholders in society, including women and men,
girls and boys, families, communities, religious leaders and local community and
traditional leaders,
Recognizing that female genital mutilation is inherently linked to deep -rooted
harmful stereotypes, negative social norms, perceptions and customs on the part of
both women and men that threaten the physical and psychological integrity of women
and girls, and that are obstacles to their full enjoyment of human rights, and
acknowledging in this regard that awareness-raising is critical,
Recognizing also that female genital mutilation is exacerbated in humanitarian
situations owing to several factors, including displacement or forced displacement
and breakdown of law and State authority or social support networks, including lack
of essential specialized and adequate protection and health -care services,
Deeply concerned that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
disrupted prevention programmes aimed at eliminating female genital mutilation and
other harmful practices, increased the vulnerability of girls and women, especially
those at risk of undergoing female genital mutilation, and further exacerbated existing
gender inequality, economic disparities and health risks faced by women and girls,

__________________
20

42/56

Resolution 70/1.
22-27052

A/77/456

Welcoming the increased national, regional and international efforts and the
political commitment at the highest levels, which are critical to successfully
eradicating female genital mutilation,
Deeply concerned that, despite the national, regional and internation al efforts,
the practice of female genital mutilation persists in all parts of the world, has
interlinkages with other harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage,
and remains underreported, particularly at the local level, and that the use of new
methods, such as its medicalization and cross-border practice, is increasing,
Recognizing that decades of efforts to eliminate female genital mutilation are
undermined by cross-border and transnational practices, which occur when girls or
women are taken across national borders to countries that have not outlawed this
harmful practice or do not enforce existing criminal laws,
Recognizing also that negative discriminatory and stereotypical attitudes and
behaviours, on the part of both women and men, have direct implications for the status
and treatment of women and girls, and that such negative stereotypes impede the
implementation of legislative and normative frameworks that guarantee gender
equality and prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex ,
Stressing that men and boys play an important role in the acceleration of
progress in preventing and eliminating harmful practices such as female genital
mutilation by being agents of change,
Recognizing that the campaign of the Secretary-General entitled “UNiTE to End
Violence against Women” and the Global Database on Violence against Women have
contributed to addressing the elimination of female genital mutilation,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations system to end female genital
mutilation, in particular the commitment of 10 United Nations entities,21 announced
in their joint inter-agency statement of 27 February 2008 on eliminating female
genital mutilation, and taking note with appreciation of the Joint Programme on the
Elimination of Female Genital Mutilation: Delivering the Global Promise to End
Female Genital Mutilation by 2030 of the United Nations Population Fund and the
United Nations Children’s Fund, to accelerate the elimination of the practice,
Commending the continued efforts and actions undertaken by States,
individually and collectively, regional organizations and United Nations agencies for
the elimination of female genital mutilation, as well as the imp lementation of its
resolution 75/160,
Noting with appreciation the recent progress made globally towards ending
female genital mutilation, which has become less common in countries where it was
once universal and in countries where it occurred in only a few communities, while
expressing deep concern that, despite this global trend, progress is uneven and not
fast enough to achieve the target of eliminating female genital mutilation by 2030 and
the promise to leave no one behind, and that the COVID-19 pandemic increased
women’s and girls’ vulnerability to female genital mutilation,
Underscoring the importance of eliminating female genital mutilation as a
contribution to the implementation of the range of Sustainable Development Goals
and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular target 5.3,
__________________
21

22-27052

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, United Nations Development Programme, Economic Commission for
Africa, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations
Population Fund, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations
Children’s Fund, United Nations Development Fund for Women and World Health Organization.
43/56

A/77/456

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,22
Deeply concerned that a tremendous gap in resources continues to exist and that
the shortfall in funding has severely limited the scope and pace of programmes and
activities for the elimination of female genital mutilation,
1.
Stresses that the gender equality and empowerment of women and girls is
key to breaking the cycle of discrimination and violence and for the promotion and
protection of human rights, including the right to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health, including sexual and reproductive
health, and calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligations under the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, as well as their commitments to implementing the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, 23 the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century”, and of the special session of the General Assembly on
children;24
2.
Condemns all forms of violence and harmful practices that affect women
and girls, in particular female genital mutilation, and urges States to take all necessary
measures in accordance with their obligations under applicable international human
rights law, including legislative and policy measures, to prohibit female genital
mutilation and to protect women and girls, including from cross -border and other
affected communities;
3.
Calls upon States to place a stronger focus on the development and
implementation of comprehensive prevention strategies, including the intensification
of educational campaigns, awareness-raising and formal and non-formal education
and training in order to promote the direct engagement of girls and boys, women and
men and to ensure that all key actors, including government officials, law enforcement
and judicial personnel, immigration officials, parliamentarians, health -care providers,
practitioners, civil society, the private sector, community and religious leaders,
teachers, employers, media professionals and those directly working with girls, as
well as parents, legal guardians, families and communities, work to eliminate attitudes
and harmful practices, in particular female genital mutilation, that negatively affect
women and girls, and emphasizes the importance of adopting a non-stigmatization
approach in all prevention interventions;
4.
Also calls upon States to develop information and awareness-raising
campaigns and programmes to systematically reach and engage the general public,
especially relevant professionals, in particular schoolteachers, families, communities,
civil society representatives, including women’s and girl-led organizations and
religious and traditional leaders, including through the traditional and non -traditional
media, featuring television and radio discussions and information and communications
technology, about the harmful effects of female genital mutilation and the fact that
this practice still exists and about national and international levels of support for the
elimination of female genital mutilation, with a view to helping to change existing
negative social norms, attitudes and behaviours that condone and justify gender
inequality, all forms of violence against women and girls and harmful practices,
including female genital mutilation;
__________________

A/77/312.
Resolution 48/104.
24 Resolution S-27/2, annex.
22
23

44/56

22-27052

A/77/456

5.
Further calls upon States to provide the resources necessary to strengthen
advocacy and awareness-raising programmes, to mobilize girls and women and boys
and men to take an active part in developing preventive and eliminatio n programmes
to address harmful practices, especially female genital mutilation, to engage families,
local community and religious leaders, educational institutions, the media and civil
society and to provide increased financial support to efforts at all l evels to end
discriminatory social norms and practices, and calls upon the international
community to support States in these efforts;
6.
Encourages States to ensure that female genital mutilation-related
prevention, protection and care services are mainstreamed in humanitarian and
emergency preparedness and response plans and integrated in coordination mechanisms
and remote service delivery as part of the continuum of essential services, including
health-care services for all women and girls across the humanitarian-development
nexus, with particular attention to the protection needs of women and girls living in
cross-border communities;
7.
Urges States to complement punitive measures with awareness-raising and
educational activities designed to promote a process of consensus towards the
elimination of female genital mutilation, and also urges States to protect and support
women and girls who have been subjected to female genital mutilation and those who
are at risk in order to assist them, including by de veloping social, legal and
psychological support services and care and appropriate remedies, and to ensure
access to health-care services, including for sexual and reproductive health, in order
to improve their health and well-being;
8.
Also urges States to condemn all harmful practices that affect women and
girls, in particular female genital mutilation, whether committed within or outside a
medical institution, to take all measures necessary, including through educational
campaigns and by enacting and enforcing legislation to prohibit female genital
mutilation, to protect women and girls from this act of violence, to hold perpetrators
to account and to put in place adequate accountability mechanisms at the national and
local levels, where applicable, in order to monitor progress;
9.
Calls upon States to address the medicalization of female genital
mutilation and to encourage professional associations and trade unions of health
service providers to adopt internal disciplinary rules prohibiting their member s from
engaging in the harmful practice of female genital mutilation;
10. Urges States to promote gender-sensitive, empowering educational
processes, sensitive to the needs of women and girls, by reviewing and revising, as
appropriate, school curricula, educational materials and teacher-training programmes
and elaborating policies and programmes of zero tolerance of violence against girls
or of harmful practices, including female genital mutilation, placing special emphasis
on education about the harmful effects of female genital mutilation, and to further
integrate a comprehensive understanding of the causes and consequences of genderbased violence and discrimination against women and girls into education and
training curricula at all levels;
11. Also urges States to ensure the protection of, and provision of support to,
women and girls subjected to or at risk of female genital mutilation, including
cross-border and transnational female genital mutilation, and to address the
underlying systemic and structural causes in which this harmful practice is rooted by
establishing regional, national and multisectoral prevention and response strategies
that respond to the needs of women and girls, including supportive legislation and
policies, programmes and budgetary measures based on integrated, coordinated and
collective approaches combining political commitment, civil society engagement and
accountability at the regional, national, local and community levels;
22-27052

45/56

A/77/456

12. Further urges States to ensure that the protection of and provision of
support to women and girls subject to, or at risk of, female genital mutilation are an
integral part of policies and programmes that address the practice, and to provide
women and girls with coordinated, specialized, accessible and q uality multisectoral
prevention and response, including education, as well as legal, psychological, health care and social services, provided by qualified personnel, consistent with the
guidelines of medical ethics;
13. Urges States to put in place effective regional cooperation and
coordination mechanisms to prevent and eliminate cross-border and transnational
female genital mutilation and to ensure their sustainability and effectiveness by
providing them with adequate financial resources and capacities s o that they can
oversee the implementation of comprehensive and multisectoral regional, national
and subnational plans, strategies, policies and programmes, with the active engagement
and participation of relevant actors, including international organizati ons, regional
and international networks of parliamentarians, national human rights institutions,
professional associations, including of health-care providers, civil society
organizations, including human rights groups, women ’s human rights organizations
and youth-led organizations, as well as traditional and religious leaders and faith based organizations, men and boys, parents, legal guardians and family members,
victims and survivors;
14. Calls upon States to ensure that national action plans and strategies on the
elimination of female genital mutilation are comprehensive and multidisciplinary in
scope and that they are adequately financed, include projected timelines for goals and
incorporate clear targets and indicators for the effective monitoring, i mpact
assessment and coordination of programmes among all relevant stakeholders and
promote their participation, including the participation of affected women and girls,
practising communities and non-governmental organizations, in the development,
implementation and evaluation of such plans and strategies;
15. Urges States to take, within the general framework of integration policies
and in consultation with affected communities, effective and specific targeted
measures for refugee, asylum-seeker, migrant and internally displaced women and
girls, their families and their communities in order to protect women and girls
everywhere from female genital mutilation, including when the practice occurs
outside the country of residence;
16. Also urges States to pursue a comprehensive, culturally sensitive,
systematic approach that incorporates a social perspective and is based on human
rights and gender equality in providing education and training to families, local
community leaders and members of all professions relevant to the protection and
empowerment of women and girls in order to increase awareness of and commitment
to the elimination of female genital mutilation;
17. Further urges States to identify and allocate sufficient resources to the
implementation of policies and programmes and legislative frameworks aimed at
eliminating female genital mutilation, in particular measures involving information
and communications technologies to facilitate learning and knowledge -sharing;
18. Calls upon States to develop, support and implement comprehensive and
integrated strategies and approaches for the prevention and elimination of female
genital mutilation, including, where appropriate, by adopting or amending legislation
to criminalize the practice and the training of social workers, medical personnel,
community and religious leaders, humanitarian workers and other relevant
professionals, and to ensure that they provide competent, supportive services and care
to all women and girls who are at risk of or who have undergone female genital

46/56

22-27052

A/77/456

mutilation and encourage them to report to the appropriate authorities cases in which
they believe that women or girls are at risk;
19. Also calls upon States to harmonize legislation and policies between States
where cross-border and transnational female genital mutilation occurs, in addition to
supporting the implementation of laws criminalizing female genital mutilation,
increasing cooperation between States and civil society at national borders,
conducting media campaigns promoting cross-border prevention among vulnerable
border communities and introducing enhanced monitoring systems across borders on
female genital mutilation cases;
20. Further calls upon States to support, as part of a comprehensive approach
to eliminate female genital mutilation, programmes that engage local community
practitioners of female genital mutilation in community -based initiatives for the
elimination of the practice, including, where relevant, the identification and the
provision by communities of alternative livelihoods for them;
21. Calls upon the international community, the relevant United Nations
entities and civil society and international financial institutions to continue to actively
support, through the allocation of increased financial resources and technical
assistance, targeted comprehensive programmes that address the needs and priorities
of women and girls at risk of or subjected to female genital mutilation ;
22. Calls upon the international community and all Member States to strongly
support, including through increased financial support, organizations and programmes
that support women and girls affected by or at risk of female genital mutilation,
including the fourth phase of the Joint Programme on the Elimination of Female
Genital Mutilation: Delivering the Global Promise to End Female Genital Mutilation
by 2030 of the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Children ’s
Fund, which will run until 2030, as well as national programmes focused on the
elimination of female genital mutilation;
23. Stresses that progress has been made in eliminating female genital
mutilation in a number of countries using a common coordinated approach that
promotes positive social change at the community, national, regional and international
levels, and recalls the goal set out in the United Nations inter-agency statement that
female genital mutilation is to be eliminated within a generation, with some of the
main achievements being obtained by 2030, in line with the Sustainable Development
Goals;
24. Encourages men and boys to take an active part and to become strategic
partners of women and girls and their allies in efforts, including through
intergenerational dialogue, to eliminate violence, discrimination and harmful
practices against women and girls, in particular female genital mutilation, through
networks, peer programmes, information campaigns and training programmes;
25. Calls upon States to engage key stakeholders, in a coordinated manner,
including various sectors of government and civil society organizations, along with
the support, upon request, of United Nations entities, in developing a multidisciplinary
approach to both preventing and responding to female genital mutilation and to adopt
laws and policies, where appropriate, providing high -quality, multisectoral
interventions for girls and women who have been subject to female genital mutilation,
as well as robust prevention strategies, taking into consideration those girls and
women who are most vulnerable;
26. Calls upon States, the United Nations system, civil society and all
stakeholders to continue to observe 6 February as the International Day of Zero
Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation and to use the day to enhance awarenessraising campaigns and to take concrete actions against female genital mutilation;
22-27052

47/56

A/77/456

27. Calls upon States to improve the collection and analysis of quantitative
and qualitative disaggregated data, where appropriate, and to c ollaborate with
existing data collection systems, which are crucial for evidence -based legal and
policy development, programme design and implementation and the monitoring of
the elimination of female genital mutilation;
28. Also calls upon States to develop unified methods and standards for the
collection of data on female genital mutilation, which is underdocumented and
underreported, particularly in humanitarian and emergency situations, to develop
additional indicators to effectively measure progress in eliminating this practice and
to reinforce the sharing of good practices relating to the prevention and elimination
of female genital mutilation at the national, subregional, regional and global levels;
29. Urges the international community to fulfil its commitment in supporting
developing countries in strengthening the capacity of national statistical offices and
data systems to ensure access to high-quality, timely, reliable and disaggregated data,
while ensuring national ownership in supporting and tracking progress, in order, inter
alia, to inform policy and programming, as well as to monitor progress in the
elimination of female genital mutilation;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, individually and collectively, take into a ccount the protection and
promotion of the rights of women and girls against female genital mutilation in their
country programmes, as appropriate and in accordance with national priorities, in
order to further strengthen their efforts in this regard;
31. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly, at its seventy-ninth session, an in-depth, multidisciplinary, evidence-based
report, with accurate and updated data, an analysis of root causes, progress made to
date, challenges and needs and action-oriented recommendations for eliminating this
practice, on the basis of updated information provided by Member States, relevant
actors of the United Nations system working on the issue and other relevant
stakeholders.

48/56

22-27052

A/77/456

Draft resolution IV
Intensification of efforts to end obstetric fistula
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 62/138 of 18 December 2007, 63/158 of 18 December
2008, 65/188 of 21 December 2010 and 67/147 of 20 December 2012 on supporting
efforts to end obstetric fistula and its resolutions 69/148 of 18 December 2014, 71/169
of 19 December 2016, 73/147 of 17 December 2018 and 75/159 of 16 December 2020
on the intensification of efforts to end obstetric fistula,
Reaffirming the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 1 the outcomes of
the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”,2 the Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development 3 and the
Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development, 4 and their
reviews, and the international commitments in the field of social development and to
gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls made at the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance 5 and the 2005 World Summit,6 as well as those made in the outcome
document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post -2015
development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”,7
Reaffirming also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 8 as well as the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 9 and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 10 recalling the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 11 and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,12 and urging States that have not done so to consider, as a mat ter of
priority, signing, ratifying or acceding to those conventions and the optional protocols
thereto,13
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General14 and the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein,
Recognizing that intensified national ownership and leadership, political
commitment and scaled-up national capacity are urgently needed to accelerate
progress towards the elimination of fistula, including by implementing strategies to

__________________

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2 Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
3 Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4 Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
5 See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF. 189/12/Corr. 1, chap. I.
6 Resolution 60/1.
7 Resolution 70/1.
8 Resolution 217 A (III).
9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
10 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
11 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
12 Ibid.
13 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2131, No. 20378; ibid., vols. 2171, 2173 and 2983,
No. 27531; ibid., vol. 1642, No. 14668; and ibid., vol. 2922, No. 14531.
14 A/77/229.
1

22-27052

49/56

A/77/456

prevent new cases and treating all existing cases with special attention paid to
countries with the highest maternal mortality and morbidity levels,
Stressing the interlinkages between poverty, malnutrition, lack of or inadequate
or inaccessible health-care services, early childbearing, child, early and forced
marriage, violence against young women and girls, sociocultural barriers,
marginalization, illiteracy and gender inequality as root causes of obstetric fistula,
and that poverty remains the main social risk factor,
Stressing also that obstetric fistula can be a cause of devastating lifelong
morbidity if left untreated, with severe medical, social, psychological and economic
consequences, that approximately 90 per cent of women who develop fistula deliver
stillborn babies and that misperceptions about its cause often result in stigma and
ostracism,
Recognizing that the difficult socioeconomic conditions that exist in many
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, have resulted in the
acceleration of the feminization of poverty,
Recognizing also that early childbearing increases the risk of complications
during pregnancy and delivery and entails a much higher risk of maternal mortality
and morbidity, and deeply concerned that early childbearing and limite d access to the
highest attainable standard of mental and physical health, including sexual and
reproductive health, specifically timely access to high -quality emergency obstetric
care, cause high levels of obstetric fistula and other maternal morbidities, as well as
maternal mortality,
Recognizing further that adolescent girls, in particular those who live in poverty
or who are marginalized, are at particular risk of maternal death and morbidity,
including obstetric fistula, and concerned that the leading cause of death among girls
aged 15 to 19 in many low- and middle-income countries is complications from
pregnancy and childbirth and that women aged 30 and older are at increased risk of
developing complications and of dying during childbirth,
Recognizing that lack of access to sexual and reproductive health, especially
emergency obstetric, services, including in humanitarian settings, remains among the
leading causes of obstetric fistula, leading to ill health and death for women and girls
of childbearing age in many regions of the world, and that a dramatic and sustainable
scaling-up of quality treatment and health-care services, including high-quality
emergency obstetric services, and of the number of trained, competent fistula
surgeons and midwives is needed to significantly reduce maternal and newborn
mortality and to eradicate obstetric fistula,
Noting that a human rights-based approach to eliminating obstetric fistula and
efforts to eliminate obstetric fistula should be underpinned by, int er alia,
accountability, participation, transparency, empowerment, sustainability, non discrimination and international cooperation,
Deeply concerned about discrimination against and marginalization of women
and girls, in particular those who are facing multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination, which often result in reduced access to education and nutrition,
compromising their physical and mental health and well-being and the enjoyment of
their human rights and the opportunities and benefits of ch ildhood and adolescence
compared with boys, and often in their being subjected to various forms of cultural,
social, sexual and economic exploitation and abuse, violence and harmful practices,
which can increase the risk of obstetric fistula,
Deeply concerned also about the situation of women and girls living with or
recovering from obstetric fistula, who are often neglected and stigmatized, which
50/56

22-27052

A/77/456

may lead to negative effects on their mental health, resulting in depression and
suicide, and are driven deeper into poverty and marginalization,
Recognizing the need to raise awareness among men and adolescent boys and,
in this context, to fully engage men and community leaders as strategic partners and
allies in the efforts to address and eliminate obstetric fistula,
Welcoming the contribution by Member States, the international community, the
private sector and civil society to the global Campaign to End Fistula led by the
United Nations Population Fund, bearing in mind that a people-centred approach to
social and economic development is fundamental for protecting and empowering
individuals and communities,
Deeply concerned that, as the global Campaign to End Fistula completes its
nineteenth anniversary, while some progress has been made, significant challenges
remain that require the intensification of efforts at all levels to end obstetric fistula,
Deeply concerned also about the insufficient resources for addressing obstetric
fistula in high-burden countries, compounded by the low levels of development
assistance for maternal and newborn health, which have declined in recent years, and
the substantial need for additional resources and support for the global Campaign to
End Fistula and for national and regional initiatives ded icated to improving maternal
health and eliminating obstetric fistula,
Noting the Secretary-General’s revised Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s
and Adolescents’ Health (2016–2030), undertaken by a broad coalition of partners,
in support of national plans and strategies that aim for the highest attainable
standards of health and well-being, physical, mental and social, at every age, ending
maternal and newborn mortality, which is preventable, and noting that this can
contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Welcoming the various national, regional and international initiatives on all the
Sustainable Development Goals and the global Campaign to End Fistula, including
those undertaken bilaterally and through South-South cooperation, in support of
national plans and strategies in sectors such as health, education, finance, gender
equality, energy, water and sanitation, poverty eradication and nutrition as a way to
reduce the number of maternal, newborn and under-5 child deaths,
Welcoming also ongoing partnerships between stakeholders at all levels to
address the multifaceted determinants of maternal, newborn and child health, in close
coordination with Member States, based on their needs and priorities, and in this
regard welcoming further the commitments to accelerate progress on the health related Sustainable Development Goals by 2030,
1.
Reaffirms the commitments made by Member States to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, and recognizes that the efforts to end
obstetric fistula within a decade will contribute to the achievement of the Goals by
2030;
2.
Stresses the need to address the interlinkages between poverty, lack of or
inadequate education for women and girls, gender inequality, lack of or inadequate
access to health-care services, including sexual and reproductive health-care
services, early childbearing and child, early and forced marriage as root causes of
obstetric fistula, and calls upon States, in collaboration with the international
community, to take accelerated action to address the situation;
3.
Calls upon States to take all measures necessary to ensure the right of
women and girls to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health, including
sexual and reproductive health, and reproductive rights, in accordance with the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,
22-27052

51/56

A/77/456

the Beijing Platform for Action 15 and the outcome documents of their review
conferences, and to develop sustainable health systems and social services, with a view
to ensuring universal access to such systems and services without discrimination, while
paying special attention to adequate food and nutrition, water and sanitation, family
planning information, increasing women’s empowerment, knowledge and awareness
and ensuring equitable access to high-quality appropriate prenatal and delivery care for
the prevention of obstetric fistula and the reduction of health inequities, as well as
postnatal care for the detection and early management of fistula cases;
4.
Also calls upon States to ensure equitable coverage and timely access, by
means of national plans, policies and programmes, to health-care services, in
particular emergency obstetric and newborn care, skilled birth attendance, obstetric
fistula treatment and family planning, that are financially affordable, accessible and
culturally sensitive, especially in rural and the most-remote areas;
5.
Further calls upon States to ensure the right to education of good quality
for women and girls, on an equal basis with men and boys, and to ensure that they
complete a full course of primary education, and to renew their efforts to improve
and expand girls’ and women’s education at all levels, including at the secondary and
higher levels, including age-appropriate sex education, as well as vocational
education and technical training, in order to, inter alia, achieve gender equality, the
empowerment of women and girls and poverty eradication;
6.
Urges States to enact and strictly enforce laws to ensure that marriage,
including in rural and remote areas, is entered into only with the free and full consent
of the intending spouses and, in addition, to enact and strictly enforce laws concerning
the minimum legal age of consent and the minimum age for marriage and to raise the
minimum age for marriage, where necessary;
7.
Calls upon the international community to provide intensified technical and
financial support, in particular to high-burden countries, to accelerate progress towards
the elimination of obstetric fistula within a decade, which can contribute to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 and leave no one behind;
8.
Urges the international community to provide and enhance the necessary
resources and capacity-building, upon the request of Member States, in order to treat
fistula cases through surgery, leading to the reintegration of affected women and girls
into their communities, with appropriate psychosocial, medical and economic
support to restore their well-being and dignity;
9.
Urges multilateral donors, international financial institutions and regional
development banks in the public and private sectors, within their respective mandates,
to review and implement policies to support national efforts and institutional capacitybuilding to end obstetric fistula and to ensure that a higher proportion of resources
reach young women and girls, in particular in rural and remote areas and the poorest
urban areas, as well as to ensure that needed funding is increased, predictable and
sustained;
10. Calls upon the international community to support the activities of the
United Nations Population Fund and other partners, including the World Health
Organization, in the global Campaign to End Fistula in establishing and financing
regional fistula treatment and training centres and, where necessary, national centres,
by identifying and supporting health facilities that have the potential to serve as
centres for treatment, training and convalescent care;
__________________
15

52/56

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
22-27052

A/77/456

11. Calls upon States to accelerate progress to improve maternal health by
addressing sexual and reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health in a
comprehensive manner, inter alia, through the provision of family planning, prenatal
care, skilled attendance at birth, including midwives, emergency obstetric and
newborn care, postnatal care and methods of prevention and treatment of sexually
transmitted diseases and infections, such as HIV, within strengthened health-care
systems that provide universal access to affordable, equitable and high-quality
integrated health-care services and include community-based preventive and clinical
care, towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
12. Urges the international community to address the shortage and inequitable
distribution of doctors, surgeons, midwives, nurses and other health-care workers
trained in life-saving obstetric care, and of space and supplies, which limit the
capacity of most fistula centres;
13. Commends the commemoration by the international community of
23 May as the International Day to End Obstetric Fistula and the decision to continue
to use the International Day each year to significantly raise awareness, intensify
actions and mobilize support towards ending obstetric fistula;
14. Calls upon States and/or the relevant funds and programmes, organs and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates,
and invites the international financial institutions and all relevant actors of civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, and the private sector, to end
obstetric fistula within a decade by:
(a) Redoubling their efforts to meet the internationally agreed goal of
improving maternal health by making maternal health-care services and obstetric
fistula treatment geographically and financially accessible, including by ensuring
universal access to skilled attendance at birth and timely access to high-quality
emergency obstetric care and family planning, as well as appropriate prenatal and
postnatal care;
(b) Making greater investments in strengthening health systems, ensuring
adequately trained and skilled human resources, especially midwives, obstetricians,
gynaecologists and doctors, and providing support for the development and
maintenance of infrastructure, as well as investments in referral mechanisms,
equipment and supply chains, to improve maternal and newborn health-care services
and ensure that women and girls have access to the full continuum of care, with
functional quality control and monitoring mechanisms in place for all areas of service
delivery;
(c) Supporting the training of doctors and surgeons, nurses and other healthcare workers in life-saving obstetric care, especially midwives, who are the frontline workers in the fight to prevent obstetric fistula and maternal and newborn
mortality, including training on fistula prevention, treatment and care as a standard
element of the training curricula of health professionals;
(d) Ensuring universal access through national policies, plans and programmes
that make maternal and newborn health-care services, particularly family planning,
skilled attendance at birth, emergency obstetric and newborn care and obstetric fistula
treatment, financially accessible and affordable, including in rural and remote areas and
among the poorest women and girls through, where appropriate, the establishment and
distribution of health-care facilities and trained medical personnel, collaboration with
the transport sector for affordable transport options, support for developing and
maintaining infrastructure to improve maternal and newborn health-care services and
to strengthen the capacity for surgery, the promotion of and support for communitybased solutions and the provision of incentives and other means to secure the presence
22-27052

53/56

A/77/456

in rural and remote areas of qualified health-care professionals who are able to perform
interventions to prevent obstetric fistula;
(e) Developing, implementing, following up on and supporting national and
international prevention, care and treatment and socioeconomic reintegration and
support strategies, policies and plans to eliminate obstetric fistula within a decade by
developing further multisectoral, multidisciplinary, comprehensive and integrated
action plans in order to bring about lasting solutions and put an end to maternal
mortality and morbidity and obstetric fistula, which is preventable and treatable,
including by ensuring access to affordable, accessible, comprehensive, high-quality
maternal health-care services, and, within countries, incorporating into all sectors of
national budgets policy and programmatic approaches to address inequities and reach
poor women and girls and those in vulnerable situations;
(f) Establishing or strengthening, as appropriate, a national task force for
obstetric fistula, with a lead governmental entity, to enhance national coordination
and improve partner collaboration to end obstetric fistula, including partnering with
in-country efforts, to increase surgical capacity and to promote universal access to
essential and life-saving surgery;
(g) Strengthening the capacity of health-care systems, in particular public
health systems, to provide the essential services needed to prevent obstetric fistula
and to treat existing cases by increasing national budgets for health, ensuring that
adequate funds are allocated to reproductive health, in cluding for obstetric fistula,
ensuring access to fistula treatment through increased availability of trained, expert
fistula surgeons and permanent, holistic fistula services integrated into strategically
selected hospitals, thereby addressing the significant backlog of women and girls
awaiting surgical repair of fistula, and encouraging communication among fistula
centres to facilitate training, research, advocacy and fundraising and the application
of relevant medical standards, including consideration of the use of the World Health
Organization manual entitled Obstetric Fistula: Guiding Principles for Clinical
Management and Programme Development, which provides background information
and principles for developing fistula prevention and treatment programmes, as
appropriate;
(h) Mobilizing funding to provide free or adequately subsidized maternal
health-care and obstetric fistula repair and treatment services, including by
encouraging networking among providers and the sharing of new treatment
techniques and protocols to protect women’s and children’s well-being and survival
and to prevent the recurrence of subsequent fistulas by making post-surgery followup and the tracking of fistula patients a routine and key component of all fistula
programmes, and also to ensure access to elective caesarean sections for fistula
survivors who become pregnant again in order to prevent fistula recurrence and to
increase the chances of survival of mother and baby in all subsequent pregnancies;
(i) Increasing national budgets and harnessing domestic resources for health,
ensuring that adequate funds are allocated to prevent obstetric fistula and to treat
existing cases, and for strengthening the capacity of health-care systems to provide
the essential services needed in this regard;
(j) Ensuring that all women and girls who have undergone fistula treatment,
including the forgotten women and girls whose conditions are deemed incurable or
inoperable, are provided with and have access to comprehensive health-care
services, holistic social integration services and careful follow-up, including
counselling, education, family planning, socioeconomic empowerment, social
protection and psychosocial services, for as long as needed, through, inter alia, skills
development, family and community support and income-generating activities, so
that they can overcome abandonment, stigma, ostracism and economic and social
54/56

22-27052

A/77/456

exclusion, and developing linkages with civil society organizations and women’s and
girls’ empowerment programmes so as to help to achieve this goal;
(k) Empowering fistula survivors to make informed decisions about their
lives and to contribute to community sensitization and mobilization as advocates for
fistula elimination, safe motherhood and newborn survival, and supporting the
exercise of their voice, agency and leadership;
(l) Accelerating efforts to improve the health of women and girls globally, with
an increased focus on social determinants that affect their well-being and that include
the provision of universal access to quality education for women and girls, economic
empowerment, with access to microcredit, savings and microfinancing, legal reforms,
the promotion and support of their meaningful participation in decision-making at all
levels, and social initiatives, including legal literacy to protect women and girls from
violence and discrimination, child, early and forced marriage and early pregnancy;
(m) Educating individual women and men, girls and boys, communities,
policymakers and health professionals about how obstetric fistula can be prevented and
treated, and increasing awareness of the needs of pregnant women and girls, as well as
of those who have undergone surgical fistula repair, including their right to the highest
attainable standard of mental and physical health, including sexual and reproductive
health, by working with community and religious leaders, traditional birth attendants
and midwives, women and girls who have suffered from fistula, the media, social
workers, civil society, women’s organizations, influential public figures and
policymakers;
(n) Enhancing the participation of men and adolescent boys in the
intensification of efforts to end obstetric fistula and further strengthening their
involvement as partners, including in the global Campaign to End Fistula;
(o) Strengthening awareness-raising and advocacy, including through the
media, to effectively reach families and communities with key messages on fistula
prevention and treatment and social reintegration;
(p) Strengthening research, monitoring and evaluation systems, including by
developing a community- and facility-based mechanism for the systematic
notification of obstetric fistula cases and maternal and newborn deaths to ministries
of health, and their recording in a national register, and by acknowledging obstetric
fistula as a nationally notifiable condition, triggering immediate reporting, tracking
and follow-up for the purpose of guiding the development and implementation of
maternal health programmes and ending fistula within a decade;
(q) Strengthening research, data collection, monitoring and evaluation to
guide the planning and implementation of maternal health programmes, including
for obstetric fistula, by conducting up-to-date needs assessments on emergency
obstetric and newborn care and for fistula and routine reviews of maternal deaths and
near-miss cases as part of a national maternal death surveillance and response system,
integrated within national health information systems;
(r) Improving data collection, pre- and post-surgery, to measure progress in
addressing needs for surgical treatment and the quality of surgery, rehabilitation and
socioeconomic reintegration services, including post-surgery prospects for
successful subsequent pregnancies, live births and severe health-related
complications, so as to address the challenges of improving maternal health;
(s) Providing essential health-care services, equipment and supplies,
education, skills training and income-generating projects and support to women and
girls so that they can break out of the cycle of poverty;

22-27052

55/56

A/77/456

15. Encourages Member States to contribute to efforts to end obstetric fistula,
including, in particular, through the global Campaign to End Fistula, to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 and to commit themselves to continued
efforts to improve maternal and newborn health, with the aim of eliminating obstetric
fistula globally within a decade;
16. Requests the global Campaign to End Fistula to develop a road map that
will accelerate action to end obstetric fistula within a decade, towards achieving the
2030 Agenda, including for enhancing financial resources for interventions at the
local, subnational, national, regional and international levels, in order to support
countries and relevant United Nations organizations in the prevention, treatment and
care of obstetric fistula;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report with
specific updated statistics and disaggregated data on obstetric fistula and the
challenges faced by Member States in implementing the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session under the item entitled
“Advancement of women”.

56/56

22-27052
