UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3313
12 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Friday, 12 November 1993, at 3.30 p.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. CHENG Jingye
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MARUYAMA
Mr. BELLOUKI
Mr. ADANK
Mr. MARKER
Mr. SIDOROV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. GREY
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-87165 (E)

S/PV.3313
2
The meeting was called to order at 5.55 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION RELATING TO NAGORNY KARABAKH
LETTER DATED 26 OCTOBER 1993 FROM THE CHARGE D’AFFAIRES A.I.
OF THE PERMANENT MISSION OF AZERBAIJAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/26647)
LETTER DATED 27 OCTOBER 1993 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF TURKEY TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF
THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/26650)
LETTER DATED 28 OCTOBER 1993 FROM THE DEPUTY PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN TO THE UNITED
NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
(S/26662)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Armenia,
Azerbaijan, the Islamic of Iran and Turkey in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I

propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Arzoumanian (Armenia),
Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran) and Mr. Batu (Turkey) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in response to the requests
contained in the following documents:

S/26647, letter dated

S/PV.3313
3
(The President)
26 October 1993 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/26650, letter dated
27 October 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council;
and S/26662, letter dated 28 October 1993 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Members of the Council have before them document S/26719,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the following other documents: S/26589, S/26595,
S/26602, S/26615, S/26637, S/26647, S/26657, S/26658, S/26682 and
S/26693, letters dated 15, 18, 19, 21, 26, 27 and 28 October and
2 and 4 November 1993, respectively, from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/26612, S/26643 and S/26645, letters dated 21, 26 and
27 October 1993, respectively, from the Permanent Representative of
Armenia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/26665, letter dated 28 October 1993 from the
Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council; S/26674, letter dated
29 October 1993 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General; and S/26718, letter dated 9 November 1993 from
the Permanent Representative of Italy to the United Nations,
transmitting the text of a letter of the same date from the

S/PV.3313
4
(The President)
Chairman-in-Office of the CSCE Minsk Conference on Nagorny Karabakh
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Members of the Council have received photocopies of letters
dated 11 and 12 November 1993, respectively, from the Permanent
Representatives of Belgium and Italy to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as documents S/26728 and S/26732.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call
on those members of the Council who wish to make statements before
the voting.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

My delegation remains gravely

concerned over the situation in the Azerbaijani Republic resulting
from the aggression against its territory.

The Council must take

immediate cognizance of the latest offensive launched by the
Armenian forces and the occupation of the Azerbaijani districts of
Djebrail, Fizuli, Zangelan and Kubatli.

Not only does this

constitute a violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of a Member State of the United Nations, but the aggression has
also resulted in a colossal humanitarian tragedy, forcing more than
60,000 local inhabitants to flee their homes and seek refuge in
neighbouring countries.

The situation thus constitutes a threat to

the peace and security of the region.
We commend the efforts made by the Chairman-in-Office the
Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
(CSCE) to find a peaceful solution to the conflict, and express the
hope that the Security Council’s adoption of the draft resolution
before it will strengthen the CSCE process.

We appeal to all

S/PV.3313
5
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
parties to refrain from any action that will exacerbate the
conflict and to engage sincerely in negotiations towards reaching a
just, equitable and lasting solution.
My delegation supports the draft resolution before the Council
but would have preferred to see it include an expression of the
Council’s intention to take further appropriate steps of the
resolutions of the Council continue to be defied.
It is my delegation’s sincere hope that the draft resolution
that the Council will be considering will lead to the immediate
cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal from all occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, and full respect for the cease-fire and
for the territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani Republic.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now put to the vote the draft

resolution contained in document S/26719.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela
The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 884 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. GREY (United States of America):

My Government’s

support for this resolution rests on a simple premise:

where

cease-fires are continually violated and the ensuing violence
escalates far beyond any conceivable military necessity, innocent
civilians on both sides of the conflict suffer more and more.

This

resolution rightly lays blame for this appalling situation on both
the parties - the party that initiated this round of cease-fire

S/PV.3313
6
(Mr. Grey, United States)
violations and the party that responded out of all proportion to
the violation itself.
These acts are difficult to comprehend when one considers that
civilians on both sides of the conflict are the victims of policies
that clothe themselves in the justification of defending these very
same civilians.
There is a way out.

It is offered by the Minsk process and

the tireless efforts of the Minsk Group, which has fashioned a
framework by which a cease-fire can be stabilized and negotiations
undertaken.

But this kind of progress takes political will and a

realization that continued bloodshed serves no one’s good.

We call

on the parties to awaken to that realization and exert the will to
choose peace.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

My

Government is seriously concerned at the recent resumption of
hostilities between the parties involved in the Nagorny Karabakh
conflict and by the occupation of the Zangelan district, which has
led to the forced displacement of tens of thousands of persons,
thus making the civilian population of the region suffer even more.
These events deserve to be most vigorously condemned.

The

Council has just done that unambiguously by adopting this
resolution.
The acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible and
doing so for the purposes of negotiation cannot be countenanced.
We demand the immediate cessation of armed hostilities, the
unilateral withdrawal of occupying forces from the Zangelan
district and the withdrawal from other recently occupied areas of
the Azerbaijani Republic in accordance with the adjusted timetable
of the Minsk Group.
It behoves the parties concerned to demonstrate their
readiness to refrain from recourse to the use of force and their

S/PV.3313
7
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
genuine commitment to a negotiated settlement, in particular by
means of the adoption of a unilateral cease-fire declaration and by
participating constructively in the negotiations under way within
the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE).
In approving the Declaration of the nine members of the Minsk
Group adopted on 4 November 1993 in Vienna, the Council is again
expressing its full support for the sustained efforts of the CSCE
and firmly charging the parties to continue, in this framework,
their discussions with a view to the convening of the Minsk
Conference as early as possible.
I wish in conclusion to stress my Government’s deep concern at
the effects that the continuation of the conflict is having on the
humanitarian situation.

My delegation welcomes the appeal the

Council is making today for increased humanitarian assistance to
the civilian populations of the region and recalls its insistence
on ensuring that such assistance is guaranteed free access.
Mr. SIDOROV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned at the

escalation of the Nagorny Karabakh conflict, which is the result of
local violations of the cease-fire and the excesses in the use of
force in response to those violations, which have had catastrophic
consequences for tens of thousands of Azerbaijani refugees.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
immediately called on the Karabakh units to cease the offensive and
to withdraw their forces to their initial positions.

We undertook

efforts designed to settle the existing situation on the basis of a
joint statement by Azerbaijan, Nagorny Karabakh and Armenia which
would have provided for the restoration and continuation of the
cease-fire, an investigation of the origin of those incidents that
led to the resumption of military hostilities, and the withdrawal

S/PV.3313
8
(Mr. Sidorov, Russian Federation)
of the Karabakh forces to the positions that they occupied prior to
21 October.
The Russian Federation takes a positive views of the decisions
of the recently concluded Vienna meeting of the Minsk Group of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) on Nagorny
Karabakh, in which it actively participated, and believes that the
parties will heed them.
We hope that the resolution adopted today by the Security
Council will be an important, and this time clearly understood,
signal that the international community will no longer tolerate the
continuation of bloodshed and the ever-more-dangerous escalation of
the conflict.
We attach great importance to the demand contained in the
resolution for immediately resuming of the cease-fire which was
established earlier as a result of direct contacts and with the
assistance of the Russian Federation, and for making it effective
and permanent.

Russia considers as a high-priority objective the

achievement of a total cease-fire and the cessation of military
actions and the establishment of machinery which with maximum
reliability would guarantee that such actions would not be resumed.
It is focusing its efforts precisely on this objective.

S/PV.3313
9
(Mr. Sidorov, Russian Federation)
We are firmly convinced that a lasting cessation of armed
hostilities would create the proper atmosphere for successfully
advancing the peace process and promoting a comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict through negotiations within the context
of the Minsk Group.
In conclusion, I should like once again to express my heartfelt hope that the Security Council’s appeal will at last be heeded
and that it will receive the right response.

The Russian

Federation, for its part, will make its best efforts to ensure that
that happens.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

In

voting for resolution 884 (1993), Hungary wished to express its
serious concern over the continuing conflict in Nagorny Karabakh
and the continuation of tension between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
The Council has every reason to take up this matter because this
crisis - which, despite the efforts to settle it, seems in no way
to be losing its intensity - is likely to jeopardize peace and
security throughout the region.
In this context, Hungary welcomes the declaration by the nine
members of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
(CSCE) Minsk Group, and gives its full support to the peace process
that the Group is pursuing.
We should like to stress how important is the reaffirmation,
in the resolution that has just been adopted, of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani Republic and of all
other States in the region, as well as the resolution’s
reaffirmation of the inadmissibility of the use of force for the
acquisition of territory.
We should also like to highlight the position set out in the
Minsk Group’s declaration of 4 November last, that the occupation

S/PV.3313
10
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
of territory cannot be used to try to obtain international
recognition or to impose a change of legal status.
In this respect, the Council must also take account of the
importance of ensuring respect by all those concerned for the
principles that it is setting out in its resolutions and the
warnings they contain.

Otherwise, the stands taken by the

international community will hardly be considered to be expressions
of a real will to prevent problems or to act, or as demonstrations
of a serious, credible commitment to maintain the peace and
everything necessary to contain a contagion that has lately begun
to spread with appalling intensity in several regions of the world.
The process of achieving a settlement in the region can be
supported only on the basis of the Minsk Group’s adjusted timetable
and by the withdrawal of the occupying forces from all the occupied
areas.

In addition, the international community’s efforts to

achieve a negotiated settlement must be based on a real political
will and a constructive attitude by the parties to the conflict.
We hope that the protagonists on the basis of the
inviolability of international frontiers and respect for, and
protection of, the legitimate rights of national minorities and
ethnic communities, will act in a spirit of great responsibility
not only to restore peace and stability but also to ensure that the
peoples of the region enjoy a natural and harmonious coexistence.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

The British Government

is deeply disturbed by the new upsurge in fighting around Nagorny
Karabakh and the consequent further wave of refugees, and we call
on all States to allow the free transit of humanitarian aid to
those in need.
It is vital that the cease-fire now be reinstated and be
formally extended.

The maximum restraint is needed on all sides;

without it there is a clear risk of further escalation of the

S/PV.3313
11
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
fighting.

Violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity

of the Azerbaijani Republic, and of all other States in the region,
must cease, as this and previous resolutions have made clear.
We look to all parties to adopt a positive approach to the
Minsk Group negotiations, and in particular to accept the Minsk
Group’s new package proposal by the deadline of 22 November.
The British Government fully endorses the declaration of the
Minsk Group’s nine "neutral members" accompanying the revised
package.

It is clear that acceptance of this timetable is a

necessary first step to implement the earlier Security Council
resolutions.
As the declaration itself specifies, all issues not dealt with
in the timetable, including the status of Nagorny Karabakh, will be
decided with the agreement of the parties concerned through the
negotiations at the Minsk Conference.
All parties in the region have now said that they want to
settle the conflict by peaceful means.

Now is the time for them to

take concrete steps to show that this is the case.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

Since the adoption of

Security Council resolution 822 (1993) last April the situation
that has arisen out of the dispute concerning Nagorny Karabakh has
continued to deteriorate.

Regrettably, the area affected by the

fighting has steadily expanded, and tensions remain high between
Armenia and Azerbaijan, despite occasional positive signs on the
political side, signs that have so far proved insufficient to break
the vicious circle of mutual recriminations following, or followed
by military offensives and counter-offensives.
Brazil remains deeply concerned, especially over the
precarious humanitarian situation prevailing in the region.

As in

relation to conflicts in other areas of the world, it is imperative
that full attention be paid to tackling the urgent needs of the

S/PV.3313
12
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
civilian population affected by the fighting, independently of
political or military considerations.
All the parties and others concerned remain bound to comply
with the rules of international humanitarian law and to ensure
unimpeded access for humanitarian relief efforts throughout the
region.
In order to avoid the disquieting risks that would be involved
in any further escalation of the conflict, a cease-fire must be
effectively implemented and efforts must be focused on the
attainment of a peaceful and negotiated settlement of all the
questions arising from the dispute.

Moreover, all parties and

others concerned, including neighbouring States, must refrain from
taking any action that could result in a heightening of the
tensions in the region.
The Security Council has from the outset agreed to recognize
the prominent role to be played by the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) in the pursuance of a negotiated
solution to the conflict concerning Nagorny Karabakh.

The

resolution that we have just adopted confirms that the efforts made
at the regional level in the context of the CSCE Minsk process
continue to have our full support.

It is in that framework that

the best chance of achieving a lasting solution of the problems
that have arisen in connection with the dispute is to be found.
The Minsk Group’s adjusted timetable of urgent steps to
implement Security Council resolutions has already been welcomed
and commended by the Council, which has called on the parties to
accept it.

Acceptance of the adjusted timetable resulting from the

recent Vienna meeting of the Minsk Group would significantly
contribute to easing the tensions, enhancing the negotiating
process and advancing the prospects of achieving a lasting peace.

S/PV.3313
13
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
Today’s resolution complements resolutions 822 (1993),
853 (1933) and 874 (1993).

The parties and others concerned must

abide fully by those resolutions, including the provisions
concerning the cessation of armed hostilities and other hostile
acts, and the withdrawal of occupying forces from recently occupied
areas of the Azerbaijani Republic.
While the Security Council continues to lend its backing to
the diplomatic efforts of the CSCE, it is important that the
Council should remain seized of the matter and monitor the
situation closely as it develops.
Mr. YAÑEZ-BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation considers that resolution 884 (1993), which the
Council has just adopted, is extremely timely, for the situation on
the ground in the Azerbaijani Republic has deteriorated markedly
since 14 October, when the Council last took action on this item
with the adoption of resolution 874 (1993).

Our well-founded hopes

concerning the permanence of the cease-fire declared on 24 October
have been dashed by the recent hostilities, which have resulted in
further occupation of territory and which have thus exacerbated the
conflict.
The violations of the cease-fire are clearly to be condemned,
and resolution 884 (1993) does this, and demands the withdrawal of
the forces of the Armenians of the Nargorny Karabakh region from
the recently occupied areas.

My delegation reaffirms the

importance that must be attached to the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Azerbaijani Republic, without ignoring the
rights of the Armenians of Nargorny Karabakh, in conformity with
the principles of the United Nations Charter and of the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).

S/PV.3313
14
(Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo, Spain)
Of special concern is the humanitarian situation, especially
the increase in the number of refugees and displaced persons, which
is causing the problem to spread beyond the borders of the
Azerbaijani Republic.

In addition to achieving an immediate

cease-fire, the international community must give priority to the
problems of securing asylum and protection for the tens of
thousands of refugees fleeing the conflict areas and of ensuring
the free movement and delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The conflict threatens to spread beyond the territory of the
Azerbaijani Republic, endangering peace and security in the region.
All of this justifies, indeed necessitates, redoubled efforts by
the United Nations and the CSCE to halt and end the conflict.
The parties must demonstrate their readiness to renounce the
use of force and to prove, by their deeds, that they are committed
to the peace process, participating in it in a constructive manner
and putting in place a permanent, effective cease-fire that would
allow the Minsk process to proceed and to yield results in the near
future.
The CSCE Minsk Group has continued to work to secure peace.
On 4 November 1993, its nine member States issued their Vienna
declaration addressed to the parties and to all those capable of
contributing in any way to the settlement of the conflict.

Spain

supports that declaration and hopes that it will prompt the parties
to accept and put into effect the "Adjusted timetable of urgent
steps to implement Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) and
853 (1993)" - and now 874 (1993) - as amended by the Minsk Group
meeting recently at Vienna.
On 9 November 1993, the Western European Union, of which Spain
is a member, issued a statement in which it lent its full support
to the efforts of the Minsk Group to find a lasting political
solution to this conflict.

The Minsk Group has given the parties

S/PV.3313
15
(Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo, Spain)
until 22 November to respond to the latest package of proposals.
We hope the parties will respond positively and without
reservations, thus setting in motion a true peace process.

Failing

this, the Security Council would have to re-examine the item with a
view to adopting such measures as might be deemed most appropriate
in the light of the information and recommendations we expect to
receive from the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Chairman-in-Office of the CSCE and the Chairman of the CSCE Minsk
Conference.
The PRESIDENT:
meeting.

There are no further speakers for this

The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.
