NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 91
205emeseance
29 septembre 1947

205th meeting
29 September 1947

Lake Success
( 26 p.)

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Two hundred and fifth meeting

Deux-cent-cinquieme scance

Page
366. Provisional agenda
2427
367. Adoption of the agenda
, .. ,
2428
368. Continuation of reconsideration of the
applications for admission to the United
Nations of Bulgaria, Hungary, Italy
and Roumania and of consideration of
the application of Finland
2428

Pages
366. Ordre du jour provisoire
2427
367. Adoption de l'orclre du jour
2428
368. Suite du nOl1ve! examen des demandes
d'admission a l'Organisation des Nations Unies emanant de la Bulgarie, de
la Hongrie, de !'Italie et de la Roumanie
et de l'exaluen de la demande cl'admission de la Finlancle
2428

Documents

Documents

The following document, relevant to the two hundred ancl fifth meeting, appears as follows:

Le document se rapportant a la deux-cent-cin-

quieme seance figure dans la publication suivante:

Official Records of the Security Cmmcil, Second Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Year, Special S~IPPlement No. 3:
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special N° 3:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members

Rapport du c.omite des demancles d'admissioll de
nouveaux Membres

2427

-.

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 91

DEUXIEME ANNEE

' No 91

TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTH MEETING

DEUX-CENT-CINQUIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York>
on Monday, 29 September 1947) at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. A. GROMYKO
(Union of Soviet Soet"alist Republics).

Tenue a Lake-Success, New~York>
le ltmdi 29 septembre 1947 a15 heures.
President: M. A. GROMYKO
'
(Union des Repttbliques sociali~tes sovietiques).

Present: The representatives of the following
Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Co- Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
lombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
States of America.
,d'Amerique.

366. Provisional agenda (document
S/ Agenda/205/Rev.1)

366. Ordre dll jour provisoire
(document S/Agenda/205/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Cable dated 19 September, 1947 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Finland addressed to the Secretary-General '(document
5/559)1.

~.

3. Reconsideration of the applications for admission to the United Nations of Bulgaria, Hungary, Italy and Roumania:

3. Nouve1 examen des demandes d'admission
l'Organisation des Nations Unies emanant de
la Bulgarie, de la Hongrie, de l'Italie et de la
Roumanie:
a) Lettre, en date du 20 septembre 1947, adressee au President c1u Conseil de securite par
le representant suppleant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique (document S/562)1; .

(a) Letter dated 20 September 1947 from
the alternate representative of the United
States of America, addressed to the President of the Security Council (docnment
S/562)1.
(b') Letter dated 22 September 1947 from
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Poland, addressed to the President of the
Security! Council (document S/563) 1.

4. Indonesian question: ,
(a) Interim report from the consular representatives in Batavia, dated 22 September 1947 (document 5/573)2.

----

1 See Official Records of the SeclWitji Council, Second
Year, No. 90, 204th meeting.

2 The text of this document is as follows:
3 October 1947
Document S/573
[Original te;rt: English]
NOTE dated 24 September 1947 from the representative
of the United States at the seat of the United Nations
addre!sed to the Secretary-General and enclosed
interim report ,from the Consular Commission at
Batavia

Telegramme, en date dll 19 septembre 1947,
adresse au Secretaire general par le Ministre
des Affaires etrangeres de Finlande (document S/559)1.

a

b.) Lettre en date du 22 septembre 1947, adressee au Presidentdu Conseil de securite par
le Ministre des Affaires etrangeres de
Pologne (document S/563)1.
4. Question indonesienne.
a) Rapport interimaire des representants COllsulaires a Batavia, en datedu 22 septembre
1947 (document 5/573)2.

---1 Voir les ProcJs-varbau~ officiels dl~ CO/wail de' sec1~rite,

Deuxieme Annee, N° 9Q; 204eme seance.

2 Void le texte de ce document S/573':
Document S/573
3 octobre 1947
[Te;rtc original en al1glais]
NOTE en date du 24 septembre 1947 adressee al1
Secretaire general par le representant des Etats-Unis
au siege d-es Nations Unies accompagnant le raQPort
provisoire de la Commission consulaire
Batavia

a

2428

367. Adoption of the agenda
The age1tda was adopted.

367. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
Vordre du jour est adopte.

368. Continuation of reconsideration of 368. Suite du nouvel examen des dethe applications for admi~sion to
the United Nations of Bulgaria,
Hungary, Italy and Roumania and
of consideration of the application
of Finland.

mandes d'admission it I'Organisadon des Nations Dnies emanant de
la Bulgarie, de la Hongrie, de
I'Italie et de la Roumanie et de
l'examen de la demande d'admission de la FinIande.

Le PRESIDENT (t~aduit de l' anglais ): Au cours
The PRESIDENT: At the last meeting of this
de
la dernif~re seance du Conseil, notts avons COlllCouncil we began to discuss the applications of .
the Governments of Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, mence l'examen des demandes d'admission au seil1
Italy, and Roumania, for admission to ~e Unite? des Nations Unies presentees par les GouverneNations. As the members of the Secunty CounCil ments de la Bulgarie, de la Finlande, de la HonThe United States representative at the ,seat of the
United Nations presents his compliments to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations a,nd has the honour .to
transmit herewith, for the PreSident of the Se~ur.lty
Council, an interim report .from the CO!lsular COIJln:1SSI?n
at Batavia, established by the SecurIty Counct! ID Its
resolution of 25 August 194-7.
The United States representative has the honour to
further advise that the Consular Commission, for the sake
of convenience and speed, has used the facilities o.f !he
United States Department of State for the transmISSIon
of this report.
.
.
It will be noted that the Consular CommisSion requests
that this preliminary report be treated as a confidential
docut;1ent.
: .
.
Intertm report from the Consular ComnnssIon at BatavHl:
"1. Although investigations cannot be regarded as com-·
plete until reports can be r-eceived from all military
observers the Commission has unanimously reached certain defi~ite and inevitable conclusions after visits by
members to eleven different Netherlands and Indonesiancontrolleq areas in Java and Sumatra since the Commission began its work on 1 September. In view of the
urgency of the problem we think these should be transmitted to you without delay and very concisely for your
advance information.
"2. Advances by Netherlands troops betw·een 20 July
and 4 August were in the nature of spearheads and some
fighting occurred. While the main bodies of Republican
troops in most areas retreated, considerable numbers of
Republican troops remained between the spearheads in
some areas and guerrillas remained in all areas. The
Indonesian scorched"earth policy and other disturbances,
including looting and heavy loss of life, especially of
Chinese, were intensified between and behind the spearheads during and after the Netherlands advance. On 29
August the Netherlands East Indies Government declared its intention to 'complete restoration of law and
order and the complete disarmament and winding- up of all
armed organizations' opposing the Netherland$ East Indies
authority within a. demarcation line· covering Netherlands
advanced positions. The Indonesians did not accept the
Netherlands demarcation line. The Netherlands line entailed patrol and other activities which were regarded by
the Indonesians as hostile movement. Patrol clashes and
sniping result without diminution,. notwithstanding the
cease-fire order.

"3. We find that the cease-tire order is not fullY effective, and that casualties and damage continue and that this
state of affairs is due in the main to the situation described above. So long as this situation continues, it will
be impossible to secure anything like complete observance
of the cease-fi re order.
. "4. We have so far been unable to dtscover anypractieal
interim measures which would secure a more effective
observance of the cease-fire order or reduce casualties.

. ':5. As the work of the Commission is not yet completed,
It IS requested that these. advance conclusions may be regarded as confidential.

':6. The Consular Commission hopes to complete a
WrItten report on or about 30 September."
September 22, 1947

Le representant des Etats-Unis au siege de.s Nations
Unies presente ses compliments au Secretaire general des
Nations Unies et le prie de bien vouloir transmettre au
President du Conseil de securite le rapport provisoire cijoint de la Commission consulaire a Batavia instituee
par le Conseil dans sa resolution du 2S aotit 1947.
Le representant des Etats-Unis a l'honneur d'informer
le Secretaire general que la Commission consulaire,
soucieuse d'eviter tout delai, a eu recours aux 'bons offices du Departement d'Etat des Etats-Unis pour la transmission de ce rapport.
I1 est a signaler que la Commission consulaire demande
que ce rappqrt pretiminaire soit considere confidentiel.
Rapport provisoire de la Commission consulaire a Batavia:
"1. Bien que l'enquHe ne puisse etre consideree comme
terminee avant que tous les observateurs militaires n'aient
fait parvenir leurs rapports, la Commission, qui a commence ses travaux le 1er septembre, a constate, apres les
visites effectuees par ses membres dans onze differents
s·ecteurs de Java et de Sumatra sous contr6le neerlandais
ou indonesien, que certaines eone!usions predses s'imposent. Etant donne le caradere d'urgence de ce probleme,
nous croyons 'bon de vous communiquer l'essentiel de ces
conclusions pour information.
"2. Entre le 20 juillet et le 4 aotit, les troupes neerlandaises ont realise des avances en pointe et il y a ell
quelques combats. Bien que, dans la plupart des secteurs,
le gros des forces republicaines se soit replie, il reste
dans certains secteurs de tres importants elements republicains entre les pointes neerlandaises, et il y a partout
des francs-tireurs. Pendant l'avance neerlandaise, et
depuis, les Indonesiens ont intensifie leurs destructions
systematiques entre les pointes neerlandaises· et a. l'arriere
de celIes-ci; cette meme periode a vu une recrudescence
d'autres troubles, notamment du pillage, et un accroissement des pertes en vies humaines surtout parmi les
Chinois. Le 29 aoftt, le Gouvernem~nt des Indes neerlandaises a fait connaitre son intention "d'achever la
restauration du droit et de l'ordre public ainsi que le
desarmement et la liquidation de tous les elements armes"
en lutte contre les autorites neerlandaises a l'arriere d'une
ligne de demarcation qui suivrait les v:,sitions avancees
des ~roupes ~eerlaI1daises; les Indonesiens n'ont pas accepte cette hg-ne de demarcation' elle etait le theatre
d'oper~t!ons de patrl?uille et d'a~tres. activites que les
IndonesIens consideraient comme des mouvements hostiles.
Les .co~bats de pat!ouil!es et les coups de feu isoles ont
contmue avec la meme tntenste malgre l'ordre de eesser
le feu.
"3. Nous constatons que l'ordre de cesser le feu n'est
j)~s stricte!llent observe, qu'il y a encore des pertes en
vIes humames et des destructions, et que cet etat de
choses est dfI avant tout a la situation exposee plus haul.
T;;nt que cette si~uation existera, it sera impossible de
faIre respecter stnctement rordre de faire cesser le feu
"4.. ~ous n':;vons encore pu trouver aucune mesur~
provISOlre pratIque permettant de mieux assurer le respect
de l'ordre de cesser le feu ou de diminuer le chiffre des
pertes. .
.
"5. La Commission n'ayant pas encore termine ses
tra valt~, nous vous. prions de consiclerer les presentes
conc!tlslOns commul11quees par avance comme confidentie1les.
'
"6. La Mission consulaire espere terniinerla redaction
de son rapport vers le 30 septembre."
Le 22 septembre 1947.·
.

2429
will recall, we decided to discuss each of these
applications separately. We started to discuss first
the application received from the Government of
Hungary. We did not complete our discussion'
we shall continue it now.
'

grie, de l'Italie et de la Roumanie. Comme les
membres du Conseil s'en souviennent nous avons
decide d'examiner separement chacU1;e de ces demandes et nous avons commence par celle du Gouvernement hongrois. Nous n'avons pu terminer
la discussion de cette question et nous allons donc
la reprendre maintenant.

ApPLICATION OF HUNGARY

DEMANDE D' ADMISSION DE LA HONGRIE

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): On 22 September, the Foreign Minister of, the Republic of
Poland addressed a letter to the President of the
Security Council asking for an early review of
~he ~ve applications of the former enemy States,
111 VIew of the fact that the Peace Treaties have
been ratified and have entered into force l • At our
previous meetings, our only objection to the early
admission of these five States to the United Nations was the fact that peace treaties had not yet
been ratified and, therefore, these five States could
not be considered as sovereign States within the
meaning of the Charter.

M. KATz-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'atlglais): Le 22 septembre, le Ministre des AHaires
etrangeres de la Republique de Pologne a adresse
une lettre au President du Conseil de sckurite pour
lui demander que le Conseil procede, a une date
rapprochee,
un nouvel examen des cinq demandes d'admission des Etats ex-ennemis, etant
donne que les Traites de. paix avec ces Etats
avaient ete ratifies et etaient entres en vigueur 1•
Piecedemment, notre seule objection a 1'admission
prochaine de ces Etats comme Membres des
Nations Unies etait que les traites de paix n'avaient
pas encore ete ratifies et que les pays en question
ne pouvaient de ce fait etre consideres comme
Etats souverains, au sens de la Charte.
La delegation polonaise estime que les cinq Etats
mentionnes clans la lettre du Ministre des Affaires
etrangeres de Pologne apparti~nent a une meme.
categorie et doivent etre traites sur un pied d'egalite. Nous pensions qu'une resolution dansce sens,
portant sur les cinq demandes d'admission, rencontrerait l'assentiment unanime et que l'admission des cinq Etats dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies ne souleverait pas d'objection2 •
Nous avons cependant le regret de constater
que certains membres du Conseil persistent a
etablir une distinction entre ces Etats et exigent
que chaque demande d'adrnission soit examinee
separement. Si je comprends bien, le President
a decide a la derniere seance que l'on examinerait
le cas de chaque Etat separement et que 1'on mettrait aux voix ·les demandes d'admission lorsque
les debats seraient termines. Je voudrais dire,
au nom de la delegation polonaise, qu'a la fin de
la discussion, je devrai revenir sur la proposition
presentee au Conseil le 25 septembre 1947 au
sujet de l'admission en bloc des cinq Etats requerants 2 •
Au cours de la dernier.f seance, nous avons
examine le tas de la Hongrie. rai constate que le
representant des Etats-Unis a alors souleve des
objections contre l'admission de ce pays. rai le
regret de declarer que ces objections ne trouvent
aucun fondement dans laCharte. Si le Conseil
tient compte de ces objections dans sa decision, le
refus d'admettre la Hongrie au sein des Nations
Unies sera contraire a l'esprit et a la lettre de la
Charte.
L'Article 4 du Chapitre 11 de la Charte de£init
clairement les regles d'admission. Cet Article
stipule: "Peuvent devenir ~e~bres d~s Nations
Unies tous autres Etats pacIhques ql11 acceptent
les obligations de la presente Charte et, au jugelUent de 1'Organisation, sont capables de les remplir et disposes a le fah'e."
Dans sa lettre au President du Conseil de seeurite, le Premier Ministre de Hongrie indique
clairementque son Gouvernement est pret a accepter les obligations de la Charte et dispose a

The Polish delegation considers that all the
five States mentioned in the letter of the Polish
Foreign Minister belong in the same class and
are to be granted equal treatment. We oelieved
that a resolution in this sense, covering all the
five applications, would meet with common consent, and that no objections would be;, found
against the admission of those five States2 •
vVe notice, however, with regret that certain
members of this Council continue to make a
distinction in the treatment of these States and
demand a discussion on the subject of each
application separately. As I understand the ruling made by the President at the last meeting,
it was that each State shall be discussed separately, and that then a 'vote shall be taken after
the debate on all five applicants is finished. I
should like to state, on behaH of the Polish delegation, that I shall have to return, after. the
discussion is finished, to the proposal submItted
to this Council on 25 September 1947 in regard
2
to the blanket admission of the five applicants •
At the last meeting we discussed the problem
of Hungary. I noticed that the United. States
representative raised objections at that tune .to
the admission of that country. I am sorry th~t
I must state that his objections have no bas~s
in the Charter. If the Council acts on the baSIS
of these objections, the deci.sion prol;ibi~ing t~e
admission of Hungary to thIS OrgamzatIOn WIll
be contrary to the spirit and the letter of the
Charter.
Chapter 11, Article 4 of the C~arter clearly
lays down the rule for membershIp. It states:
"Membership in the United Nations is open to
all other peace-loving States which accept the
obligations contained in the present Charter and,
in tl)e judgment of the Organiz~tio~, a~~ able
and willing to carry out these oblIgatIOns.
In the letter from the Prime Minister of Hungary it is stated in clear words that the Gover~­
ment of Hungary is prepared to accept the 'oblIgationscontained in the Charter and is willing to
1 See Official Records of

the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 90, 204th meeting.
, "
2 For the text of the resoluton, see Off1cwl Reco1·d s, of
the Security Council, Second Year, No. 90, 204th meetmg.

a

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite Deuxieme Annee, N° 90, 204eme seance.
2 P~ur le texte de la resolution, voir les Proces-verbull:r
officiels du Conseil de seeurite, Deuxierne Annee, N° 90,
204eme seance.

2430
carry o11t all these obligations. As proof of
Hungary's ineligibility' for admission to the
United Nations, the representative of the United
States recalled the recent elections which have
been quite widely publicized, especially in the
United States Press. In his statement at the
last meeting he said: "The first national elections
in Hungary at the end of the war, in the autumn
of 1945, were free and unfettered." ,
This a~ows me to make a slight comparison
between the elections of 1945 and those of 1947.
First of all, we had st,atements that many voters
were deprived of their right to vote. To our surprise, however, we find that the t).umber of people
who had the right to vote in the elections of
1947 was larger by a quarter of a million than
the number of those voting in 1945. Only those
who were accused of collaboration with the Germans-and there were 250,000 of them-together
with 150 Germans who had been transferred from
Germany to Hungary during the occupation and
were awaiting repatriation to Germany, were deprived of the right to vote.
The United .States representative referred to
certain alleged abuses of electoral rights and irregularities which, he said, put into power a party
representing a minority. I really do not know on
what kind of in formation the representative of
the United States based his statement i I do not
know what kind of irregularities these are supposed to have been.
Let me compare the positions in regard to votes.
Up to the holding of the present elections, the
party in power was the so-called Small Holders
Party, which had 57 per cent of the votes. The
composition of the present Parliament is as follows: Small Holders, 15 per cent; the Social
Democratic Party, 25 per cent; the Communist
Party, 24 per cent; the National Peasant Party,
10 per cent. From these figures, it can be seen
that the Communists have increased by 6 per
cent, the Socialists by 7 per cent, the National
Peasant Party by 4 per cent. At the same time,
the opposition possesses 134 seats in the present
Parliament, as compared. with three seats in the
Parliament of 1945. It is worth noting that the
Catholic ,Party received more votes than any except the two largest p~rties in the recent elections.
I therefore cannot see how any of the parties has
engaged in electoral abuses in order to gain a
majority, when the fact is that there is no majority and the relative voting strength is such
that most of the parties are almost equal.
The Government' is a coalition of democratic
parties, the same coalition which existed before.
I do: 110t think that a change in the person of the
Prime Minister should determ'ine the attitude of
the Security Council in regard to a country's
membership in the United Nations. It is the
sovereign right of a country· to decide who shall
be its Prime Minister, without asking for the
advice of any other country.
Th~ representative of the United States also
mentioned certain persistent violations of human
rights. In that connexion, it is surprising to note
that in Budapest, the capital of Hungary, seventeen daily- newspapers are being published, the
majority of which belong, to the opposition and
contain violent attacks on the present Govern.
ment.

s'acquitter de toutes ces obligations. Pour prouver
que la Hongrie ne reunit pas les conditions requises pom pouvoir devenir Membre des Natiolls .
Unies, le representant ,des Etats-Unis a rappele
les recentes elections hongroises, dont on a tant
parle, surtout dans la presse des Etats-Unis. Dans
sa declaration il a dit a la derniere seance: "Les
premieres elections nationales qui ont eu lieu en
Hongrie apl"eS la fin des hostilites, en automne
194,5, ont ete libres de toutes entraves,"
Cette remarque me pennet de proceder a une
petite comparaison entre leselections de 1945 et
celles de 1947. En premier lieu,on a declare que
de' nombreux electet1rs avaient ete prives du droit
de vote. Or, a notre grande surprise, nous constaextons que le nombre des personnes admises
primer leur suffrage aux elections de 1947 etait
superieur d'un quart de million au nombre des
electeurs en 1945. Seu1s etaient prives du droit de
vote ceux qui etaient accuses d'avoir collabore avec
les Allemands, et il y en avait 250.000, plus 150
Allemands qui avaient ete transplantes d'AIlemagne en Hongrie pendant l'occupation et qui
attendaient leur rapatriement.
Le representant des Etats-Unis a mentionne de
pretendllS abus du droit de vote et des' irregularites
qui, selon llli, ont eu comme resultat d'amener au
pouvoir un parti qui constituait la minorite. Je ne
sais vraiment pas sur qllels renseignements le representant des Etats-Unis fonde sa declaration et
j'ignore de quelles sortes d'irregularites i1 se serait
agi.
Permettez-moi de comparer la situation des
divers partis au point de vue des suffrages qtt'ils
ont reclleillis: jusqu'aux dernieres elections, le
parti denomme "parti des petits proprietaires" qui
avait obtenu 57% des suffrages etait au pouvoir.
La composition du Parlement aetue! est la suivante: petits proprietaires: 15 %; parti social-democrate: 25%; parti communiste: 24%; parti
national paysan: 10%, De ces chiffres, il ressort
que, par rapport aux chiffres anterieu~s, les co mmunistes ont gagne 6% des voix, les socialistes 7%
et le part.i national'paysan 4%. D'autre part, les
partis de l'opposition detiennent 134 sieges dans
le Parlement actuel, alors qu'ils n'en avaient que
3 apres les elections de 1945. Il convient de noter
que le parti catholique a obtel1l}, aux dernieres
elections, plus de. voix que n'importe quel autre,
a l'exception des deux grands partis. J e ne vois
done pas comment on peut declarer qu'un parti
quelconque a commis des abus pour .obtenir la
majorite, alors qu'iln'y a en fait aucune majorite
et que le nombre des voix obtenues par la plupart
des partis est telle que leur force est apeu pres la
meme.
Le Gouve1'11ement actueI est une coalition des
partis democratiques, la meme que ceUe qui existait anterieurement. A mon avis, un changement
dans la personne du premier ministre ne devrait
pas determiner \'attitude c1u Conseil de securite it
l'egard ,de l'ac1mission d'un pays comme Membre
des Nations Unies. Un pays a parfaitement le
droit de choisirson premier ministre, sans demander l'avis de n'importe quel autre pays.
Le representant des Etats-Unis a egalement
declare qu'a plusieurs reprises les droits de I'homme avaient ete violes eh Hongrie. A ce propos,
il est etonnant de constater qu'a. Budapest, la
capitale de la Hongrie, dix-sept quotidiens sont
publies, dont la majorite appartiennent it l'opposition et contiennent de violentes attaques contre
le Gouvernement actue!.

a

2431
· Since the Security. Council has heard the opinIOn of a representatIve of the United States in
regard to this situation. I think it would be worthwhile to hear the opinion of another American
who visited Hungary and observed the elections.
~ tr~st the. Council ",:,ill excuse me for taking up
I~S tune WIth a read1l1g of the following quotatIon, but I believe it is very important. The remarks I am about to read were made by Roward
Smith, chief of the European news staff of the
C?lumbia Broadcasting System, reporting from
VIenna. The standing of Howard Smith, a wellknown commentator, ensures that this opinion
;;a: n~t written" with special sympathy for the
m~nonty party , as the representative of the
Ul11ted States called it, which is allegedly ruling
Hungary at present.
An article in the newspaper P111 on 18 August
1947 quotes Mr. Smith as follows:
"I have just come back from a week's tour
of Hungary, scene of the most dramatic move
on the European checker board, when Premier
Ferenc Nagy resigned in June and a new Government was formed . . . I had expected to see
a country shaken by a reign of terror following the N agy resignation. In fact, in connexion
with the Nagy incident, the total number of
people arrested by police was three.
"I sought for every indication that the affair
had converted Hungary into a Police State ...
Proportionally, the police force is no bigger
than the American police force ...
"I made an exhaustive search for indications
that civil liberties are being curtailed. I could
find no solid indications."
The a~ticle in PM then goes on as follows:
"Smith said wealthy town peasants, uninhibited, said they would vote, man· and boy, for
Nagy's Small Holders Party at the elections
two weeks hence. Village peasants who, under
the land reform, got their own land, said they
would vote Communist.
\

,

" 'I,n Budapest', Smith said, 'waiters talkec1no
less openly'. He was told tens of thousands of
persons were languishing in the Budapest jail.
An authority told him there were about 5,000,
'a rather modest number in a population so predominantly Nazi a short while ago'.
"Smith said political trials in Hungary were
still civil trials-not military-and wide open.
"He said that 60 Andrassy Street, the number of the Government's political prison, 'sends
chills coursing up and down the backs of cafe
waiters and some western diplomats'. But when
Ruth Lloyd of the United Press and he interviewed the Under-Secretary of ,State for the
Interior, and Miss Lloyd sprang the surprise
question, 'How about letting us go through 60
Andrassy now, immediately?', he thought for a
second, then shrugged his shoulders and said,
'Why not?'
"Newspaper reports said 4,000 political pri-

Comme le Conseil de securite a entenclu l'opinion
d'un representant des Etats-Unis' au sujet de la
situation en Hongrie, je pense qu'il serait utile de
connaitre l'opinion cl'un autre citoyen americain
qui a visite la Hongrie et a assiste aux elections.
Je suis convaincu que les membres du Conseil
m'exctlseront d'abuser de leur temps en leur clonnant lecture d'une citation que je considere comme
tres importante. L'auteur de ces quelques lignes
est M. Howard Smith, Chef du personnel euro":
peen du Col1t1tzbia Broadcasting System, qui envoie
ses reportages de Vienne. En raison de la personnalite de M. Howard Smith, commentateur bien
connl1, on pel1t etre assure que son opinion n'a pas
ete motivee par une sympathie particllliere a
l'egarddu "parti de la minorite", comme le representant des Etats-Unis l'a appele, qui exercerait actl1ellement le pouvoir en Hongrie. \
Un article du journal P.M., du 18 aOllt 1947,
cite les declarations suivantes de M. Smith:
"J e viens de rentrer d'une tournee d'une
semaine en Hongrie, pays qui a ete le theatre
des evenements les plus dramatiques sur l'echiquier europeen, lorsque le Premier Ministre
Ferenc Nagy a donne sa demission en juin et
qu'un nouveau Gouverne111ent a ete forme ...
Je m'attendais a tl'ouver un pays en proie a la
terrel1r apn~s la demission de Nagy. En realite,
la police a arrete en tout trois personnes a
propos de cet incident.
"J'ai cherche des indices 1110ntrant que cette
affaire avait transforme la Hongrie en U11 Etat
a regime polider ... Toutes proportions gardees, la police n'est pas plus importante en
Hongrie ql1'al1x Etats-Unis ...
"J'ai procede a une enquete aPPl'onfondie
pour trouver des indications d'une atteinte
portee a la liberte civile. Je n'en n'ai trouve
aucune de valable."
L'article du journal P.M. continue C0111111e suit:
"D'apres Smith, les riches paysans des villes
ont declare librement qu'aux elections qui auraient lieu deux semaines plus tard, ils voteraient
comlJle UI1 settl h0111me pour le parti de N agy
des petits proprietaires. Les paysans des villages
qui, en vertu de la reforme agraire, sont devenus
proprietaires de leurs terres, ont declare qu'ils
voteraient pour le parti communiste.
"A Budapest, a declare M. Smith, les garc;ons
de cafe ne parlaient pas moins ouvertement. On
lui a dit que des dizaines de milliers de personnes
deperissaient dans les prisons de Budapest.
D'apres une personnalite competente, il y en
avait environ cinq mille - chiffre plutot reduit.
pour une population ou predominaient il ya
peu de temps les elements nazis.
"Smith a dit que les proces politiques en
Rongrie se poursuivaient clevant des tribunaux
civils et 110n militaires et que les debats etaient
publics.
.
"n a declare que le 'N° 60 de la rue Andrassy,
qui est le numero de la prison ou sont enfermes
les prisonniers politiques, fasait fremir les
gan;ons de cafe et certains diplomates occidentaux. Mais lorsque Ruth Lloyd de la Uniteti
Press et ltli-meme ont interviewe le Sous-Secretaire d'Etat a l'Interieur et que MIle Lloyd a
demande a brUle-pourpoint a ce del"nier: "Que
diriez-votls si nous vous demandions la permission de visiter immediatement le 60 de la rue
Andrassy?", il reflechit un instant, haussa les
epal1les et repondit: "Potlrquoi pas ?".
"D'apres les journaux, il y aurait 4.000

2432
sonel's were locked in its dungeons. Said Smith:
prisonniers politiques dans ces cachots. Smith
'The few minutes (between permission to visit
a poursuivi : "ll semble que pendant les quelques
and the time of our arrival) would seem a very
minutes qui se sont ecoulees entre le moment ou
short time indeed to hide away the few thounous avons ete autorises a. visiter les prisons et
, sand prisoners rumored to be locked up there; ~. celui ou nous y sommes arrives, il n'y aurait
the nineteen we found . . . looked healthy and
guere eu le temps de cacher les quelques milliers
well and there were no marks of maltreatment.' , de prisonniers 'que l'0n pretendait y etre enfermes'; les dix-neuf prisonniers, que nous y avons
trouves . . . semblaient bien portants et ne
p01:taient aucune trace de mauvais traitement.
"Smith said he got the number of people
"Smith a declare qu'il avait obtenu le nombre
des personnes admises a participer aux elecwith the right to vote in the elections and there
were 100,000 more than in the last elections ...
tions: il y avait! 100.000 eletteurs de plus qu'aux
dernieres elections - chiffre proportionne1le'proportionately more than in an American
ment plus eleve que clans une election presidenpresidential election. More than that we can
tielle aux Etats-Unis. Nous ne pouvons guere en
hardly demand'.
derlJander davantage,
"Smith a ajoute: "Il n'y a ~ucun indice qu'un
"He added: 'There was no indication that
groupe quelconque soit influence d'une maniere
anyone group would be influenced in any way
ou d'une autre si ce n'est par une persuasion
save by liberal persuasion. Most important of
de caractere liberal. Le plus important est que
all, there is not the slightest indication, that I.
je n'ai rien vu en Hongrie qui permette de
could see, that there will be any Russian interference.' "
'
conc1ure a une ingerence russe."
N ous devrions prendre en consideration, clans
The opinion of that American, who was on the
scene and who observed the events, should enter l'examen de l~ demande-d'admission de la Hongrie,
i~lto our judgment when we consider the applica- l'opinion d'un citoyen americain qui etait sur les
lieux et qui a ete temoin oculaire des evenements.
tion made by Hungary.
, D,e l'avis de la delegation polonaise, le Conseil
In the opinion of the, Polish delegation, this
Council should recommend the admission of Hun- devrait recommander l'acl.mission, comme Membre
gary, as well as of all the other applicants now des. Nations Unies, de 'la Hongrie aussi bien que
under discussion, to membership in the United celle des. autres Etats requerants dont nous discutons en c'e moment.
Nations.
'
After twenty-four years of a military dictatorApres·vingt-quatre ans d'une dictature militaire
ship which deprived the people of the most ele- qui a,prive le peuple de l'exercice de ses droits les
mentary rights and against which no one pro- plus elementaires et contre laquelle personne' n'a
tested, and after six years of Nazi occupation and proteste, et apres six ans d'occupation nazie et de
forced collaboration, Hungary, on 28 December collabO'1;ation forcee, la Hongrie s'est engagee dans
1944, when it declared war on Germany and took la voie de sa rehabilitation le 28 decembre 1944
part in the Allied war effort, entered upon the en declara~t la guerre a I'Allemagne et en prenant
road of reh~bi1itation. By allowing Hungary to part a l'effort de guerre allie, En admettant la
~nter ~he United Nations, we should be ma1)jng Hongrie comme Memb're des Nations Unies, nous
1t poss1ble for that country to proceed much more permettrions a. ce pays d'avancer beaucoup plus
rapidly towards peace and that democratic state ,rapidement vel'S la 'paix et vel'S ce regime demofor which the present Government is striving.
cratiqqe que le Gouvernement actuel essaie
d'etablir. '
'i
0

f~

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
I feel I must correct what I think is a misunder- (traduit de I'anglais) : Je me sens oblige de mettre
st~nding o~ the part of the Polish delegation. I fin a ce qui, a mOll'avis, constitue un malentendu
th111k the representative of Poland said that the de la part de la delegation polonaise. Le represenonly objection to the admission of these four tant de la Pologne a declare, je crois, que la seule
countries, Italy, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Rouma- objection al'admission de ces quatre pays, asavoir :
nia, was the fact that, when their cases were first rItalie, la Hongrie, la B.ulgarie, et la Roumanie,
. considered, the peace treaties had not come into c'est q~e les traites de paix n'etaient pas encore
~orce. As far as my delegation is concerned, that entres en vigueur lorsque feur clemande a ete exa1S not so. I have never said, and no United King- minee pour la premiere fois. Ce n'est pas le cas
dom representative has ever said, that the only en ,et; qui concerne ma delegation. Je n'ai jamais
objection to the admission of these countries was· clit, pas plus qu'aucun 'autre representant du
the non-existence of a peace treaty. It is quite Royaume-Uni, que la seule obJe'ction a l'admission
true that they have all suffered from that one de ces pays etait la non-existe~lce d'un traite de
common disqualification, and when their cases paix. 11 est parfaitement vrai que certe objection-la
were put before us in the first instance we felt s'applique egalement clans le~ quatre cas et que
that they could not be considered on, that ac- lorsque nous avons ete saisis pour la premiere fois
count 1. Of course, it is quite clear that fhe re- des demandes d'admission de ces pays, nous avons
moval of one common disqualification cannot pos- juge, pour cette raison, impossible de les examisibly mean that they are otherwise completely, and 11erl , Cependimt l i1 est bien evident que la dispariequally qualified, Therefore I think it is impos~ ti,on ,de cetobstac1e
l'examen des quatre desible to consider them together, as has been pro- man-des ne saurait ,signifier que, par ailleurs, ces
posed, or to vote on their admission tog:ether. I pays remplissent, clans Ulllnesure egale, toutes les
1 See documents S/c'2/SR,22 and S/C.2/SR.23· Of1 Voir les documents S/C.2/SR,22 et S/C.2ISR,23; les '
ficial Records of the Security Council, Second Yea;, No. Proces-verbau.r offietels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme

a

I,

78; ibid" No. 81, 190th meeting; ibid" No. 90, 204th
meeting,
'

P

,

Annee, N° 78; N° 81, 190eme seal1ce; N° 90, 204eme
s~nc~
\

2433

can see no justification whatever for that. We
consider that they have varying degrees of merit
\ or demerit. We feel it is for the Council to examine each case separately on its merits and to v~te
accordingly. I thinlc it would be cOlltr~ry to all
proper procedure for the CounciI to do otherwise.

In regard to the case of Hungary, '~hich is before us now, in the view of my Government the
present regime in Hungary inspires no confidence
in its respect for fundamental social and political
rights or in its willingness or ability to carry
out the obligations of the Charter. In the first
place, respect for such rights is enjoined by article 2 of the Treaty which has just come into force.
In the second place, the representative of Poland
said that to vote against or to withhold support
for Hungary on the ground of failure to respect
such rights would not be in accordance with the
Charter. Article 4 of Chapter II states:

"Membership in the United Nations is open
to all other peace-loving States which accept
the obligations contained in the present Charter
and, in the judgment of the Organization, are
able and willing to carry out these obligations."
What are these obligations? It might be rather
difficult to enumerate all of them, but there are
one or two quite clearly stated in Chapter I, Article 1, paragraph 3, defining the purposes of the
United Nations. Paragraph 3 says that one of
those purposes is:
"To achieve international co-operation in
solving international problems of an· economic,
social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and
in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for.
all without distinction as to race, sex, language,
or religion. . . ."
My Government feels that the present regime
in Hungary has failed in that respect. It is true
that the recent elections in that country have
shown that the Hungarian people are still able to
resist, with a measure of success,. the suppression
of their liberties, but we do not in the present
circumstances feel able to support the admission
of Hungary. And we prefer to reserve judgment
upon the future action of the Hungarian Government.

conditions youlues. J'estime done impassible que
le Conseil examine les demandes en meme tenws,
comme on l'a propose, ou se prononce it leur sujet
par un vote unique. Je ne vois aucune raison
d'adopter pareille procedure. Nous estimons 'que
ces quatre pays n'ont pas les memes titres. A notre
avis, iI convient que le Conseil examine les demancIes separement d'apres les titres de chacun des
Etats en question et vote en consequence. A mon
sens, le Conseil irait it l'encolltre de toutes les
regles etablies's'iI choisissait une autre procedure.
Revenons au cas de la Hongrie, qui nous occupe en ce moment; de I'avis de mon Gouvernement,
le regime actuel de ce pays n'inspire aucune
confian~e; nous ne sommes pas convaincus qu'il
respecte les droits sociaux et po!itiques fondamentaux, ni qu'il soit dispose it remplir les obligations qui decoulent de la Charte ou soit en mesure
dele fCl:ire. Or, en premier lieu, I'article 2 du Traite
qui vient d'entrer en vigueur prescrit le respect
des ces droits. D'autre part, le representant de la
Pologne a declare qu'il ne serait pas conforme a
la Charte de voter contre l'admission de la Hongrie ou de ne pas appuyer sa demande, en alleguant qu'elIe ne respecte pas ces droits fondamelltaux. Voyons cependant le Chapitre II de la
Charte; l'Article 4 stipule en effet:
"Peuvent devellir Membres des Nations Unies
tous autres Etats pacifiques qui acceptent les
obligations de la presente Charte et, au jugement
de I'Organisation, sont capables de les remplir
et disposes a le faire."
QueIles~ont ces obligations? It serait peut-etre
difficile de les enumerer toutes, mais quelques-unes
sont clairement enoncees dans le Chapitre I, au
paragraphe 3 de l' Article 1, qui definit les buts
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies; l'un de ces
buts est, d'apres le texte, de
"Realiser la cooperation internationale en resolvant les problemes internationaux .d'ordre
economique, social, intellectnel ,ou hUl11anitaire,
en developpant et en encourageant le respect des
droits de l'homme et des libettes fondamentales
pour tous sans distinction de race, de sexe, de
lallgue ou de religion..."
Mon Gouvernement estime qu'a cet egard, le regime actuel de la Hongrie l1'offre pas de garantie.
Les recentes elections qui ont eu lieu dans cc pays,
ont prouve, il est vrai, que le peuple hongrois est
encore capable de s'opposer, avec un certain succes,
it la suppression de ses Iibertes. Mais dans les
circonstances actnelles, nous ne croyons pas pouvoir appuyer la demande d'admission presentee
par la Hongrie. Nons pre£erol1s reserver notre
jugement et le faire -dependre de ['attitude que
prendra le Gouvernement hongrois dans l'avenir.

M. GONZALEZ FERNANDEz (Colombie) (tra. Mr. GONzALEZ FERNANDEZ (Colombia): My
delegation will support the recommendation that duit de l'anglais): Ma delegation appulera la
Ifungary be admitted to membership in the United recommandation visant cl l'admission de la HonNations. In the \past we have reserved our posi- grie COl11me Membre de l'Orgonisation des Nations
. tion regarding certain countries becoming Mem- Unies. Precedem1l1ent, nous avons reserve notre
bers of the United Nations because of some doubt opinion concernant certains pays qui soIIicitaient
as to their signature, ratification and enforcement leur admission it l'Organisation des Nations U nies
parce nous n'etions pas tout a fait certains qu'ils
of the peace treaties.
signeraient, ratifieraient et mettraient en vigueur
les traites de paix.
Puisque cette forl11alite juridique est maintenant
Now that this legal formality has been fulfilled,
we concur in the views expressed here by several remplie, nous nons rangeons it l'avis exprime ici
delegations, particularly the French and Syria? par plusieurs delegations, notamment par ceIles
delegations, to the effect that the factor of unl- de la France et de la Syrie, concernant l'importance
Yersally is a very important o~le for the success de l'universalite CO,l11t11e facteur du succes ~e

2434
of the United Nations l • We believe that we should . l'Organisation des Nations Unies 1• Nous estimons
give' this oppor~unity to all nations which have qu'il conviendrait d'admettre tous les pays qui ne
not yet joined the United Nations but which, by sont paSi encore membres de 1'0rganisation des
application, undertake to respect the obligations Nations Unies mais qui, en presentant leur' deand commitments contained in the Charter. We mande, s'engagent a respecter les' obligations et les
believe that through the universality of the United engagements prevus par la Charte. Si taus les pays
Nations and the obligations assumed by those du monde sont Membres de l'Organisation et si
countries in entering the United Nations, the tous ces pays assument les obligations qu'entraine
United Nations can exert better control and main- pour eux leur admission comme Membres de l'Ortain better supervision' over these countries about ganisation, .les Nations Unies seront mieux a
meme d'exeJcer leur controle et de surveiller ceux
which some doubts have been raised.
des pays au sujet desquels certains doutes ont ete
eleves.
D'autre part, au cours des dernieres semaines,
On the other hand, in view of the ideas presented in the last few weeks as to a greater inter- on a exprime l'idee que l'Assemblee generale deest of the General Assembly in the acceptance and vrait jouer un plus grand role dans l'examen et
study of applications by prospective new Mem- l'acceptation des demandes d'admission; a notre
bers, we think that it should Ge the Assembly avis, c'est a I'Assemblee qu'il appartient de decider
which, in the last analysis, should decide the en dernier ressort si certains pays remplissent les
question of the eligibility of certain countries. conditions requises pour devenir Membres de
l'Organisation.
Par consequent, il ne serait que juste, selon nous,
Therefore we feel that it would be only fair
que
le Conseil recommande ces demandes d'admisfor the Council to recommend these applications
to the Assembly and to have the Assembly, in a sion a l'Assemblee et que, par une procedure plus
more democratic way, decide the question of the democratique, l'Assemblee decide si ces pays remplissent ou non toutes les conditions pour devenir
eligibility or non-eligibility of these 'countries.
Membres de l'Organsiation.
Mr. EL-K:FIOURI (Syria): I shall confine my
comment to the application of Hungary. Among
the objections which I have heard so far I have
not found one sufficient to be taken as a reason
for refusing Hungary admission to membership
in the United Nations.
I
I think no one can deny that the Hungarians
have always been peace-loving people. During the
First World War and the Second World War,
they were led into the struggle, involuntarily, by
strong pressure from the outside. For nations in
such a situation, it would be a' good service to
admit them into membership of the United Nations, so as to help them -not to fall under pressure
of any kind. It would be a good service for them,
since we believe in their good will and good nature.
There is no difference between the Hungarians
and the Austrians as regards their love of peace
and th~ir world humanitarian attitude. According
to the principle which has, been stated several
times by my delegation 2, and to which we still
hold, we ask that Hungary be recommended for
membership.

M. EL-KI-Iou:gr (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Je limiterai mes observations a la demande d'admisssion presentee par la Hongrie. Parmi les objections soulevees jusqu'a present, je n'en ai
entendu aucune qui soit suffisante pour justifier un
refus.
Personne, je crois, ne peut contester que le peupIe hongrois a toujours ete epris de paix. Pendant
la premiere et la deuxieme guerre mondiale, on l'a
contraint par une forte pression exterieure a entrer dans la lutte contre son gre. Ce serait rendre
un bon service a des pays dans cette situation que
de les admettre comme Membres de 1'0rganisation
afin de les aider a ne pas succomber a Hne pression
quelcollque. Ce serait leur rendre un bOll service du
,moment que nous croyons en leur bonl).e volonte
et en leur bon nature!.
Tout comme'les Autrichiens, les Hongrois sont
epris de paix et ont toujours fait preuve d'humanite envers les autres peuples. Conformement
a~x princi~es que ma delegation a enonces a pluSleurs repnses 2 et auxquels nous restons attaches,
nous demandons que le Conseil recommande l'admission <:le la Hongrie comme Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
'

The Pro;:sIDENT: As nobody wishes to speak,
we have to decide on the Polish proposal.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puisque
personne ne demande la parole, nous devons nous
prononcer sur la proposition polonaise.

Mr. KATZ-SUC:FIY (Poland): I really do not
understand what the President means by "decide
on the Polish proposal." r do not know whether
he means our resolution, because We understood
that the present discussion would be confined to
a discussion on the merits of each applicant, without any further action, and that after that discussion had ended a yote would be taken on the
Polish resolution.

M. KATZ-SUC:FIY (Pologne) (traduit de ['anglais): J e ne comprends vraiment pas ce que le .
President veut dire en declarant que "ll0US devons
nous prononcer sur la proposition polonaise".
Veut-il parler ele notre resolution? Nous avions
cru comprendre qu'au cours de la presente discussion, nous nous bornerions a examiner les titres
de chacun des pays qui ont sollicite leur admission
et qu'apres la discussion, la resolution polonaise
serait mise aux voix.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 78; ibid., No. 81, 190th meeting'; ibid., No. 85;
ibid. No. 90, 204th meeting.
"
2 Ibid., Special Supplement No. 3, page 28; ibid., No. 78;
ibicl., No. 81~ 190th meeting; ibid., INo. 90, 204th meeting.

1 Voir

les Proces-verbaux ojficiels du Conseil de -re-

write, Deuxieme Ann.ee, N° 78; N° 81, 190eme seance;
N° 85; N° 90, 204eme seance.
2 Ibid., Supplement special N° 3, page 28; N° 78;
N° 81, 190eme seanc5; et N° 90, 204eme seance.

2435

/'

The' PRESIDENT: When I said "on the Polish " Le PRE~IJ?ENT (tr~if, d.e l' anglais): En disant
proposal" I did not mean the Polish resolution'
la proposlt1?n polo.nalse , Je ne voulais pas parier
I t;1eant the pr~posal regarding the procedur~ de la, resolutlOn, malS de la proposition relative a la
WhICh we are gOll;.g to follow, exactly what was procedure que nous allons suivre, celle exactement
stated by the Pohsh representative.
que le representant de la Pologrie vient de rappeler.
~

Colon~l HODGSON (Australia): I wish to speak

on a pomt of order.

I invit~ .the President's attention to l'ule 32 of
the p:ovlslonal rnles of procedure which states
t.hat, If a representa~ive on the Security Council
tequests that a tnotlOn or a draft resolution be
voted, on in parts, it shall be done. There is no
questlOn of the President's ruling to the contrary
or of ~ vote. being taken by the members of the
Co~n~tl. It IS ~an~atory. This rule says that
thel e IS one qualtficat~on, namely, that the original
mover of the resolutlOn-in this case the Polish
rep-resentative-has no objection. The President
Wl}l recall .that at the last meeting I asked for
thIS re~olutlOn to be voted on portion by portion,
a.nd thIS was the reply of the Polish representative :-"I have 110 objection to the vote being taken
separately, that is, that each country be dealt
with separately."

Therefore it is mandatory for that vote to be
taken separately on each country.
The PRESIDENT: The representative of Poland
did pot ask that a vote be taken now on 'his resolution. He suggested that the Security Council
first discuss each application, and then take a
separate vote on each. If there is no objection to
this procedure, we shall follow it.
.J wish to remind the Council that we-followed
exactly the same procedure last year l •

, Le ~olonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
1anglms): Je demande la parole sur un pOilit
d'ordre.
J'attire l'attention du President sur l'article 32
du reglement interieur. Cet article stipule que, si
un membre du Conseil de securite demande que
l'?n v~te se~a:ement ~ur les. differentes parties
d.u~: proposItion ou do un proJet de resolution, la
dlvlslOn est de droit. 11 n'est nullement question
que le President puisse decider le contraire ou
que les mem~res ~~ Conse~l se.pr~noncent par un
vote. Cette ,dlSposltlOn est Imperative. L'artic1e 32
c,omporte en ou!re u~le condition: i1 faut que
1auteur de la resolution - en l'occurrence le
,
1 la Pologne - ne s'oppose pas
' a
representant
(e
la division. Le President se rappelle sans doute
qu'a la derniere seance j'ai demande que l'on vote
separement sur les differentes parties de la resolution et que le representant de la Pologne a repondu: ": ... Je ne vois pas d'objection a ce que
le Consell procede a des votes distincts c'est-a
dire qu'il examine separement le cas de' chaque
pays."
11 est donc obligatoire pour le President et pour
le Conseil que le vote ait lieu s~parement sur
chaque demande d'admission.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le representant de la Pologne n'a pas demande que l'on
vote maintenant sur sa resolution. Il a propose
que le Conseil de secl1l'ite examine d'abord les
demandes une a une et que celles-ci soient ensuite
mises aux voix separemcnt. Si cette procedure est
acceptable, nous l'adopterons.
J e tiens a rappeler au Conseil, que c'est exactement la procedure que nous avons suivie l'allnee
derniere l •

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'atlglais): Si le President decide que nous examinerons les candidatures ttne par une, "puis que nous
les mettrions aux voix separement, je n'eleverai
aUCUlle objection; j'avais pourtant cru comprendre au debut de la discussion qu'avant de mettre
chaque candidature aux voix, le Conseil voterait
sur la resolution polonaise, que l'on peut difficilement diviser.
Le representant de l' Australie a cite une partie
The representative of Attstralia read a part of de la declaration que le representant de la Pologne
the statement made by tl;te representative of a faite att cours de la derniere seance. Toutefois,
Poland at the last meeting:~owever, he did not il n'a pas lu cette declaration jusqu'a la fin. C'est
read the statement in its entirety. The passage moi donc qui le feraL Le passage en question se
ends: "But after that, I shall ask the President tennille ainsi: "Mais, cela fait, je demanderai au
to submit the whole resolution to a vote."
President de mettre aux voix la resolution dans
son ense.lPble."
'c""

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): If the President's ruling is that we first discuss the applicants, country by country, and then take separate
votes, I am not going to challenge it, although
I understood in the beginning that, before a vote
on each country was taken, the Polish resolution
-which is very difficult to separate and break up
into parts-would be voted on.

i "~,:'

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): I
wish to speak on the question of order. I shall
read from the verbatim record of the last meeting, and quote the President:
"The majority of the Security Council is
definitely in favour of discussing and taking
a decision on each of the applications separately."
.
1 See

Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, Second Series, No. 4.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): J e voudrais presenter une observation sur ce point d'ordre. Je cite les paroles du
President figurant au compte rendu stenographique de la derniere seance:
"La majorite du Conseil de securite est nettet111C discussion et
une dement favorable
cision separee pour chaquc cas."

a

a

1 Voir les Proces-verbal~!J: officiels du COllseil de sewrite, Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Scrie, N° 4.

2436
J e passe une partie du texte, sur laquelle je
reviendrai ulterieurement, ci c'est necessaire. Le
President a poursuivi comme suit:
"Quelle que soit la procedure que nous adoptions, puisque la majorite de~ membres du Conseil est d'avis de discuter separement de chaque
cas, le resultat sera probablement le meme.
. .. Nous allons donc proceder, pour chaque
demande, a une discussion et a un vote separes."
Je vous fais remarquer que, si c'est la ce que
le President decide de faire, nous devons proceder
au vote maintenant, car nous avons deja discute
de l'une des demandes d'admission.

I shall omit part of the text, to which I may
refer later, if necessary. The President continued
as follows:
"No matter what procedure we use, since
the majority is in favour of discussing and
taking separate decisions on each of the applications, the result will probably be the same ...
we shall discuss, and after discussion of each
application, we shall take a vote."
I make the point of order that if this is the
ruling of the President we !lhould vote now, because we have had the discussion on the application of one country.
The PRESIDENT: I still have not made any
ruling on the question. I propose the following
procedure, which I think is the most appropriate.
in the circumstances: to discuss each of the applications and, after the discussion on each of
. them, to take separate votes on each application.
I repeat, this is the procedure we used last year.
We did not find any inconv~nience in such a
procedure then. I hope the United States representativ~ will agree with me that this procedure
will not introduce any complications; rather, T.
think it will facilitate matters.
As to the Polish proposal, of course the representative of Poland may ask that a vote be taken
on his resolution after votes have been taken on
all the separate applications. If it is agreeable to
the Council, we' shall follow the procedure as
defined by me.

Le PRESID:!tNT (traduit de l'anglais): Je n'ai
enCore pris aucune decision a ce sujet. J e propose
la procedure suivante qui me semble convenir le
mieux aux circonstances: nous discuterions chacune des demandes et les mettrions ensuite aux
voix separement. Cette procedure, je le repete,
est celle que nOllS avions suivie l'annee derniere.
Nous n'avions trouve aucun inconvenient a la
suivre. J'espe~e que le representant des EtatsUnis conviendra avec moi que cette procedure
n'amenera pas de complications; j e crois, au (:ontraire, qu'e1le facilitera les choses.
En ce qui concerne la proposition polonaise, le
representant de la Pologne peut, bien entendu,
demanderqu'on mette aux voix sa resolution
apres que 1'on aura luis aux voix toutes les demandes separement. Si ·le Conseil n'y voit pas
d'inconvenient, nous suivrons la 'procedure que
je viens d'indiquer.
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : PerM. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trahaps the President is right in saying that it would duit de l'anglais ): Le President a peut-etre raison
make no difference in the expedition with which de dire qu'il importera peu, en fin de compte, au
we handle this matter whether or not we wait poidt de vue de la celerite avec laquelle nous reuntil after discussion of all the applications. But glerons cette affaire, que nous attendions ou que
if we were to follow strictly what was said, we nous n'attendions pas que toutes les demandes
should take a vote now. H'Owever, I shall not aient ete examinees. Toutefois, si nous devions
press it. In view of what the President has said, nous en tenir strietement a ce qui a ete dit, nous
I am inclined to follow his view.
devrions proceder a un vote des maintenant.Cependant, je n'insisterai pas a ce sujet; etant donne
ce que vient de dire le President, je suis dispose
a me rallier a son avis.
Mr EL-KHOURr (Syria): No misunderstandM. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
ing should be left in the case which might cause 11 ne ,faut laisser subsister aucun malentendu
some conflict at the. end. I understand the repre- qui risquerait, en fin de compte, de creer des diffisentative of ,Poland to l11~an that after discussing cu1tes. Si j'ai bien compris, le representant de la
and voting on each application separately, at which Pologne voudrait qu'apres avoir procede a une
time the date of each application would be de- discussion et a un vote separes pour chaque decided affirmatively or negatively, we should then mande et apres nous etre ainsi prononces affinna, take a general vote on all the applicants. In that tivement ou negativement a son suj et, nous procase, if the joint vote on all the applicants were cediol1s ensuite a U11t'i'lvote d'ensemble, sur toutes
to fail, all those applicants who previously had les demandes. Dans ce cas, si le vote d'ensemble
the affirmative vote would also fail of admission. etait negatif, tous les pays qui auraient beneficie
That is impossible. No such procedure could be anterieurement d'un vote affirmatif ne seraient
admissible.
pas non plus admis. Ce1a est impossible. On ne
saurait achnettre une telle procedure.
In case one of these applicant countries is voted
Dans le cas ou la demande d'admission de l'un
on and approved for admission, we cannot then des Etats a ete mise aux voix et approuvee, nous
link it with another which may be rejected and ne pouvons alors lier le sort de la demande de
thereby reject. the previously approved applicant. eel Etat a celui de la demande d'un autre pays
What is the meaning of that? We cannot vote on qui pourrait etre repoussee, et refuser finalement
two criminals, or five or six, at the same time, d'admettre l'Etat dont la demande avait ete prefor each of them is accused of a different crime. ced'emment approuvee. Que signifie tout cela?
We cannot decide that two, three, four, five or Nous ne pouvons juger deux criminels, ou einq,
six students have passed an examination in school, ou six, en meme temps, lorsque chaeun d'eux est
and then fail them together. Each of them has accuse d'un crime different. N 011S ne pouvons
to be examined and given a mark according to dire que deux, trois, quatre, cinq ou six etudiants
his own merits. In the same way, any joint voting ont passe avec succes un ~xamen a l'eeole, puis
on more than one applicant is irregular and cannot declarer qU'ils ont tous echoue. Chacun d'eux doit
I

It

2437

. be .admitted,unless the p~inciple of unjversality
w~lch I first proposed ts accepted, that is, to admIt all of them. As long as this principle is not accepted by the Se~urity Cot~p:il, we must adopt
t~e procedure whIch t!1e President has .9utlined :
dIscuss eCl;ch one, and vote on each. Tue fate of
e~ch applicant .would then De decided definitely,
Wlt~out r~turn1l1g to that applicant again in connexlOn wIth other applicants.
.

The PRESIDENT,: I wish to ask the members
of the. Council to be as brief as possible. I think
!he~e IS nothing complicated in the procedure. It
1~ simple. We decided at the previous meeting to
dISCUSS separately each of the applications and to
take a. separ~te vote on .each of them. Although
there IS no Ideal procedure, I think it will be a
practical solution if we decide to discu~s each of
t~e applicatio~s fir~t and then, after the co~ple­
hon of the diSCUSSIOn, to take separate votes on
each applicant. What is tHere that is not acceptable in stlch a procedure?
.
As ~o the suggestion made by the Polish representatIve concerning his resolution, it is up to him
whether he introduces it at the end of the consideration of all these applications and after sepl'.arate votes have been taken on them. If he proposes that a vote be taken on the rekolution, since
the resolution is at the disposal of the Council,
we should take action on it,
However, we have not yet reached that point.
If there is no really serious objection to the procedure I suggested, then I propose that we follow
~

..

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I should like, to
speak on a point of order.
I am afraid that I must" return to the voting
procedure on the resolution. I"' believe that the
representative "of Syria corr~ctly understood the
intentions of the Polish delegation. In fact we
agreed that the States would be voted, on separately, on the condition that after the votes were
taken a vote on the resolution as a whole should
be taken, and the vote on the resolution should
• be the vote which will decide. That procedure is
not strange to. this Council. Several times we
have voted on various resolutions by parts, and
parts that were accepted have been rej ected when
the vote on the whole resolution was taken.
I

If'"
!If'

I do not think the comparison with criminals
and examinations is appropriate here. These are
five States ,which are bound by a common fate,
whose primary sin has. been' collaboration with
the Axis. Therefore, we think their applicatiov.s
should be considered together. Merely to make
the procedure easier, we decided to agree to a
·separate discussion, with the first vote being
taken on each application separately ~fter the entire discussion has ended. But we cannot pennit
our agreement to such a voting procedure· to be

p~sser l'ex~t?en et recevoi!' une note d'apres ses
p,lopres mentes. De la mel11e mal11ere, tout vote
? e?sel:lble portant sur plus d'ul1 candidat est
I~Teguher et ne sau~ait. etre admis, a moins que
1,on . accepte" le pnnClpe de l'nnivessalite que
I avals tout d abOI'd propose et qn'on les admette
tous. ensemble. Tant que ce principe n'est pas
arums par le Conseil de securite, notts devons
adopter la procedure que le President vient
d'en~ncer: examiner la demande de chaque Etat
requerant et nous prononcer par un vote cl son
sUJ et. Le sort de chaque Etat r~querant serait
al?rs regIe definitivement sans que sa demande
SOlt de nouveau remise en question en relation
avec d'autres demandes.
'

. ~e PRiSIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrals demander aux membres du Conseil d'etre
crois qu'il n'y a rien
aussi bre~s que possible.
de c~mphque clans la prOledure. Cettc procedure
est sImple. Nous aviol1s decide, cl ·la derniere
seance, de discuter separement de chacltne des demandes et de les mettre aux voix separement.
Bien qu'il n'y ~it pas de procedure ideale, je
p;nse ~ue c~ serait une solution pratique que
d exat11ll1er d abOI'd chacune des demandes puis,
apres achevement de la discussion, de proceder
a un vote s6pare sur chaque demande. Qu'y a-t-il
clans cette procedure qui ne soit pas acceptable?
Quant a la proposition faite par le representant
de la Pologne a propos de sa resolution, i1 lui
appartient de juger s'il doit la soumcttre apri:s
que toutes les demandes. auront ete etudiees et
que l'on aura procede a des votes separes sur
ceUes-d. S'it propose que sa resolution soit mise
aux voix, etant donne que le Conseil en est saisi,
i1 nous faudra prendre une decision.
Mais nous n'en sommes pas encore la. Si la
procedure que je viens de proposer ne so'uleve
pas d'objection serieuse, je propose que nous la
suivions.

1;

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de'l'anglais): Je desire prendre la parole sur une motion d'ordre.
Je crains d'etre oblige de revenir sur la methode

it suivre pour mettre aux voix la resolution. Je

crois que le representant de la Syrie a bien interprete les intentions de la delegation polonaise.
En fait, nous avons ete d'accord pour que l'on
mette separement aux voix toutes les demandes
it la condit\pn que, une fois que 1'on aura procede
atuc votes, on mette aux voix la resolution dans
son ensemble et que le vote sur cette resolution
soit decisif. Cette procedure n'est pas nouvelle
pour le ConseiL A plusieurs reprises nous avons
deja vote par division sur diverses resolutions et
certaines des parties de ces resolutions qui avaient
ete acceptees ont parfois ete repoussees lorsque la
resolution, dans son ensemble, a ete mise aux viox.
Je ne crois pas que la comparaison avec les
cirminels et les examens soit de mise id. Nous
nons trouvons en presence de dnq Etats qui sont
lies par un sort C01l1111un, dont le peche originel
a ete leur collaboration avec les Puissances de
l' Axe. Par consequent, notts pensons que leurs
demandes doivent etre examinees ensemble. C'est
simplement pour faciliter la procedure que nous
avions accepte de proceder a llne discussion separee, en procedant a un vote sur chacune des demandes separement, apres l'achevement de toute

2438

used as a means of discrimination against one or
another country.

la discussion. Mais nous ne saurions admettre
que 1'0n se prevale de notre acquiescement a une
telle methode de vote comme d'un moyen de discrimination contre un pays ou un autre.

Mr. PARODI (France)
(translated from
French) : I consider that one point has been settled: at our last meeting we had a discussion and
took a decision. We decided that we should examine the various applications in turn and vote
on each of them separately. There is no reason
to go back on that decision or to bring that point
up again fot: discussion.
As to the question of what we shall do in connexion with the reso!ution presented by the Polish
delegation, after we have voted separately on the
various applications, I share entirely the views
on this matter expressed by the representative of
Syria. After we have taken separate decisions on
each of the applicant States, the over-all decision
will necessarily be inferred by adding up or comparing the various votes that have been taken
separately.
. I therefore request that we now proceed to vote
on each country and that we leave the rest of the
question to be examined later.

M. PAiwDI (France): J'estime qu'un point est
acquis: nous avons procede la demiere fois a une
discussion et nous avons pris une decision. Cette
decision, c'est d'examiner successivement les difrerentes candidatures et de voter separement sur
chacune d'elles. It n'y a pas lieu de revenir lades sus ni de remettre ce point en discussion.

•

Quant a la question de savoir ce que nous ferons
de la resolution presentee par la delegation polonaise apres nous etre prononces separement sur
les differentes candidatures, je partage pleinement,
a cet egard, le point de vue exprime par le representant de la Syde. Lorsque nous aurons pris des
decisions separees sur chacun ,des Etats candidats,
la decision globale se deduira necessairement de
l'addition ou de la comparaison des differents votes
distincts intervenus.
J e demande done que, pour l'instant, nous procedions a un vote par pays et que nous laissions le
reste de la question pour un examen ulterieur.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French) : I do not think there is any disagreement in the Security Council about the necessity of voting separately on each of the applications for admission. On the other hand, like several of my colleagues, I am entirely opposedfor reasons which I indicated at the last meeting-to our voting on the resolution as a whole. I
consider tllat to vote en bloc on several applications for admission would be contrary to the
Charter, for it would mean adding to the conditions which are stipulated there, and this Security
Coundl cannot do.
I would therefore suggest that, when the time
comes, the President should consult the Security
Council as t6 whether such a vote should be
taken.

M. VAN LANGJ;:NHOV);: (Belgique) : Je ne pense
pas qu'il y ait desaccord au sein du Conseil de
securite sur la hecessite de proceder a' un vote
separe sur chacunedes demandes d'admission. Par
contre, comme plusieursde mes collegues, je .suis
tout a fait oppose a ce que nous votions sur l'ensemble, et ce'pour les motifs que j'ai deja indiques
a la derniere seance. J e considere que voter en bloc
au sujet die plusieurs demandes d'admission serait
contraire a la Charte, car ce serait ajouter, aux
conditions qui y sont expressement mentionnees
et cela, le Conseil ne peut pas le fain~.

The PRESIDJ;:NT: Each member of the Security
Council has the right·to introduce a proposal such
as that introduced by the Polish representative.
Those members of the Council who do not agree
with such a proposal may vote against it, if such'
a proposal, I repeat, is introduced at the end of
the consideration of this entire question.

Le PRESIDENT (tra(l1tit de· l'anglais): Tout
membre du Conseil de securite a le droit de soumettre une proposition du genre de celle faite par
le representant de la Pologne. Les membres du
Conseil qui ne sont pas d'accord avec eIle peuvent
voter contre,·si cette proposition, je le repete, est
faite apres que la question aura ete examinee dans
son ensemble.
Lors de notre derhiere seance, nOllS avions decide d'examiner separement chacune des demandes
et de proceder a des votes separes. J'av.ais essaye ~
d'expliquer aussi clairement que possible que la
meilleure procedure, si personne ne desirait
prendre la parole au sujet de la demande de la
Hongrie, serait de passer a la discussion de la
candidature de l'Italie et, apres avoir acheve notre
discussion sur toutes les demandes, de mettre
separement aux voix chacune d'elles.

At the last meeting, we decided to discuss separately each of the applications and to take separate votes. I tried to explain as clearly as possible
that, if no one wishes to speak on the application
of Hungaqr, the best procedure would be to discuss the application of Italy and, after completing
our discussion on all applications, to take separate
votes on each of them.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I must retnrn to
the same question. First of all, with due respect
for his knowledge of the rules of procedure, I
cannot agree with the representative of France
that any resolution can be decided by itself or by
comparison with a previous vote. There is no
such rule in our rules of procedure. Any resolution which has been submitted and accepted by
the Council must be voted upon. Therefore the
Polish delegation insi1sts that the Council vote on

J e suggere donc que le President consulte en
temps opportun le Conseil de securite sur la
question de savoir si ce vote doh avoir lieu.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'a-nglais): Je dois revenir de nouveau sur la meme
question. D'abord, tout en rendant hommage a
la connaissance que le representant de la France a
du reglement interiel1r, je ne peux etre d'accord
avec lui lorsqu'il estime ql1'une resolution peut
faire l'objet d'une decision en eIle-meme ou par
comparaison avec le resultat d'un vote anterieur.
II n'existe aucune regIe de ce genre dans notre
reglement interieur et toute resolution qui a ete

2439
its resolution. The resolution is before the Council, and the Council is seized of it until it is disposed of.

soumise au Conseil et acceptee par lui doit etre
mise aux voix. En consequence, la <relegation polonaise insiste pour que le· Conseil vote sur la
resolution qu'elle a presentee. La resolution a ete
deposee sur la table du Conseil et celui-ci en reste
saisi jusqu'a ce qu'il ait prls une decision a son
sujet.
..
.
The Polish delegation agreed at the last meetSi la delegation polonaise a accepte, 191"S de la
ing to accept the procedure of separate votes on derniere seance, la procedure consistant' a voter
its resolution only because it wished to reach an par division sur sa resolution, c'est seulement
agreement; it thought that would help in the de- parce qu'e11e desirait arrive l' a un accord; elle
liberations. I now see that that agreement, and pensait que cela faciliterait nos deliberations. J e
our attempt at a compromise, have been misused constate maintenant que notre acquiescement et
here as an instrument for discrimination against noS efforts pour parvenir cl. un compromis ont ete
one or another country. I reserve the right of the utilises ici comme instruments de discrimination
Polish delegation to withdraw its agreement that' contre tel ou tel pays. J e reserve le droit a la delegation polonaise de revenir sur sa decision d'acseparate votes be taken on the resolution.
cepter que la resolution fasse l'objet d'un vote par
division.
'
(translated from
Mr. . P ARODI (France)
French) : I did not ask to speak on the question
of procedure, as I thought that the discussion of
that subject was closed. But since I have the
floor, I repeat that we took a decision at our last
meeting, that 'that decision has become definitive,
and that in these circumstanc~ we must proceed,
as the President has suggested, to a consideration
of the Italian application.

M. PARODI (France): Je n'avais pas demande
la parole sur la question c1e procedure; je pensais,
en effet, que la discussion en etait terminee. Mais,
puisque je l'ai, je repete que nons avons pris une
decision la derniere fois, qu'eHe est devenue \
definitive et que, clans ces conditions, nous devons
passeI', comme le President l'a propose, a l'exarp.en
de la candidature de l'Italie.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
I want to clear up what may prove to be a misunderstanding. I did not understand myself-and
that may be my fault-that at the last meeting
we decided to take these applications separately,
vote on them separately, and th!=n vote on the
resolution of the representative of Poland. I never
understood that.

Sir Alexander ,CADOGAN (Royaulne-Uni)
(traduit de l' anglais): J e voudrais eclaircir un
point qui risque de creet' un malentendu. Je n'avais
pas compris ~oi-meme-c'est peut-etre de ma
faute--que, lors de la derniere seance, nous avions
decide d'examiner les demandes separement, de les
mettre' aux voix separement, et ensuite de mettre
anx voix la resolution de la Potogne. Je n'avais
jamais compris cela.
Je desire ajouter qu'uue procedure de ce genre
nous mettrait vraiment dans une situation ridicule.
Nous examinons quatre demandes et il se peut
que je vote en faveur de deux d'entre elles et
contre les deux: autres; d'autres membres diU
Conseil pourront en faire de meme, ou bien ils
pourront voter en faveur d'une demande seulement
et contre les autres. Nous nous trouverions ensuite
en presence de la resolution polonaise. Qu~ nous
l'acceptions ou que nous la rejetions, naus reviendrions sur notre attitude anterieure, dans une
mesure plus ou moins grande. Ce1a nous placerait
veritablement dans une situation difficile.
11 n'y a pas la moindre raison pour grouper
toutes ces demandes et pour demander qu'on les
mette allX voix en bloc. Nous connaissons tous la
veritable raison. On ne lrouve allcune justification
de cette solution dans b Charte, ni n'importe ou
ailleurs. J e ne pense pas que le Conseil doive
proceder de cette maniere.
Si cela est conforme au reglement, je desirerais
demander au President de proposer, ou bien je
proposerai moi-meme, que le Conseil vote sur la
question de savoir si'la resolution polonaise doit
etre mise aux voix ou non.

I wish to say that such a procedure would really
place us in a ridiculous position. We are considering four applications. I might vote in favour
of two of them and against two of them; other
members of the Council might do \ the same, or
they might vote for only one application ~nd
against the others. We should then face the Pohsh
resolution. Whether we accepted it or rej ected
it, we should be reversing our previous position
to a greater or lesser extent. That would really
put ,us in a difficult position.
There is no justification whatever for grouping these applications together and demanding
that a vote should: be taken jointly on them. We
all know what the real reason is. There is no justtification for it in the 'Charter or anywhere else.
I do not think the Council should proceed in that
way.
If it were in order, I should ask the President
to move, or I should move myself, that the Council put to a vote the question as to whether the
Polish resolution should be voted tlpon or not.

,

Mr. "TSIANG (China): The insistence of the
representative of Poland in asking us to vott. on
these five countries as a whole seems to be devlsed
to prevent the Security Council from giving an
accurate expression of its opinion on the various
applicants. If lie insists on his technical right to
ask for a vote on his resolution, each one of us
has the right to submit amendments to the, resolution, and amendments take precedence in voting.

,~~

M. TSIANG (Chine) (tradttit de l' anglais) : I1
semble que l'insistance que met le representant de
la Pologne a nous demander de voter en bloc sur
les demandes des cinq pays, ait pour but d'empecher le COl1seil de securite d'emettre une opinion
precise a l'egard des dJvers requerants. S'il insiste
sur le droit reconnu qu'il a de demander que sa
resolution soit mise aux voix, chacun de' nous a
alors le droit de deposer des amendements a la

e

2440

I.

Anyone of us could submit an amendment to
delete a certain word from his resolution. By that
device, we 'Would come back to where we are now.
It seems to be common sense that we should vote
on the applications s~paratdy and not jointly.

resolution, et les amendements sont mis aux v6ix
par priorite. 'Chacun de no'us peut deposer un
amendement en vue de supprimer un certainmot
de la resolution. De cette tnaniere, nous nous
retrouverions au point ou nous en sommes maintenant. Il semble conforme au bon sens de voter sur
les demandes separement et nOl1 en bloc.

ApPLICATION OF ITALY

DEMANDE D'ADMISSION DE L'ITALIE

The PRESIDENT: The discussion on the application of· Italy is open. The Council has received
the communication from the representative of the
· United States, and he will probably wish to make
a statement in that connexion.

Le PRESIDENT (traduitde l'anglais) : La discussion de la demande d'admission de I'Italie est
ouverte. Le Conseil a rec;u la communication du
representant des Etats-U nis et ce dernier voudra
probablement faire une declaration a ce sujet.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America):
Since the United States representative at previous meetings has made a fairly full statement
supporting the admission of Italy into the United
Nations l , I need say no more than this: Italy is
now free from all foreign control and is an independent and friendly neighbour of every other
· peace-loving country in the world. Since the end
of hostilities, it has made endeavours to resume
friendly contacts with its neighbours and with all
other nations. Diplomatic relations have been established, trade agreements have been entered
into, and Italy has been able to contribute to some
of the work of the various international technical
organizations. All this is evidence of Italy's peaceful purpose. The case therefore stands before the
Council with an affirmative history and record of
qualification for admission into the United Nations.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais) : Etant donne que le representant des
Etats-Unis a fait au cours de seances anh~rieures
un expose a peu pres complet, en faveur de l'admission de l'Italie dans l'Organisation des Nations
Unies\ je n'ai pas besoin d'ajouter plus que ceci:
1'1 talie est maintenant liberee de tout contr61e
etranger; c'est un pays independant, ami de tous
les autres pays pacifiques du monde. Depuis la
cessation des hostilites, e1le a fait des efforts pour
reprendre des contacts amieaux avec ses voisins et
avec toutes les atttres nations; elle a eta:bli des
relations diplomatiques; elle a conclu des accords
commerciaux et elIe a pu participer.a une partie
du travail accompli par les diverses organisations
techniques internationales. Tout ceci est la preuve
de ses desseins pacifiques; par consequent, la
c1emande de l'Italie s'appuie sur des faits positifs
et ce pays est tout a fait qualifie pour etre admis
comme 'Membre de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French) : I shall be very brief and shaH merely
refer to the reasons I gave at the Council's last
meeting for supporting the application of Italy.

11. P ARODI (France) : Je serai tres bref et me
bornerai a me re£erer aux raisons que j'ai donnees
au cours de la precedent~ seance a l'appui de la
candidature italienne.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I, too, shall not detain the Council, because I have
expressed previously the view of my Government
that Italy should be admitted to membership2. We
look forward to seeing that country become a
Member of the United Nations.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royau111e-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Moi non plus, je ne retiendrai pas longtemps l'attention du Conseil parce
que j'ai deja dit precedemment2 que mon Gouvernementetait d'avis d'admettre I'Italie dans
1'Organisation des Nations D nies. Nous esperons
la voir devenir Membre de cette Organisation.

The PRESIDENT: Speaking as the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, I
have very little to add to the statement I made at
a previous meeting of the Security Council 1. At
that time, although we did not discuss the various applications separately, we expressed our
views on the substance of the entire question.
I stated at that time that the delegation of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is ready to
agree to the admission of Italy if all the other
countries, namely, Hungary, Roumania, BtJlgaria
and Finland, are also admitted. The delegation
of the USSR cannot consider the case of Italy
separately. At that previous meeting I gave the
.reasons why my delegation 'believes that that

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): En tant
que representant de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, j'ai tres peu de chose a
'ajouter a la. declaration que. j'ai faite lors d'une
seance anterieure du Conseil de securitel • A ce
moment, bien que nous n'ayons pas discute separement les diverses demandes, nous avons exprime
nos va;:ux sur tout le fond du probleme.
J'avais dit a l'epQque que la delegation de l'URSS
etait prete a acquiescer a l'admissionde l'Italie si
tous les autres pays requerants, a savoir la Hongrie, la Roumanie, la Bulgarie, et la Finlande,
etaient aussi admis. La delegation de l'URS'S ne
peut considerer le cas de l'Italie separement. A
cette seance precedente, j'avais donne les raisons
pour lesquelles ma delegation estimait que ce

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 78; ibid.; No. 81, 190th meeting; ibid., No. 90,
204th meeting.
.
·
2 Ibid., No. 81, 190th meeting; ibid., No. 90, 204th
meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de· sewrite, Deuxieme Annee, N° 78; N° 81', 190eme seance;
et N° 90, 204eme seance.
'
2 Ibid., N° 81, 190eme seance; et ,N° 90, 204eme
seance.

2441
would be the only correct decision. I mentioned
the Potsdam Agreement, which relates to all of
these countries. ¥y Government is only carrying
out the agreement reached with the Governments
of the United States and the United Kingdom.
All these countries are in the same position.
Thi~ question is a political question; .everyone
realIzes that. My delegation considers that it is
impossible to take a favourable decision on the
application of Italy alone. The Italian people and
the Italian Government must know that the
USSR supports Italy's request for admission into
t~e' United. Nations. However, my delegation considers that a favourable decision on the Italian
application can be taken only simultaneously with
favourable decisions in regard to the applications
of Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, and Roumania.

As I said at the beginning of this brief statement, I have very little to add to what I said at
a previous meeting.
.
At the last meeting, we heard the statement
of the representative of the United Kingdom. He
said that the position taken by the USSR repre'sentative was a "horse-trade". If this is a "horsetrade", then the Security Council and, first of all,
the United Kingdom and the United States repre• sentatives were engaged in this "horse-trade" a
year ago, when the proposal was submitted to
admit simultaneously to the United Nations still
larger number of countries1•

,serait la seule decision correcte. J'avais mentionne
l'accord de Potsdam qui a trait a taus ces pays.
~Ion Gouvernement n'a Jait qu'executer l'accord,
111tervenu avec les Gouvernements des Etats-Unis
et du Royaume-U ni.'
Tous ces pays se trouvent dans la me111e sitllation. 11 s'agit d'une question politique. Tout le
monde s'en rend compte. Ma d~legation estime
qu'il est impossible de· prendre une decision
favorable a l'egard de la demande de l'Italie prise
isolement. Le peuple et le GOl1vernement italiens
doivent savoir que l'URSS apPl1ie la demande
d'admission dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies
pr.esentee par l'Italie. Cependant, ma delegation
considere qu'l1ne" decision favorable ne peut etre
prise a l'egard de la demande Cle l'Italie que si
celle-ci est prise simultanement avec des decisions
favorables en ce qui concerne les de111andes de la
Bulgarie, de la Finlande, de la Hongrie, et de la
ROllmanie.
.
Comme je l'ai dit au cI:ebut de cette breve,declaratiolil' j'ai tres peu de chose a ajouter a ce que
j'avais dit lors d'une seanceanterieure.
Lors de la seance precedente, n011S avons
entendu le representant elu Royaume-Uni. I1 a
ql1alifie l'attitude adoptee par le representant de
l'URSS de "maquignonnage". Si c'est du "maquignonnage", le Conseil de securite et les representants du Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis Ies
premiers, l'ont pratique, il y a un an, lorsque fut
Pi:eSentee une proposition visant a l'admission
simultanee comme Membres des Nations Unies
d'un nombre pIllS grand encore de paysl.

M. VAN LANGENHOVIt (Belgiql1e) : Je voudrais
Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French) : I wish to state again that the Bel- confirmer que la delegation beIge votera en fagian delegation will vote in favour of the admis- veur de l'admission de l'Italie. J e confirme egalesion of Italy. I also repeat that the Belgian dele- ment que la delegation beIge considere qu'il est
gation considers it contrary to the United Nations contraire \a la ·Charte des Nations U nies de faire
Charter to mi.ke the admission of' Italy dependent 'dependre l'adlllission de l'Italie de celle d'autres
upon the admission of other States. I do not know Etats. Jene sais pas si c'est du maquignonnage
whether this is what is known as "horse-trading", mais, en tout cas, c'est une ilIegalite.
but at any rate it is illegal.
M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): As I had occasion to
state at the last meeting, the Brazilian delegation Comme j'ai deja eu l'occasion de le declarer id,
favours the admission of Italy to the United Na- la delegation du Bresil est en faveur de l'admistions. Italy meets all the requirements of the sion de l'Italie dans l'Organisation des Nations
Charter for membership. We consider it there- Unies. L'Itf).1ie remplit toutes les conditions d'adfore unjust to cause any further delay in its ad- mission requises par la Charte. C'est pourquoi
nous considerons qu'il est injuste de retarder
mission.
'
encore son admission.
, ,;i, Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
With due respect, I must say the President is
entirely mistaken. Neither I nor my delegation
made any proposal last year such as he referred
to.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (tmduit de l'anglais): Avec tous les egards que je lui
dais, je suis contraint de dire que le ·President est
entierement Clans l'erreur. Ni ma delegation, ni
t11oi-meme, n'avons ·fait ran dernier aucune pr\,>position de la nature de celle dont il a parle.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je n'ai
The PREsIDENT: Speaking as the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, pas dit; en qualite d'e representant de l'URSS,
I did not say that the United Kingdom represen- que le representant du Royau111e-Uni avait pretative made the proposal. The proposal was made sente une propqsition. La proposition etait celle
by the United States representative, but the du representant des Etats-Unis, mais le repreUnited Kingdom representative did not call it sentant du Royaume-Uni ne l'a pas qualifiee de
"maquignonnage".
"horse-trading".
M. EVATT (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais):
j, ,~: Mr. EVATT (Australia): We support the adNous
sommes en faveur de l'admission de l'Italie.
, mission of Italy: We think, together with other
delegations, that to favour the admission of Italy Nous S01111l1eS d'avis, ainsi que d'autres delegaand to make that admission dependent upon the . tions, que le fait de se prononcer pour l'admission
admission. of' other countries is contrary to the de l'Italie et de faire eft~pendre cette admission de
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, Second Series, No. 4, pages 41-43.

, 1 Voir les Proces-vel·bau:r officiels d1f Conseil de seC1/.rite, Premieme Annee, I1euxieme Serie, N° 4, pages 41-43.

2442
celle d'autres pays est contraire a l'intention de
la Charte. Celle-ci prevoit seulement que chaque
pays doit presenter sa demande, que cette demande doit etre examinee en soi et que des recommandations doivent etre formulees a son sujet
par le Conseil de securite. Si, en fait, le Conseil
de securite est en faveur de l'admission de l'Italie,
c'est commettre une grave injustice envers l'Italie
que de retard'er son admission dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies uniquement parce que,
pour une raison ou pour une autre, quelle qu'elle
soit, un des membres permanents desire que
d'autres pays soient admis.
My point is exactly the same as that of the
Mon point de vue est le mep.1e que celui du
representative of Belgium, namely that such pro- representant de la Belgique.. Nous nous eloignons
cedure is quite contrary to the Charter. The Char- tout a fait de la Charte, Celle-ci stipule que chaque
ter provides that each application be dealt with demande d'admission doit etre etudiee en soi.
on its merits. We now' know from the President Nous savons maintenat, par ce qu'a declare le
that he favours the admission of Italy, but he President lui-meme, qu'il est en faveur de l'admiswould desire other cQuntries to be admitted simul- sion de l'Italie, mais qu'il voudrait que. d'autres
taneously. That is not favoured by the majority pays soient admis en meme temps. La majorite
of the Security Council, and the net res(lIt of it du Conseil de securite n'est pas en faveur de
all is the denial of the rights of membership to cette solution, et le resultat final est que le peu-·
the people of Italy at a time when, according to pIe d'Italie se voit refuser le droit d'etre Membre
the undisputed facts, every member of the Coun- des Nations Unies a un moment ou, d'apres des
cil favours the admission of Italy. I do hope that faits indiscutables, ohaque membre du Conseil est
common sense will prevail and that what is, in en faveur de l'admission de ce pays. J'ai l'espoir'
fact, the unanimous view of the Security Council que le bon sens l'emportera et que ce qui est, en
will be followed. I am in favour of the proposal. fait, l'avis unanime du Conseil de securite sera
suivi. Je suis en faveur de la proposition.

intention of the Charter, which is that each coun~
try should apply, should have its application considered on its merits, and that recommendations
should be made by the Security Council. If, in
fact, the Sectlrity Council favours the admission
of Italy, then it is a great wrong committed
against Italy to hold up its admission to the
United Nations simply because, for one reason
or another-whatever name you give it-it is desired by one of. the permanent members that other
countries should be admitted.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : I do
M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
not really believe that the President means to say de l' anglais).· Je ne crois vraiment pas que le
that the term "horse-trade" is an opprobrious President ait voulu dire que le terme "maquiterm. "Horse-trading" is recognized as entirely gnonnage" est injurieux. Le maquignonnage· est
proper and appropriate at a county fair, but it is reconnu comme une pratique parfaitement admise
not appropriate in the Security Council. I must et appropriee dans une foire en province, seulebeg the President to refresh his memory from the ment il ne convient pas au sein du Consei! de
record. There was no "horse-trading" proposed securite. J e prie le President de verifier ses
at a former meeting by the United States which souvenirs en se reportant aux proces-verbaux: les
involved a threatened use of the veto to keep a Etats-Unis n'ont propose a aucune seance precountry that is qualified from being admitted into cedente un "maquignonnage" impliquant de leur
the United Nations. That is the dangerous situa- part une menace d'user du veto pour empecher
tion in which we now find ourselves. We are ap- un pays remplissant les conditions requises d'etre
parently making a record which indicates to all admis ,comme Membre de l'Organsiation des N athe world that the veto will be used tlnless a cer- tions Unies. Or, c'est la situation dangereuse dans
tain procedure can be imposed upon this Security laquelle nous nous trouvons maintenant. 11 semble
Council in such a manner that countries will have que nous soyons en train d'etablir un precedent
to vote against certain countries that they deem . qui fasse apparaitre au monde entier qu'il sera
qualified, or for certain countries that they deem fait usage du veto si l'on ne parvient pas a imposer
not qualified, in aider to get any action taken. au Conseil de securite une certaine procedure
That is a very bad prospect for the United Na- d'apres laquelle, pour aboutir a un resultat queltions. It is one more dangerous step that we are conque, il faudra que des pays votent contre cerabout to take, if we insist that we will warp the tains Etats, qu'ils jugent ·reunir les conditions
rules, that we will twist reason, and that we will requises, ou pour certains Etats ·qu'ils jugent ne
take illegal action here in order to see that a cer- pas avoir les titres voulus. C'est une tres mauvaise
tain point is carried through the Security Council. perspective pgur.les Nations Unies. C'est une meI protest again that procedur~.
sure dangereuse de plus que nous allons prendre
si nous persistons a vouloir tourner le reglement,
a trahir le bon sens et a agir de fa<;on tout a fait
illegale afin d'arriver a un certain resultat au Conseil de securite. Je m'eleve contre cette procedure.
i'o'
1"'he PR~SIDENT_: Speaking as" representative of . Le PRESIDE;NT (traduit de l'anglais).· En ma
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, I admit qualite de representant de l'Union des Republithat the United States representative has full right ques socialistes sovietiques, je reconnais que le
to protest, but I do not see any reason for such representant des Etats-Unis a parfaitemnt le droit
a protest. The United States Government does de protester, bien que je ne voie rien que motive
not agree to support the applications of Bulgaria, t111e telle protestation. Le Gouvernement des EtatsFinland, Hungary, and Roumania. It does not Unis n'est pas d'accord pour appuyer les candiagree to admit all these countries to the United datures. de la Bulgarie, de la Finlande, de la
Nations. It is up to the United States Govern- Hongrie/et de la Roumanie. 11 n'est pas d'accord
ment to decide what its attitude is in respect to pour admettre tous ces Etats comme Membres
each of the applications, but the USSR Govern- de l'Organisation- des Nations Unies. C'est it lui

2443

!Uent has an equal right to de~ermine its position qu'il appartient de decider de son attitude a. l'egard
. 111 respect to each of the applications. I have given

de chaque demande, mais le Gouvernement de
the reasons wh~ we cafolnot agree to admit only l'URSS a egalement le droit de le faire. J'ai
It~ly to t.he Umted NatlOns. All these five coun- expose les raisons pour lesquelles nous ne poutnes .are m t~1e same position. Some people might von~ accept~r d'admettre l'Italie seule panni les
not lIke the mternal order of some of these coun- NatlOns Umes. Les cinq Etats requerants sont
tries, b~t,. one can.not be. sure that everybody likes t?US dans la meme situation. On peut ne pas
everyt~ng t~at IS takIng, place in Italy. Even almer l'organisation interieure de certains d'entre
countnes whIch are MemBers of the United Na- eux? ma~s it n'e:,t pas sur que ce qui se passe en
!ions differ greatly as far as their internal order ItalIe S?lt du gout de tout le monde. Les pays qui
IS concerned. But I think it is obvious to what son! deja. Membres de l'Organisation des Nations
conc~usion. we may come if we are guided by this Umes offrent eux-memes des differences sensiconSIderatIon.
bles en ce qui concerne leur organisation interieure, mais je crois que nous savons ou nous
en arriv~r~ons. si nous nous laissions guider par
ces cOl1slderatlOl1s.
I did. not say in my statement that last year
Je, ?'ai pas dit. dans ma declaration que l'annee
the Umted States representative threatened to derl11~re le representant des Etats-Unis mana<;ait
use the veto. I said that if this is a "horse-trade"
de falre usage du veto. J'ai dit que s'iI s'agit ici
t~en the first r,ep~;sentative i.n the Security Coun~ d'un "maquignonnage" le preniier membre du Concd to engage 111 horse-tradmg" was the United seil de securite qui se soit linea ce-maquignonStates repre~entative, who' made a proposal last nage a ete le representant des Etats-Unis, en proyear to adl11lt a larger number Of countries by posant l'an c1ernier c1'admettre par une seule et
one and the same decision. I mention this in meme decision un nombre de pays plus grand
order to show that such an accusation is ground- encore. Si je rappelle ce fait, c'est pour 1110ntrer
less. I have stated the position of the USSR dele- que l'accusation qu'on a formulee n'est pas £ongation on the substance of the question, and I am dee. J'ai expose la position de la delegation de
not going to repeat it.
.
l'URSS sur le fond de la question et je ne vais
pas la repeter.

Mr. KATz-SuCHY (Poland): When the Polish
delegation proposed that the five applications of
the former "Satellite States should be reviewed before this Council and a decision in favour of their
acceptance be made, it was animated by the desire
to correct the abnormal situation of five countries
whose Peace Treaties have been ratified, which
have become fully sovereign and which yet remain outside the United Nations. We considered
the situation of these five countries to be the same
with regard to their past and their present. The
terms of their 'acceptance into the United Nations
have been clearly laid down, both in the Potsdam
Agreement and in the Paris Peace Treaties. Now
we fi,nd an attempt being made to divide them into
various groups, some being favoured by some
members of this Council for acceptance and others
being opposed.

M. KATz-SrUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais): Lorsque la delegation .de la Pologne a
propose que le Conseil de securite examine les,
cinq demandes d'admission des anciens Etats
satellites de l'Axe, et qu'il prenne une decision
favorable, c'etait dans le desir de remedier a la
situation anormale dans laquelle se trouvent cinq
pays dont les Traites de paix ont ete ratifies, qui
sQnt devenus pleinement souverains, et qui restent
pourtant encore en dehors des Nations Unies.
Nous estimions que la situation de ces cinq pays
etait la meme en ce concerne leur passe et leur
pr~sent. Les conditions de leur admission parmi
les Nations Unies ont ete clairement precisees
tant par l'Accord de Potsdam que par les Traites
de paix de Paris. Or, nous constatons que l'on
tente de les diviser en plusieurs groupes, des membres du Conseil favorisant l'admission de certains
alors qu'ils s'opposent a ceIle des autres:
J'ai le regret de 'declarer que ma delegation ne
I am sorry to state that my delegation cannot
be a party to such a decision. We believe that an peut s'associer a une telle decision. Nous estimons
attempt to divide nations inside 91' outside the que toute tentative de diviser les pays au sein ou,
United Nations into favoured and unfavonred a l'exterieur de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
nations, into liked and disliked nations, is a very en pays bien Vl1S ou mal vus, sympathiques ou
dangerous step, much more dangerous than use . antipathiques, est un procede tn~s dangereux, bien
of the veto or threat of the veto. It is a step plus dangereux que l'usage ou la menace du veto.
which may cause the disruption of our Organi- C'est un procede qui peut entrainer l'effondrezation and which may divide nations into hostile ment de notre Organisation et. qui peut diviser les
pays en des camps hostiles.
camps.
Apres ce qu'ont dit ici les representants du
In view of what has been said here by the representatives of the United States and the United Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis, il nous est im~
Kingdom, we cannot, in a separate vote, support possible de voter en £aveur de la demande de
the application of Italy. We are convinced that l'Italie, en un scrutin separe. Nous avons la conboth the Italian people and the ·Italian Govern- viction que le peuple italien ainsi que le Goument will understand the attitude of Poland. Very vernement italien comprendront l'attitude de la
close ties of political friendship and economic col- Pologne. Des liens tres etroits c1'amitie politique
laboration have existed since the end of the war et de collaboration economique existent depuis
between Poland and Italy. Poland was one of the la fin de la guerre entre la Pologne et l'Italie.
first countries to initiate diplomatic relations with La Pologne a ete l'Ull des premiers Etats a nouer
des relations diplomatiques avec le nouveau Gouthe new Government of Italy.
I
vernement italien.
L'amitie qui 'unit les peuples de Pologne et
The friendship between the Polish and Italian
d'Italie
ne date pas d'aujourd'11l1i, eIle remonte
people goes far beyond present days; it goes deep·

2444
jusqu'au milieu dtt~dix-neuvil~me siec1e, a l'epoque
ou des legionnaireB" polonais combattaient pour
l'independance, la liberte et la democratie de l'Italie. Elle s'est maintenue pendant la seconde guerre
mondiale, oules troupes polonaises jouerent un
role important clans la lutte pour liberer l'Italie
cle l'occupation allemande et du joug fasciste.
Having this in mind, we are convinced that the . Pour ces raisons, nous sommes certains que
Italian people will know that the attitude of les Italiens comprennent que l'attitude cle la PoPoland does not indicate any objection to their logne n'implique pas de la part de celle-ci qU'elle
admission. In-that case, our Yote against the ap- s'oppose a l'admission de leur pays. Dans le preplication of Italy would be only a vote of protest sent cas, notre vote contre l'admission de l'Italie
against those who try to divide applicants and serait uniquement un vote de protestation dirige
nations into various camps, thereby sowing seeds contre ceux qui tentent de diviser les Etats requerants et les nations en plusieurs camps, semant
for a future misunderstanding.
,
ainsi les germes d'un desaccord futuro
La situation qui vient de se developper au sein
The situation which' has now been created in
this Council is of very grave concern to my dele- du Conseil de securite inquiete beaucoup ma delegation. We are facing a session of the General gation. Nous sommes en periode de session de
Assembly. Therefore, we should like to have these . l'Asselllblee generale; c'est pourquoi nous aillleapplications de.alt' with and these five nations ad- rions que les demandes d'admission soient exmitted during the present sessiol.1 of the Assembly. aminees et que les cinq Etats requerants soient
admis au cours de cette session de l'Asselllblee.
In view of our concern, we shall propose one
Etant donne l'ii1ten~t que nous portons a cette
procedure, which is only a suggestion. V it is question, nous allons proposer une procedure.
favoured by a majority of the members of this Ce n'est qu'une simple suggestion; toutefois, si
Council, however, it can be recognized as a formal eUe obtient l'assentiment de la majorite des memmotion. This is a procedure which has been' used bre.s de ce Conseil, elle pourra etre admise comme
motion formelle. C'est une pratique qui a deja
before and has yielded certain results.
ete suivie et a donne certains resultats.
The main difficulty: at the moment' is the inLa principale dif.ficulte reside actuellement dans
ability of the five petmanent members to agree le fait que les cinq membres pennanents ne peu. upon the countries to be accepted. Therefore, my vent se mettre d'accord sur les pays a admettre
suggestion would be to adjourn this meeting and to comme Mel11bres des Nations Unies. Je propose
advise the five permanent members of the Coun- done de lever la seance et d'inviter les cinq mem- !
cil, together with the Secretary-General, to meet bres permanents du Conseil, ainsi que le Secreand to discover ways and means which would taire general, a se reunir et a rechercher les voies
enable us to find a way out of the present impasse. et moyens qui nous permettraient de trouver une
'issue a l'impasse actuelle.
The presence in this Council of Senator Austin,
La presence au Conseil de securite de M. le
whose spirit of collaboration and deep sense of senateur Austin, dont nous reconnaissons l'esprit
sound compromise we' know, encourages me to de collaboration et le profond esprit de comsubmit this suggestion. If the Council should fa- promis raisonnable, m'encourage a presenter cette
vour the suggestion, I feel that we could find the suggestion. Si le Conseil accepte cette suggestion,
. ,proper and right way out of our present position. je pense que nous pourrons trouver la solution qui
nous permettra de sortir de la situation actuelle.
into the middle of the nineteenth century, when
Polish; legionnaires fought for the freedom, liberty and democracy of Italy. It continued until
th.e Second World War, when Polish troops
played an important part in the liberation of Italy
from German occupation and the fascist yoke.

I~I;

The PUSIDENT: According to the rules of procedure, any motion for adjournment should be
decided with.out debate. But in view of the particular character 'of this motion and in view of the
fact that the Polish representative has a definite
purpose in moving this adj otlrnment, and further,
taking into account his wish to hear the opinion
of the other members of the Security Coul}cil, I
think it would be desirable for the members of the
Council to express their opinions on the suggestion made by the Polish representative.
If the Polish representative does not press his
motion and does not ask for an immediate vote,
then it would be useful to hear the opinion of the
representatives in the Council.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Aux
termes de notre reglement interieur, toute motion d'aj ournement doit etre votee sans discussion. En raison, toutefois, du caractere particulier
de la motion dont nous venons d'etre saisis et du
but bien de£ini que le representant de la Pologne
a en vue en proposant l'ajourneme,nt, compte tenu
egalement de son desir de connaitre l'opinion des
autres membres du Conseil de securite, je crois
qu'il y aurait avantage cl. ce que les mel11bres du
Conseil expriment leur opinion an sujet de la
suggestion du representant qle la Pofogne.
Si le representant de la Pologne n'insiste pas
pour un vote immeeliat, il serait utile d'entendre
l'opinion des representants au Conseil.

Mr. EL-KHO~RI (Syria) : It is alwa~s the deep
M. EL-KHOURI (Sl}'rie) (traduit de l'anglais):
and sincere desire of all the non:'permanent mem- Tous les membres non permanents du Conseil
bers of the Security Council that the permanent de securite ont !oujours le vii et sincere desir de
members shonld agree on the points under con- voir les membres permanents d'accord sur les
sideration, because that would save us from many questions en discussion, car cela nous epargnedifficulties which obstruct our business. If the rait de nombreuses difficultes qui font obstacle
permanent members can come to an agreement· au progres de nos travaux. Si les membres peron. this point or on other points 'which are under manents pouvaient realiser l'accord sur ce point
discussion or which will come under discussion, ,particulier ou sur d'autres qui sont en discussion
!

2445
then we should be assured that the work of the ou qui le seront, nous aurions l'assurance que le
Security Council would never be obstructed, be- travail du Conseil de securite ne serait jamais
cause the permanent members constitute five . entrave, car les membres permanents representent
votes, and it is not difficult to obtain two votes cinq voix, et.il n'est pas difficile d'obtenir deux
fr01:11 th~ non-pennanent members. Accordingly, voix parmi les membres non per111anents. I1 s'en
their wishes would certainly be followed and suivrait que 1'0n se' rallierait cl leurs propositions
adopted. Therefore, I think it would be advan- et qu'on les adopterait. C'est pourquoi il serait
tageous and useful for the United Nations, if the cl mon sens avantageuxet utile pour les Nations
pe:manent members would agree on all these Unies que les membres permanents se mettent
pomts.
d'accord sur toutes ces questions.
Disagreement is causing the obstacles and difLes desacco~ds creent des obstacles et des diffificulties in accomplishing the work of the United cultes cl l'accomplissement de la tache de l'OrganiNations as a whole as well as of the Security sation des Nations Unies en general, et aussi du
Council. Therefore I would gladly support the Conseil de securite. C'est pourquoi je me rallie
suggestion made by our Polish colleague, and. I avec plaisir cl la suggestion presentee par notre
am sure that the meeting of the 'permanent mem- collegue polonais, et j'ai la certitude que la rebers will bring about good results if it is held in union des membres permanents donnera des rea spirit of good will and if those members intend sultats satisfaisants, s'ils y mettent de la bonne
to be faithful to their declarations that they are volonte et s'ils ont l'intentioll de rester fideles
trying to keep peace and security throughout the aux declarations qu:ils i ont faites, c'est-a-dire
world. In this way they will revive that solidarity d'essayer de maintenir la paix et la securite dans
amongst themselves which existed when they pre- le monde entier. De cette maniere, ils recreeront
pared the Dumbarton Oaks proposal. The condi- la soIidarite qui a existe entre eux lorsqu'ils ont
tions which resulted from the solidarity which prepare la proposition de Dumbarton Oaks. Les
existed during the war would then be maintained avantages qui ont resulte de la solidarite qui
existait pendant la guerre seraient maintenus dans
in peace also.
la paix aussi.
The PRESIDENT: As no member wishes to
speak, I shall consider the suggestion of the representative of Poland as a proposal and ask the
Council' to vote on it. The Polish representative
proposes adjourning the meeting now and asking
the permanent members of the Security Council
to consult on all the questions under consideration
before the next meeting of the Council.
A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
5 votes in favour. No fui'ther voting occurred.
The proposal was not adopted, having failed to
obtain the affirmative I votes of seven members.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de fanglais) : Comme
aucun representant ne desire prendre la parole,
je considererai la suggestion du representant de
la Pologne comme une proposition formelle et je
demaliderai au. Conseil ,d:'emettre un vote a son
sujet. Le representant de la Pologne propose de
lever la seance et de demander aux membres
permanents du Conseil de securite de se concerter
sur toutes les questions en cours d'exameu, avant
la prochaine seance du Conseil de securite.
It est p1'ocede au vote a main levee. Il y a 5
voix pOltr, Il n'est pas procede ala contre-epreuve.
N'ayant pas obtenu le vote affirmatif de sept
. membre.s, la proposition n'est pas adoptee.

Votes for: China, Colombia, Poland, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Votent pour: Chine, Colombie, Pologne, Syrie,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): For the record,
I wish to point out that the result of that vote
shows. where the responsibility for disagreement
lies.
The PRESIDENT: As no member wishes to speak
on the application of Italy, the discussion on the
application of Roumania is open.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit rPe l'allglais) : Je tiens cl souligner pour qu'il en soit fait
etat au proces-verbal, que le resultat de ce vote
montre ou reside la responsabilite du desaccord.

;J Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I wish to make
a simple motion for adjournment, because the result of the last vote places my delegation in a
difficult position at the moment, and we have to
consult on what further steps we should have to
take on that subject.

The PRESIDENT : We shall now v~te on the
simple motion for adjournment. The moti9n has
to be voted on without discussion.
A vote was taken by show of hands. There
were 2 votes in favour. N () further voti~g occ;trred. The motion was not adopted, havmg fatled
to obtait~ tire affirmative votes of seven members..
Votes for: Poland, Union of'Soviet Republics.

Le PRESIDENT (trad1dt de l' anglais): Comme
aucun membre du Conseil ne desire prendre la
parole sur la demande d'admissi~n d~ 1',Italie, je
mets en discussion la demande d admlsslon de la .
Roumanie.
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je depose u?e motion d'aj~urnement pur
crt simple, .car le resultat ~~l de~m~r. v~te, place
ma delegation dans une pOSItion dlfflclle a I heure
actuelIe et nous avons it nOllS concerter sur les
mesure~ ulterieures que nous devrons prendre it
cet egard.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
allons voter maintenant sur la motion d'aj ournement pur et simple. Cette motion doit etre mise
aux voix sans discussion.
J[ est procede au vote a main levee. Il y a 2
voix pour. It n'est pas pracede cl la.contr.e-dpreuve.
N'ayant pas obtenu le vote a.ffwnwt~f de sept
memb1'es, la 11Wtion n'est pas adoptee.
Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

2446
ApPLICATION OF ROUMANIA

DE;MANDE D' ADMISSION DE LA ROUMANIE

Le PRESIDE'NT (traduit de l'anglais) : La discussion est ouverte sur la demande d'admission de la
Roumanie.
M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): To
its regret, my Government is compelled to con- de l'anglais) : Mon Gouvernement a le r~gret de
sider the qualifications of the present Roumanian devoir mettre serieusement en doute les titres du
Government for United Nations membership open Gouvernement roumain actuel a devenir Membre
to serious question, on the grounds of its inability de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, car il n'est
and its unwillingness to carry out6l>the obligations pas en mesure de remplir les obligations decoulant
de la 'Charte et n'est pas dispose a le faire.
.
of the Charter.
Au cours des deux dernieres annees, le GouDuring the past two years, contrary to its repeated professions, the Roumanian Government vernement roumain, contrairement a ses promesses
has shown an increasing disregard for the human repetees, manifeste une meconnaissance croissante
rights and fundamental freedoms' which it has des dToits de l'homme et des libertes fondamentales
pledged again,in the Treaty-of Peace, to ~ecure dont il s,'est engage a nouveau, dans le Traite de
paix, a assurer la jouissance a tous les peuples
to all peoples under its jurisdiction.
places sous sa juridiction.
Cette conduite deplorable constitue une violation
These deplorable actions have constituted violations of international commitments made cate- des engagements internationaux categoriques pris
gorically in January 1946 by that Government en janvier 1946 par ce Gouvernement envers les
to the three Powers which undertook at Yalta to trois Puissances qui se sont efforcees, a Yalta,
assist Roumania in forming an interim Govern- d'aider la Roumanie a. former un gouvernement
ment broadly representative of the will of its provisoire largement representatif de la volonte
people.
de son peuple.
Depuis la signature du Traite par le GouverneSince the Roumanian Government's signature
of the Treaty, the police authorities of that coun- ment roumain, la police de ce Gouv,ernement a
try. have conducted mass man-hunts and arrests procede a de veritables "chasses a ·l'homme" et
of democratic opposition elements, and have im- a des ,urrestations en masse des elements de l'opprisoned some 2,000 of these. Likewise, the Rou- position democratiqtle, dont quelque 2.000 ant e~e
manian Government has outlawed, and is in the jetes en prison. De plus, le Gouvernement roumam
process of obliterating, the principal political party ,a mis hors la loi et s'emploie en ce moment a faire
in Roumania, which, in an international tmder- dlsparaitre le principal parti politique de la Roustanding, it specifically recognized as democratic manie, qu'il a lui-mcme expressement reconnu,
and entitled to participate freely in political ac- dans un accord international, comme un parti
democratique, jouissant du d'roit de participer
.tivities.
librement a la vie politique du pays.
L'histoire de l'attitude et du comportement du
The record of the attitude and action of the
present Roumanian Government suggests that it Gouvernemnt roumain acttlel donne a croire qu'il
is neither independently able to carry out such n'est ni capable de remplir en toute inclependance
international obligations as it would assume under les obligations internationales qu'il assumerait en
the United Nations Charter, nor disposed to do so. vertu de la Charte des Nations Unies, ni dispose
a le faire.
Par son propre comportement, le Gouvernement
By its own behaviour, the Roumanian Government has cast such a shadow of doubt upon its roumain a fait peser des doutes si graves sur ses
qualifications for United Nations membership that titres a etre admis comme Membre de I'Organisamy Government cannot vote for its admission at tion des Nations Unies que, pour le moment, moo
Gouvernement ne peut voter en faveur de son
this time.
admission.
, Mr. PARODI (France)
(translated from
M. PAROD! (France) : Les observations d'ordre
French): The general considerations which I had general que j'ai. deja presentees au cours de la
occasion to express during our last meeting will precedent seance conduiront la delegation franlead the Frencr, delegation to vote in favour of c;aise a voter en faveur de l'admission de la Routhe admission of Roumania.
manie.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
Sir Alexander CADOGA,N (Royaume-Dni)
For reasons very much the same as those which ,(traduit de l'anglais) : Pour des raisons tres semI adduced in the case of the Hungarian applica- blables a celle,s que j'ai fait valoir dans le cas de
tion, my Government is unable to support the la demande d'admission de la Hongrie, mon
application of Roumania. There is no need for me Gouvernement ne peut accorder son appui' a la
to repeat the arguments which I brought forth demande d'admission de la Roumanie. J e n'ai pas
in the case of Hungary. However, what I said besoin de repeter les arguments que j'ai exposes en
then applies also to the case of Roumania.
ce qui concerne la Hongrie; ce que j'ai dit alors
s'applique egalement au cas de la Roumanie.
Mr. KATz-SUCHY (Poland) :My delegation
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'a·nsupports the application of Roumania for mem- glais) : Ma delegation appuie la demande d'admisbership in the United Nations, just as it supports sion de la Rouma~ie parmi les Nations U nies,
the applications of all the former satellite States. comme elle appuie les demandes de tous les anciens
We believe it is the duty of this Council to admit satellites de l'Axe. Nous croyons que c'est un
Roumania and to allow.her to become a full Mem- devoir pour le Conseil d'admettre la Roumanie et
ber of the United Nations.
de lui permettre de devenir sans restriction Membre de l'Organisatioll des Nations Unies.

The PRESIDEJ:fT: The discussion on the application of Roumania is open.

2447
Many allegations have been made here against
On a porte ici bien des accusations contre la
Roumania. I believe that these allegations are of Roumanie. ],estime que ces accusations sont de
the same sort as those which have been made la meme nature que celles qu'on a portees contre
against Hungary, and that they do not fall within l~ Hon~r~e et qu'elles SOl1t etranger,es aux condithe scope of the requirements laid down in the tIons flxees par la Charte pour l'admission des
Charter for prospective Members.
.
,
.
nouveaux Memhres.
Roumania today has a coalition Government
La Roumanie possede en ce moment un Goumade up of four parties, representing the widest vern~ment de coalition compose de quatre partis qui
masses of the population: the Liberal Party, the repr~s;ntent la grande masse de sa population: le
Communist Party, the Socialist Party and the parh lIberal, le parti communiste, le parti socialiste
Peasant Party. The programme of the Roumanian et le parti paysan. Le programme du GouverneGovernmen~ is to ensure a democratic regime, to ment roumain est d'etablir un regime democratiguarantee lIberties ,and to ensure political, eco- que, de garantir les libertes essentielles et d'assurer
~omic and social rights for everyone. For the first it. ~hacun l'exerCice de ses droits poIltiques, econo-time in its history, Roumania is in a position to mlques et sociaux. Pour la premiere fois au tour,s
decide its own fate. The natural resources of the de son histoire, la Roumanie est a. meme de decider
country; which until now have been subject to de son propre destin. Les ressources naturelles du
foreign exploitation, are being used for the bene- pays, dont l'exploitation dependait jusqu'a. present
fit of the people of Roumania.
de l'etranger, sont exploitees desmorais au benefice
dl1 peuple roumain.
. I believe that the question of the manner in
]'estime que la question de savoir de quelle fac;ol1
which a country fights for its internal security is un pays assure sa securite interieure constitue
entirely an internal problem of that country. I strictement un probleme qui ne concerne que ce
believe it would be only just, and in accordance pays. ]'estime que ce serait de la part du Conseil
with the requirements and principles of the Char- un acte de simple justice, comorme aux prescripter, for this Council to vote in favour of the admis- tions et aux principes de la Charte, que ,de voter
sion of Roumania.
en faveur de l'admission de la Roumanie.
"' Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria) : If it is necessary for
M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
each representative to repeat the attitude of his S'il faut que, chaque fois que la question est remise
delegation in regard to the admission or non- en d1scussion, chacun des representants expose a
admission of each applicant, wh~never the sub- nouveau l'attitude de sa delegation en ce qui
j ect is under discussion, I too wish to reiterate concerne l'admission ou la non-admission des
what I have already stated. W~ uphold the prin- Etats requerants dont il s'agit, je repeterai moi
ciple of universality in regard to all these applica- aussi ce que j'ai deja. dit: a. l'egard de toutes ces
tions for membership. Since I first stated that demandes d:'admission, nous sommes partisans d\)
view, nothing has happened to make the Syrian principe de l'universalite. Depuis le jour ou j'ai
delegation change its attitude. On the contrary, exprime pour la premierefois cette opinion, il ne
the ratification of the Treaties has strengthened s'est rien produit qui ait pu amener la delegation
that o'pinion, rather than weakened it.
de la Syrie a. modifier son attitude. Bien au contraire, la ratification des Traites, loin d'affaiblir
cette these, n'a fait que la renforcer.
[',', The PRItSIDE;NT (translated from Russian):
Speaking as the representative of the Union of
SO,cialist Republics, I wish to say a few words.
The USSR delegation supports the application
of the Roumanian Government for the admission
of Roumania to membership in the United Nations. The USSR Government bases its views on
the' fact that the three Powers that participated
in the Potsdam Agreement assumed a definite
obligation to declare themselves in favour of admitting all these five countries, including Roumania, to the United Nations, following the
conclusion and entry into force of the peace
treaties. It is the sincere conviction of the USSR
delegation that Roumania is fully able to carry
out the obligations contained in the Charter of
the United Nations and fulfills the requirements
laid down by the Charter for countries that wish
to become Members of the Organization.
The Security Council is aware that certain
countries, including the United States and the
United Kingdom, are not in full sympathy with
the internal cdnditions now prevailing in Roumania. It is also known that a number of questions in connexion with the internal jurisdiction
and iriternal competence of Roumania were the
subject of discussion between the Governments
of the United States, the United Kingdom, and
the USSR. The Governments of the United Kingdom and the pnited States did not ~md do not

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du r1;'sse) : Je voudrais
dire quelques mots en ma.qualite de representant
de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques,
La delegation de l'URSS appuie la demande du
Gouvernement roumain relative a l'admission de
la Roumanie au sein de 1'0rganisation des Nations
Unies. Le Gouvernement de l'URSS se fonc1e
sur le fait que les trois Etats signataires de
l'Accord de Potsdam se sont formellement engages a. donner, des la signature et l'entree en
vigueur des traites de paix, une suite favorable
aux demandes d'admission des dnq pays avec
lesque1s ces traites seraient conclus, et done aussi
a la demande de la Roumanie. La delegation de
l'URSS est fennement convaincue que la Roumanie est tout a. fait capable de se conformer a
la Charte de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
et qu'elle remplit les conditions que la Charte
exige des pays desireux d'adherer a 1'0rganisation.
Le Conseil de securite n'ignore certainement pas
que certaines Puissances, et notan1ent les EtatsUnis d'Amerique et le Royaume-Uni, n'approuvent guere le regime interieur de la Roumanie. On
sait egalement que les Gouvernements des EtatsUnis, du Royaume-Uni et de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques ont discute d'un certain
nombre de questions qui reIevent de la juridiction
et de la competence de la Roumanie. Les Gouvernements du Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis
n'ont pas approuve et n'approuvent pas certains

2448
now agree with some features of the Roumanian traits du regime roumain et estiment que les Etats
internal regime and hold that the Allied Powers allies doivent intervenir dans les affaires inteshould interfere in those conditions and in the rieures de ce pays et dans la situation qui y existe.
internal affairs of Roumania. The USSR and the L'URSS et son Gouvernement ne peuvent en auUSSR Government can never agree with this cun cas accepter cette 111anii~re de voir. Ils ne peuattitude: they cannot agree that-without any vent accepter que les Puissances alliees, ou n'imreason-the Allied Powers or anyone else should porte qui d'autre, interviennent sans raison aucune
interfere in the internal affairs of Roumania. dans le af faires interieures ,de la Roumanie. C'est
Therefore, the arguments that were advanced here pourquoi les arguments dont usent les represenby the representatives of the United States and tants des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni sont dethe United Kingdom are invalid, and the USSR nues de toute valeur; la delegation de l'URSS ne
delegation cannot agree with them or accept them. peut les accepter, ni en tenir compte.
La Roumanie et le peuple roumain ont montreRoumania and the Roumanian people have
shown and are showing in practice that they de- et leurs actes ne cessent de le prouver-4]u'ils
sire and are able to liquidate the aftermath of the voulaient et pouvaient eliminer les consequences de
war and make good the ravages suffered by Rou- la guerre et reparer les dommages que celle-ci avait
mania and the Roumanian. economy; that they causes a la Rouma,nie et a son economie; ils ont
desire to participate with other countries in montre qu'ils desiraient prendre part a l'reuvre
'strengthening international peace and security. de la consolidation de la paix et de la securite
The Roumanian Government's application for ad- internationales entreprise par les autres Etats. La
mission to the United Nations is an expression of demande d'admission adressee par la Roumanie
this desire. In the view of the USSR, it would a l'Organisation des Nations Unies temoigne prebe unfair to reject this legitimate request by cisement de ce desir. La delegation de l'URSS
'estime qu'il serait injuste de rejeter cette demande
Roumania.
si legitime.
.
Lorsque j'indique que la Roumanie merite
There is no need for me to repeat that, when I
say that Roumania fully deserves to be admitted pleinement d'etre admise au sein de l'Organisation
as a Member of the United Nations, I naturally des Nations Unies, je ne la distingue pas-inutile
do not draw any distinction between Roumania de le repeter-des autres nations dont nous examiand the other countries, but place it on an equal nons le cas; je la place sur le meme plan que la
footing with Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, and Bulgarie, la Finlande, la Hongrie et l'Italie, car
Italy, since I consider that all these countries de- j'estime que tous ces pays meritent d'etre admis
serve to be admitted to the United Nations. But clans l'Organisation des Nations U nies. Mais la
the USSR delegation can take no part in a politi- delegation de l'URSS ne peut pas se preter a un
cal game, the aim of .which is to secure the admis- jeu politique qui consiste a admettre l'Italie et a
s}on of Italy alone, while rejecting the applications rejeter les demandes de la Bulgarie, de la Finlande,
of Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary and Roumania. de la Hongrie et de la Roumanie. C'est la quelque
To this the USSR delegation cannot agree, and chose que la delegation de l'URSS ne peut acthis applies to the consideration of the application cepter. ]e le rappelle a propos de l'examen de la
which has been received from the Government demande que nOllS a adressee le Gouvernement de
of Roumania.
la Roumanie.
Mr. TSIANG (01ina): I simply wish to state
that my delegation will vote for the admission of
Roumania.

M. TSIANG (Chine) (t-raduit de l'anglais) : Je
voudrais simplement declarer que ma delegation
votera pour l'admission de la Roumanie comme
Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies;

The PRESID:J;:NT: As no one else wishes to
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Comme
speak on the application of Roumania, the Coun- ·personne ne demande plus la parole sur la decil will pass to the discussion of the application mande d'admission de la Roumanie le Conseil
of Bulgaria.
passe a la discussion de la demande d'~dmission de
la Bulgarie.
.
We have to decide whether to continue this
Il nous faut decider si nOllS allons continuer de
meeting, or to adjourn and continue the discus- sieger ou si nous allons lever la seance et continuer
sion at the next meeting. I should like to know la discussion a la prochaine reunion. J'aimerais
the opinion of the members of the Council.
savoir ce qu'en pensent les membres du Conseil.
If there is no objection, we shall adjourn now
S'il n'y a pas d'objection, je vais lever la ,seance'
and resume our discussion at the next meeting et nous reprendrons la discussion a la prochaine
of the Security Council. If it is agreeable to the seance du Conseil de securite. Si le prochain
next President of the Security Council, the rep- President du Conseil de securite, qui est le repreresentative of the United Kingdom, we shall s~ntant du Royaume-Uni, n'y voit pas d'inconvemeet again next Wednesday at 3 p.m.
ment, nous nous reunirons a nouveau mercredi
prochain a 15 heures.
Mr. VAN LANGENlIOVE (Belgium) (translated
from, French): Could we not deal quickly with
the Indonesian Question, which is also on the
agenda of the present meeting?

M. VAN LANGENlIOVE (Belgique): Ne pourrions-nous pas traiter rapidement de la question
d'Indonesie qui se trouve egalement a l'ordre du
jour de la presente seance?

The PRESIDENT: Since we did not finish the
consideration of the qilestion we.aie discussing
at present, we are unable to take up the Indonesian question at this meeting. However, as
soon as we complete our discussion on the quest-

Le PR.ESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Comme
nous n'avons pas termine l'examen de la question
que nous discutons en ce moment, i1 ne nous est
pas possible d'aborder a la pn~sente seance
l'examen de la question indonesienne. Toutefo,is,

2449

, '!

)'.i

tion of membership and take a vote on the separate applications, we shall take up the Indonesian
question.

des que nous aurons termine l'examen des demandes d'admission et vote sur chacune d'elles,
n.ous aborderons l'examen de la question indonesrenne.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
Would it not be possible, perhaps, to see whether
we could not dispose of that item shortly here?
As I understand, it is an interim report. I thought
the Council might wish merely to take note of
it. If any discus!iion develops, we can then decide
whether we should take it up now or adjourn.
If it is a question of taking note of the report, I
should think we might dispose of it. in a few
minutes.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(tracluit de l'anglatis): Ne serait-il pas possible
d'essayer de regIe I' ce point rapidement aujour
d'hur? Si j'ai bien compris, i1 s'agit d'un rapport
provisoire. n me semblait que le Conseil desirerait
peut-etre en prendre simplement acte. S'il s'engage
une discussion, nous pourrons alors decider
d'etudier la question ou d'en ajourner I'examen.
S'il s'agit simplement de prendre note du rapport,
il me semble que nous pourrions regler la question
en quelques minutes.

The PRI~SIDENT: I have some doubt that we
shall be able to dispose of it quickly. This is a
report submitted in relation to a very important
question, namely, in connexion with the events
which took place and are taking place in Indonesia. We shall not be able to dispose of it within
fifteen, twenty, or even thirty minutes. I think
that a discussion will probably take place in connexion with this report of consular representatives. Therefore, if there is no serious objection,
I suggest that we adj ourn now and take up the
Indonesian' question after we have completed our
discussion of applications for membership.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de r anglais) : J e doute
que nOU5 soyons capables de regler la question
rapidement. It s'agit d'un rapport relatif
une
question tres importante, celle des evenements qui
se sont deroules et se c1eroulent en Indonesie. N ous
ne serons pas capables de regler cette question en
quinze, vingt ni meme trente minutes. Je crois
probable qu'une discussion s'engagera au sujet
de ce rapport des representants consulaires. Si
personne ne s'y' oppose pour des raisons serieuses,
je propose done de lever maintenant la seance et
d'aborder la question indonesienne apres avoir
termille la discussion des demandes d'admission.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): I should like to make a request of the
President of the Security Council, and," to a certain extent, of the Secretariat. Could arrangements be made so that the Security Council will
not hold meetings on the same day as the' Committee on Palestine, as this places me personally
in a rather difficult position? Perhaps the Chairman of the 'Palestine Committee could be consulted concerning this matter, because the situation
is very awkward as far as I am concerned.

M. PARODI (France): J e voudrais soumettre
une requete qui s'adresse au President du Conseil
de securite et un peu au Secretariat. Des dispositions pourraient-elles etre prises pour que le
Conseil de securite ne siege pas le meme jour que
la Commission de la Palestine, ce qui me met personnellement dans t111e situation assez difficile?
Peut-etre un 'contact pou:r::rait-i1 etre pris
cet
effet avec le President de la 'Commission de la
Palestine parce que je suis tres gene en ce qui me
concerne.

The PRESIDENT: I have been informed by the
Assistant Secretary-General in charge of legal
affairs that it is impossible to make any arrangetnmes in this regard. The alternative will be' not
to set a definite date for the next meeting. It is
ttp to the Council to decide. Perhaps the representative of France would find it possible to attend the meeting at 3 p.m. on Wednesday, I
October.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de' l' anglais) : J'ai ete
in forme par le Secretaire general adjoint charge
des affaires juridiqucs qu'il est impossible de prendre aucune disposition it cet e£fet. I1 y aurait une
autre solution: ce serait de ne pas fixer de date
precise pour la prochaine seance. C'est an Conseil
it en decider. Il sera peut-etre possible at! representant de la France d'assister a la seance le mercredi ler octobre 15 heures.

The next meeting will be held at 3 p.m. on
Wednesday, 1 October.

La prochaine seance se tiendra le mercredi ler
octobre a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.11t.

La seance est levee d 18 h. 15.

a

a

a

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTIN E
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIRES
AUSTRALIA-AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14·22 l'ue du Persil
BnuxELLEs
BOLlVIA-BOLIVIE
Librerlll Cientffica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryel'son Press
299 Queen Street West
TonONTO
CHILE-CHill
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Librerlll Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA
COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apal'tado 1313
SAN JOSE
CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PnAHA 1
DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard
N~rregade 6
KpnENHAvN
DOMINICAN REPUBlICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Libl'erfa Dominicana
Calle Mercedcs No. 49
Apartano 656
CruDAD TnUJILLO
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Mufioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL
EGYPT-EGYPTE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAlnO
ETHJOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de publicite
P. O. Box 8
ADDIS·ADEBA

Printed in the U. S. A.

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufilot
PARIS, V·
GREECE-GRECE
"Elefthel'oudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES
GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA
HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 11l·B
PORT·AU-PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVnC
INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI
IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BACHDAD
LEBANON-LIBAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH
LUXEMBOURG
Librail'ie 1. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLANDS-PAYS.BAS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
's·GnAvENHAGE
NEW ZEALANDN OUVELLE·ZELAN DE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINCTON

United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. lOll, G.P.O.
WELLINCTON
NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.
NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum ForIag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

Price in the U. S. A.: 25 cents

PERU-PEROU
Librerfa internacional del Peru,
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA
PHILIPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
POLAN D-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA
SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fl'itzes Kungl.
Hofhokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAN D-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelle
DAMAS
TURKEY-TURQUIE
Librairie Hachette
4,69 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-!STANBUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUO-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
J OHANNESBUnG and at CAPETOWN
and DURllAN
UNITED KINGOOMROYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTER,
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMINGHAM
and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS O'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. I
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA
Escritorfa Perez Machado
Conde a Pifiango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska UI. 36
BEOGRAD
[49&1]
April 1949-3,000
