S/PV.9282

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9282

nd meeting
Wednesday, 15 March 2023, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 21 February 2023 from the Panel of Experts on Yemen addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2023/130)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-07601 (E)
*2307601*

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

Yemenis I have talked to hope for a comprehensive
resolution of the conflict. That remains my priority.

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 21 February 2023 from the Panel
of Experts on Yemen addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/130)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/130, which contains a letter dated
21 February 2023 from the Panel of Experts on Yemen
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Grundberg, Ms. Msuya and Ms. Albana
Dautllari, Deputy Permanent Representative of Albania,
in her capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: I brief the Council as Yemenis
and Muslims around the world look forward to the holy
month of Ramadan. Having lived in this region for
many years, I have come to really appreciate the holy
month of Ramadan as a time of reflection and hope.
Almost a year ago, as Ramadan was just beginning,
the United Nations-mediated truce ushered in a new
phase of relative calm on the front lines and gave us
the opportunity to make progress on efforts to relieve
the suffering of the Yemeni people. As the holy month
approaches again and despite the dire economic and
humanitarian situation, Yemen is still benefiting from
the achievements of the truce. But of course, all the
2/19

15/03/2023

The overall military situation in Yemen continues
to be relatively stable. Since the truce came into effect
on 2 April last year, Yemeni men and women have
experienced almost one year of lower levels of violence.
But that is fragile. I am concerned about the uptick in
the number and intensity of clashes in several frontline areas, in particularly along the fronts in Marib and
Taiz. I call on the parties to exercise maximum restraint
during this critical time, including by refraining from
escalatory public rhetoric, in order to avoid destabilizing
the situation. In addition to the relative calm, elements
of the truce continue to be implemented. Thanks to the
valuable support of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
commercial flights continue to operate three times a
week between Sana’a and Amman. Fuel ships, along
with other commodities, continue to enter the ports of
Al-Hudaydah. Yet those gains are also fragile. Daily
life remains a struggle for most Yemenis. The economic
situation continues to be dire, with the sadly familiar
pattern of tit-for-tat economic retaliations rather than
cooperation. New restrictions hinder the freedom
of movement of civilians, particularly women, and
impede commercial traffic between different parts of
the country. Yemenis’ access to basic services remains
limited. That underscores what I stated almost one year
ago (see S/PV.9017) — that the truce can only be a
stepping stone. We urgently need to build on what was
achieved by the truce and work towards a nationwide
ceasefire and an inclusive political settlement to end
the conflict in Yemen.
With the security situation remaining relatively
stable but no agreement on the way forward, Yemen
may seem to be in a precarious political holding pattern.
Nonetheless, intense diplomatic efforts are ongoing at
different levels to bring the conflict in Yemen to an
end. We are currently witnessing a renewed regional
diplomatic momentum, as well as a step change in
the scope and depth of the discussions. I welcome
the continued efforts of Member States of the region,
in particular the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Sultanate of Oman, and I ask the parties to seize the
opportunities created by the regional momentum. I also
call on all sides to maintain an environment conducive
to discussions and to allow the time and space needed
for the discussions to bear fruit. Impatience at this
juncture risks a return to a cycle of violence and
unravelling what has been achieved to date.
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

I have been clear in previous briefings to the
Security Council that short-term solutions and a
piecemeal approach can only bring partial relief. A
ceasefire and a sustainable political settlement can be
achieved only through a more comprehensive approach.
I continue to actively engage with the Yemeni parties,
as well as regional and international stakeholders, to
achieve that objective. The parties, as well as States of
the region, are clear that any understanding reached
as part of the ongoing discussions must be translated
into an inter-Yemeni agreement under United Nations
auspices. A resumption of the political process is a
central element in that regard and remains at the core
of my mandate.
The political process must take into account
the complexities of the conflict. It will be a difficult
process, which requires strong planning and a vision
backed by the commitment of the parties. In that
regard, I welcome the recent efforts of the Government
of Yemen through the ongoing work of the Consultation
and Reconciliation Commission. I stand ready to work
with the Yemeni parties and support them, so that
when the political process starts, they can engage with
confidence and a clear sense of direction. A political
process that addresses the concerns and aspirations of
the Yemeni people must be Yemeni-owned and inclusive.
It must include the voices of a wide range of Yemeni
stakeholders, including young people, civil society
and women. Last week’s observance of International
Women’s Day serves as an occasion to reflect on the
role that women play in furthering peace, but is also
a reminder of the continued risks and restrictions
they face. Women are central to the social fabric of
Yemen and their meaningful participation is essential
for moving Yemen forward. I remain committed to
promoting the meaningful participation of women in
all aspects of the peace process, in line with the women
and peace and security agenda, as outlined in resolution
1325 (2000) and other relevant resolutions.
Allow me to also briefly update the Council about
the meeting of the Supervisory Committee on the
Implementation of the Detainees’ Exchange Agreement,
which is co-chaired by my Office and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Deliberations are still
ongoing between the parties, and I ask them to continue
to engage in good faith. It is my sincere hope that they
will be able to implement their obligations under the
Stockholm Agreement to release all conflict-related
detainees. I urge the parties to finalize the details of

S/PV.9282

the current phase they have agreed on, including the
implementation plan, and I would like to thank the
Government of Switzerland for hosting those talks.
Returning to my overall efforts to achieve peace
in Yemen, I reiterate my appreciation for the Council’s
unity and steadfast support. That support and unity of
purpose was underscored during my recent visits to
Moscow, Abu Dhabi, Paris, Tehran and Riyadh. Allow
me to also take this opportunity to welcome the recent
agreement between Saudi Arabia and Iran to resume
diplomatic ties, which was facilitated by the People’s
Republic of China. That dialogue and good-neighbourly
relations are important for the region and for Yemen.
The parties must seize the opportunity presented by that
regional and international momentum to take decisive
steps towards a more peaceful future. That requires
patience and a long-term perspective — and it requires
courage and leadership. Much has been achieved over
the past year, and now is the time to take the next steps.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: As we said in recent briefings, the
past year has brought a number of improvements
to Yemen. The truce, of course, was a major step
forward. The fact that many of its key provisions have
persisted, even months after the truce itself expired,
raises hopes. As ever, we want to reaffirm our support
for Mr. Grundberg’s work, and we want to commend
the efforts in the region to support United Nations
mediation and promote peace. Another improvement
has been the decline in the number of people going
hungry in Yemen, which has fallen by almost 2 million
people. The number of people facing the worst level
of hunger — the phase 5 level of the Integrated Phase
Classification — has dropped to zero. That is largely
thanks to the tireless efforts of humanitarian workers,
the generous support of donors and the truce itself.
There has also been progress on the FSO SAFER oil
tanker. Last week, the United Nations Development
Programme announced the purchase of a replacement
vessel that should arrive in Al-Hudaydah in May,
which means that the offloading operation could be
finished by September — if donors quickly provide the
remaining $34 million needed.
But we must not rejoice too much, because Yemen
remains a staggering emergency. This year, more than
17 million people are counting on aid agencies for

23-076013/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

assistance and protection. But too often, agencies do
not have what they need to help. That is what I want
to discuss today. Access and security are still major
challenges, funding is in short supply and economic
problems are pushing even more people into destitution.
Let me start with the perennial challenge of access
and security. For once, there is a bit of good news on
that issue. Agencies are now increasingly present in
places that were previously extremely hard to reach
due to fighting, constraints imposed by the authorities
and internal United Nations security rules. In recent
weeks, agencies have reached former front-line areas in
Al-Hudaydah, remote parts of Hajjah hosting numerous
displaced people, and other hard-to-access locations.
Those missions are part of a larger commitment to move
the aid operation as far as possible out of the major
hubs and closer to people’s needs, wherever they might
be. The Houthi authorities also recently accelerated
their approvals of aid projects in the areas under their
control, which is welcome.
But despite those rays of light, the overall picture
on access and security remains very dark. In Houthicontrolled areas, Yemeni women aid workers are still
unable to travel without male guardians, both within
and out of the country, which has caused serious
disruptions to the ability of agencies to assist women and
girls safely and reliably. The humanitarian community
calls on the Houthi authorities to lift all such movement
restrictions and work with us to identify an acceptable
way forward on that issue. In addition, Houthi attempts
to interfere with aid operations remain rife and include
efforts to force agencies to select certain contractors
for third-party monitoring and assessments. Moreover,
two United Nations staff members remain detained in
Sana’a following their arrest by Houthi authorities in
November 2021. We ask for their immediate release.
Agencies are also concerned about growing vaccine
scepticism, particularly in Houthi-held areas, and the role
that is playing in the rising rates of vaccine-preventable
diseases such as measles and polio. Given the current
levels of malnutrition, we worry that low rates of
vaccine coverage will cause even more children to fall
sick or die from measles, polio and other diseases. On
top of those challenges, insecurity persists in many
areas, threatening aid workers and preventing access in
some places, especially in Shabwah and Abyan. It has
now been more than one year since five United Nations
staff members were kidnapped in Abyan. Again, we ask
for their immediate release.
4/19

15/03/2023

Donors have all of those issues at the top of their
minds as they consider where to spend their money this
year. Many of them are asking whether principled aid
delivery is even possible in such an environment. For
now, the answer is still “yes”. Last year, aid agencies
assisted nearly 11 million people every month. Doing
so is much harder than it should be and often requires
many rounds of discussions, leading to numerous
delays — but it was and still is possible. We can
absolutely keep going if we have enough money.
That brings me to my next point: funding for the
aid operation. Two weeks ago, the Secretary-General
joined the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland
in hosting the seventh annual Yemen pledging event,
at which more than 30 donors promised $1.16 billion
for humanitarian action. Given everything else going
on in the world, that is an impressive result, and my
thanks go to those donors. However, it is also the lowest
amount that the event has raised since 2017 and will
not be nearly enough to get the aid operation through
the end of the year. At the pledging event, many donors
raised serious concerns over the impediments by Houthi
authorities, in particular the mahram requirements that
restrict the movement of Yemeni women aid workers.
We know that donor funds are tight and that other
crises compete for their support. Donors often point
out that many of those other emergencies come with
fewer concerns for them in spending their money.
Therefore, for now, we urgently advocate the immediate
disbursement of all pledges. The promises made at the
Yemen pledging event need to be honoured — and
quickly. That is essential to ensure the continuity of
essential programmes, some of which are already
closing. We will also continue to advocate the full
funding of the response plan, for which we need
$4.3 billion to help 17 million people. As we do so, we
will work closely with donors and other stakeholders on
the access problems that I spoke about earlier and about
which so many donors warned us at the event. We also
remain deeply worried about the need for more support
to strengthen Yemen’s economy. Economic decline is
among the top drivers of humanitarian needs and aid
agencies would like to do much more to help Yemenis
move beyond the immediate crisis.
One priority is to clean up the terrible landmines
and other explosives that are killing and maiming so
many people, in addition to choking economic life.
We are eager to start, but we need more resources and
more specialized partners. Getting started also requires
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

ensuring that agencies face fewer obstacles and are able
to deliver principled assistance. We have recently heard
several important commitments in that regard.
Beyond mine action, the United Nations is working
with donors and partners on a revised economic
framework that will help address the broader economic
drivers of humanitarian needs in Yemen. This year
offers an important opportunity for making progress
on those economic drivers, while we still have the
benefit of a massive aid operation in the country. If
we miss that opportunity, it will become much harder
to ever transition towards a smaller aid operation
without putting millions of lives at risk. Those efforts
will depend on everyone’s support — which means
investment by donors and policy measures to promote
economic growth. The Government of Yemen and the
Arab coalition countries are already taking steps in
that regard, including by providing more support to
the Central Bank in Aden and easing regulations on
imports bound for Red Sea ports. However, the loss
of Government revenue following Houthi attacks on
oil export infrastructure in October remains a serious
challenge, particularly with regard to the efforts to pay
salaries and fund basic services.
As we move into the holy month of Ramadan, we
hope that everyone will take stock of the situation
in Yemen and how the world can help, including
by making efforts to address the issues I have just
described, as well as by supporting the work under way
to deliver what Yemen really needs more than anything
else: peace.
The President: I thank Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Dautllari.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I have the honour to report
to the Security Council on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), pursuant
to paragraph 19 (e) thereof. The most recent such
briefing took place one year ago, on 15 February 2022
(see S/PV.8966). As such, this briefing will cover the
period from 15 February 2022 to date.
Since the most recent briefing to the Council,
the members of the Committee have met four times
in informal consultations. During the informal
consultations held on 10 June 2022, the Committee
heard a presentation by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
During the informal consultations held on 9 September

S/PV.9282

2022, the Committee heard a presentation by the
Panel of Experts on Yemen on its mid-term update,
which was submitted to the Committee on 28 July; of
the eight recommendations contained in that update,
the Committee acted on one. During the informal
consultations held on 29 November, the Committee met
jointly with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia
to discuss issues related to the smuggling of weapons
between Yemen and Somalia. During the informal
consultations held on 20 February, the Committee heard
a presentation by the Panel of Experts on Yemen on
its final report, which was submitted to the Committee
on 30 December 2022 and to the Security Council on
21 February (see S/2023/130). The Committee also
discussed the recommendations addressed to it and is
currently considering follow-up actions.
During the reporting period, through resolution
2624 (2022) of 28 February 2022, the Houthis were
listed as an entity subject to the targeted arms embargo.
Furthermore, on 26 September 2022 the Committee
approved the inclusion of two individuals on its sanctions
list, and on 4 October it approved the inclusion of an
additional individual. The Committee did not receive
any de-listing requests during the reporting period.
Also during the reporting period on 1 November
2022, the Committee received a notification of an
exemption to the assets freeze under paragraph 12 (a) of
resolution 2140 (2014); no negative decision was taken
by the Committee on that notification. The Committee
continued to receive vessel inspection reports from the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
for Yemen.
The President: I now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we would like to express our
deep sympathy to Mozambique and Malawi following
the catastrophic cyclone that hit the two countries.
We reaffirm our solidarity with those countries for
that disaster.
I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and Ms. Joyce Msuya,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
briefings. I also thank the United Nations for its efforts
to support peace in Yemen. I would like to thank
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Albania,

23-076015/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Albana Dautllari, for her statement and for her
efforts undertaken as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). I also welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Permanent Representative of Yemen.
Despite the fragile situation in Yemen, the
current situation is better than it was one year ago.
The intensity of confrontations has diminished, and
the Yemeni Government continues to implement
several confidence-building measures, despite the
continued violations by the Houthis. In that context, we
welcome the convening of the seventh meeting of the
Supervisory Committee on the Implementation of the
Detainees Exchange Agreement and the progress made
with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Based on the
recent developments in Yemen, I would like to make
four points:
First, the current focus should be on intensifying
efforts to achieve a permanent agreement that halts
hostilities and to launch comprehensive political
negotiations among the Yemeni parties. The Houthis
must heed the call for peace and genuinely respond to the
proposals for ending the conflict. If they persist in their
intransigence, we will hold them fully accountable for
the continued plight of the Yemenis. We also commend
the considerable efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
to provide humanitarian, economic and political support
to the Yemeni people, and we reiterate our support for
the Yemeni Presidential Leadership Council.
Secondly, the ongoing violations of international
humanitarian law, the human rights abuses and the
crimes perpetrated by the Houthis against civilians
and civilian infrastructure must end. We strongly
condemn those violations, including the blockades,
shelling, laying of mines, attacks on Yemeni ports,
arbitrary detentions, torture and forced disappearance.
Of particular concern are the violations perpetrated
against women and children. The Houthis persist in
their indoctrination campaigns targeting children,
including through summer camps and altering school
curricula to include extremist ideology. The Houthis
also continue to undermine Yemeni women’s rights
and restrict their role in society, necessitating intensive
efforts and serious actions to end those unacceptable
oppressive practices.
Thirdly, we appreciate all efforts to enforce the
arms embargo imposed on the Houthis. We thank the
United States, United Kingdom and French navies for
6/19

15/03/2023

their efforts in intercepting and confiscating smuggled
shipments destined for the Houthis, which threaten
maritime navigation, security and stability in the region.
We call for strict compliance with the arms embargo
and for undertaking a constructive role in achieving a
sustainable political settlement in Yemen.
Fourthly, we emphasize the need to continue
supporting the humanitarian response and economic
recovery efforts in Yemen. We welcome the convening
of the donors’ conference in Geneva last month.
The United Arab Emirates will this year implement
development, rehabilitation and humanitarian projects
valued at $325 million in the health-care, renewable
energy and agricultural sectors. Those projects include
the construction of the Hassan Dam in the Abyan
Governorate, benefiting about 13,000 farmers, as
well as a renewable energy project in Aden that will
generate 120 megawatts of energy. Also, the United
Arab Emirate deposited $300 million in the Central
Bank of Yemen at the end of last year to support the
stability of the Yemeni rial.
In conclusion, we fully support efforts to reach a
political solution to the crisis in Yemen that will end the
ongoing conflict, address the legitimate aspirations of
the Yemeni people, and achieve security, stability and
prosperity in Yemen and throughout the entire region.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank our distinguished briefers for their informative
updates on the situation in Yemen. Brazil extends its
deepest appreciation to them for their efforts in search
of a better future for the Yemeni people. I also welcome
the delegation of Yemen to today’s meeting.
The ongoing civil war in Yemen has brought untold
suffering to the Yemeni people and plunged the country
into a humanitarian crisis. It has claimed the lives of
hundreds of thousands and left millions more without
access to medical care, water and food. As made evident
by the High-level Pledging Event for the Humanitarian
Crisis in Yemen, held in Geneva last month,
humanitarian action remains vital to saving countless
lives in the country, with two thirds of its population in
need of assistance. Brazil has made a financial pledge
to be channelled to the World Food Programme, with
a view to contributing to the promotion of access to
potable water and basic sanitation in Yemen.
However, much remains to be done. A key element
is to ensure that Yemen has proper access to affordable
food and resources to rebuild its food system in line
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

with the recommendation of the most recent white note
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on the topic. As one of the focal points for
armed conflict and hunger at the Security Council, and
notwithstanding recent progress on the ground, which
we welcome, Brazil continues to believe that the foodsecurity situation in Yemen deserves special attention,
as set out in the most recent Hunger Hotspots report by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) and the World Food Programme.
The promotion of food security is a crucial means
to achieving stability and reinforcing trust, de-escalate
competition over available resources and forging a path
to conflict resolution and durable solutions. Sanctions
and unilateral measures that may hinder access to
agricultural goods must be avoided. The United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for
Yemen should have the necessary conditions to enact
the proposed transformations in favour of the priority
attributed to food security.
Furthermore, facilitated access to financial
resources must be insured, especially with regard
to food- import needs, in accordance with the FAO’s
proposal for a food-import financing facility and the
Food Shock Window of the International Monetary Fund.
It is difficult to achieve food security in a
protracted crisis, and it is even more difficult to
achieve peace and stabilization without improving the
security situation. Brazil believes that the advancement
of the intra-Yemen dialogue is key, as illustrated by
ongoing efforts to exchange prisoners of war, among
other initiatives. In this vein, we highly encourage the
pursuit of direct negotiations between the parties as a
means of enhancing mutual understanding, building
trust and bridging all outstanding differences. At this
crucial moment, we would insist on the importance of
continued restraint from taking any escalatory actions,
especially against civilian targets.
The latest developments in the salvage operation
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker mark a promising step
towards the protection of the Red Sea region. This has
been a looming threat for far too long, and the recent
news is a testament to the power of collective action
through the joint efforts of all parties involved. It is
Brazil’s hope that all measures are soon implemented
so that the tanker is safely replaced, and the risk of an
environmental disaster entirely eliminated.

S/PV.9282

In brief, Brazil reiterates its steadfast support for
Special Envoy Grundberg’s resolute efforts in favour
of a sustainable resolution of the conflict. Brazil urges
both parties to show the necessary flexibility, engage
constructively in meaningful dialogue and pave the
way for a future of peace, stability and development
for Yemen.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Gabon, Mozambique and my
own country, Ghana (A3).
We thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their
briefings and welcome the participation of the
representative of the Republic of Yemen to today’s
meeting. We also thank Ms. Albana Dautllari, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Albania, for her briefing on
behalf of the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
Since this is the first joint statement of the A3
on Yemen, we avail ourselves of this opportunity to
collectively encourage the continuing efforts of the
Special Envoy to bring the Yemeni people together
around the concept of an inclusive Yemeni-led peace
that delivers security, stability and prosperity to
all Yemenis.
In respect of the political processes, we are
encouraged that the elements of the expired truce
continue to hold, affording the people of Yemen the
rare opportunity to enjoy the longest period of relative
calm since 2015. We encourage the parties to seize
this period of tranquillity to advance engagements that
could lead to a national dialogue where the crisis in the
country would be addressed.
We believe the people of Yemen deserve more
and, accordingly, welcome the parties’ continuing
engagements with regional stakeholders and the Special
Envoy to renew and expand the truce, particularly the
efforts involving local solutions for local problems. We
pledge our support for every effort that will help restore
lasting peace in Yemen. We encourage the parties,
especially the Houthis, to engage constructively with
the Government in good faith, motivated solely by the
best interests of the people of Yemen.
We welcome the commencement of the
seventh meeting of the Supervisory Committee on
the implementation of the Detainees’ Exchange

23-076017/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

Agreement last week in Geneva. It is an important
confidence-building measure by the parties that we
hope will lead to an agreement on the release of all
detainees in fulfilment of their obligation under the
Stockholm Agreement. The release of detainees will
give hope and help ease the pain of the many Yemeni
families that have been waiting anxiously to know the
fate of their loved ones.
While there has not been any major military
escalation, we remain concerned about the risk from
ongoing limited military activity along the front lines in
Ma’rib, Sa’dah, Al-Hudaydah and Lahij governorates.
We renew our appeal to the parties to continue to
adhere to the elements of the United Nations-brokered
truce and to stave off any action that might potentially
unravel the fragile security situation in the country.
Addressing the high humanitarian needs of Yemen
remains of utmost importance and must continue to
engage the attention of the international community.
The scale of the humanitarian challenge faced by Yemen
is daunting. Two thirds of Yemen’s population — some
21.6 million people — still depend on outside aid, and
more than 2 million Yemeni children suffer from acute
malnutrition. Despite the soaring levels of hunger
and poverty, funding shortages in recent years have
forced the United Nations to scale back or cut half of
its programmes, including emergency food assistance.
The A3 therefore welcomes the generous pledges
made by donors last month in Geneva, at the HighLevel Pledging Event for the Humanitarian Crisis in
Yemen, amounting to about $1.2 billion to support the
humanitarian relief efforts in the country.
As we laud this resource-mobilization effort, we
note with concern that it falls far below the target of
$4.3 billion and corresponds to just 28 per cent of
what the United Nations said was required to prevent
the further deterioration of the dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We make an urgent appeal to the
donor community to shore up support to help bridge the
funding gap and ensure that every Yemeni in need of
support is able to receive it.
It is regrettable that, notwithstanding the Council’s
repeated appeals to the parties, constraints in access
continue to be a major barrier to the efficient and
effective delivery of aid in Yemen. The imposition
of administrative and bureaucratic impediments to
the operations of humanitarian agencies, including
restrictions on the movement of female staff, affect the
8/19

15/03/2023

delivery of critical humanitarian assistance to segments
of Yemeni society. We are particularly concerned about
the persistence of the mahram obligation imposed on
female humanitarian staff, which requires them to be
accompanied by male guardians in Houthi-controlled
areas. Such restrictions have a negative impact on the
work of humanitarian workers and hinder access to
aid. It bears repeating that the parties, particularly the
Houthis, have an obligation to grant unimpeded access
for the delivery of humanitarian aid to all those in need
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
On a broader scale, we are concerned about the
recurrence of various violations of women’s rights,
particularly their fundamental rights to movement,
expression, work and access to health care, as well as
protection from gender-based violence.
Supporting Yemen’s weak economy should remain
a key part of the international community’s efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation in the country.
Improvement in the socioeconomic conditions in the
country will help to reduce dependence on humanitarian
aid. On that note, we welcome the decision of the Yemeni
Government to allow commercial imports into the
Red Sea ports, as that will further boost the country’s
economy. We reiterate our call for international support
for Yemen’s economy as part of the efforts to improve
the living conditions of the people.
The risk posed by landmines and explosive
remnants of war in Yemen remains high. One of the
consequences of the reduction in hostilities appears
to be the high incidence of landmine explosions as
civilian activities and movements increase. As we call
for increased international action to deal with the issue,
we appeal for greater local support in the country to
curb that threat. In addition to ensuring civilian safety,
increased demining efforts will be required to help to
free up the affected agricultural land for food production
and facilitate the country’s early economic recovery.
In recent times, childhood vaccines have become
the subject of misinformation and disinformation in
Houthi-controlled areas, threatening to undermine
people’s confidence in vaccines and their willingness to
vaccinate their children. We deplore such propaganda
against time-tested vaccines that have protected
children all over the world from preventable diseases,
such as tetanus, polio, meningitis and measles, among
others. We call on those spreading the falsehood to desist
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

from that act, and we urge the Yemeni Government
to intensify its campaign against the spread of such
malicious information.
On the issue of the FSO SAFER oil vessel off
Yemen’s Red Sea coast, we welcome the acquisition of
a crude carrier by the United Nations as an initial step
towards transferring the oil from the decaying vessel,
and we look forward to its speedy arrival in Yemen.
We urge the parties to allow the salvage operation to
go ahead unhindered. We commend the United Nations
and all stakeholders that have brought us thus far, and
we note the shortfall of approximately $34 million still
required for the emergency phase of the operation.
The potential environmental and humanitarian
damage and the resultant cost of clean-up of
approximately $20 billion far outweigh the funding gap
sought. It is therefore in the collective interest of the
international community to raise the remaining amount
as soon as practicable before the vessel’s arrival in
Yemen in May.
In conclusion, the A3 underscores the need for the
parties to prioritize the interests of the people of Yemen
over and above any other interest. The solution to the
crisis in Yemen is political. We therefore encourage
the parties to negotiate directly in good faith and urge
them to refrain from any provocations that could lead
to an escalation in violence. The parties must continue
to make concessions, strive to find common ground to
renew and extend the truce agreement and ultimately
find a lasting and comprehensive solution to the crisis.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by joining other speakers in
offering condolences to Mozambique and Malawi for
the terrible damage that Cyclone Freddy has caused in
those countries. I thank Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Msuya
for their briefings.
As Ramadan approaches, so too does the one-year
anniversary of the United Nations-brokered truce.
The United Kingdom welcomes the continued efforts
towards a negotiated political settlement and reiterates
the need for dialogue to bring together all Yemeni
parties. We urge the Houthis to engage directly with
the internationally recognized Government of Yemen
and with the United Nations. An inclusive political
settlement is the only way to bring about stability
in Yemen.

S/PV.9282

While we work towards long-term stability, as
other speakers said, we must also act to mitigate the
suffering of the Yemeni people right now. Nearly
22 million Yemenis are in urgent need of assistance.
The United Kingdom welcomes the vital role of the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
in facilitating commercial cargo flows into Yemen to
alleviate the suffering.
Mahram requirements in the north are excluding
women from delivering and accessing assistance. As
well as being an egregious injustice, that drives up the
cost of living. We strongly urge the Houthi authorities
to reconsider that policy.
Efforts to address economic instability are also
fundamental to reducing the humanitarian need. The
United Kingdom welcomes the generous financial
contributions of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates to address the serious economic situation of
the Yemeni people.
Houthi terrorist attacks and threats have blocked the
Government of Yemen’s oil exports, again increasing
the cost of living for Yemenis. We call on the Houthis
to refrain from all escalatory action.
Arms smuggling is destabilizing Yemen and the
region. The British Royal Navy and our United States
and French partners continue to interdict Iranian arms
shipments. We call on all involved to stop driving
regional instability.
Finally, like other speakers, we welcome the
major progress made on the FSO SAFER salvage
operation. The procurement by the United Nations of a
replacement vessel is a vital step towards mitigating the
threat of a spill. But the mission does not stop there. We
ask the United Nations to share its detailed budget and
for the international community to step up and fill the
$34 million funding gap. Without that, the operation
cannot start.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya
for their briefings today. I also extend our appreciation
to Albania, in its capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), for its
report. I welcome the Permanent Representative of
Yemen to this meeting.
It has been six months since the United Nationsmediated truce formally lapsed on 2 October last
year. While that was a great disappointment, it is

23-076019/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

15/03/2023

encouraging that key elements underpinning the truce
broadly continue to hold and that the situation on the
ground remains relatively stable. This current period of
calm provides a crucial opportunity for the parties to
advance the dialogue towards sustainable peace.

authorities must ensure the safety of aid workers and
support staff. Like Assistant Secretary-General Msuya,
we too are concerned about the United Nations staff
in Sana’a detained by the Houthis and call for their
immediate release.

We acknowledge the coordinated efforts of regional
partners in their support for peace in Yemen, and we
stress the importance of Yemeni ownership in both
the negotiation and the implementation phases of any
agreement. An inclusive Yemeni-led process under the
auspices of the United Nations, with the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women, is the only way to
achieve sustainable and long-lasting peace.

Women and children continue to bear the brunt of
the suffering in the conflict, accounting for more than
three quarters of the 4.5 million displaced persons in
Yemen, and experience compounding vulnerabilities.
Millions of children not only suffer from acute hunger,
but continue to be exposed to recruitment by armed
groups, forced marriages, trafficking, child labour and
even commercial sexual exploitation. Landmines and
explosive remnants of war continue to kill and maim
innocent civilians on a regular basis and have been the
main cause of children’s deaths since the truce began.
Landmines also exacerbate the devastating impacts of
the conflict, denying many Yemeni families access to
their homes, farms and other sources that are essential
to their livelihoods. In that respect, Malta calls for
greater efforts in the demining process, particularly
in the Al-Hudaydah region. To that end, we commend
the efforts of the United Nations Mission to support the
Hodeidah Agreement in this important area.

Independent and impartial human rights monitoring
in Yemen is crucial to documenting serious violations
on the ground. All parties to the conflict have the
responsibility to protect Yemeni civilians, fully abide
by international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and build on the progress made
towards peace. Accountability and justice are essential
foundations in building a stable future in Yemen.
Malta is encouraged by the seventh meeting of the
Supervisory Committee on the implementation of
the Detainees’ Exchange Agreement, which opened
in Geneva last weekend. We commend the Office of
the Special Envoy and the International Committee of
the Red Cross for their work and encourage parties to
engage constructively in the discussions.
Malta remains deeply concerned about reported
impediments to humanitarian access across Yemen.
Parties must work to limit and overcome bureaucratic
obstacles to ensure that life-saving aid reaches those in
need in a timely manner. We also underline the need for
adequate and predictable funding. It is in that spirit that
Malta has made another financial contribution to the
humanitarian response plan at the high-level pledging
event held in Geneva in February. We commend
Member States that have also pledged their support and
encourage other countries in the region and beyond to
contribute in a generous manner.
The imposition of mahram requirements in
Houthi-controlled areas continues to prove to
be a major detriment to Yemeni women’s access
to essential services, exacerbating their already
vulnerable situation. Women humanitarian workers
must be allowed to perform their crucial work without
impediment. The increasing security issues faced by
humanitarian actors also remain of grave concern, and
10/19

I would also like to reiterate our thanks to Albania
for its work as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), which
has proven to be an important tool to advance peace and
security in Yemen. In late February, a joint operation
by the United Kingdom and the United States led to
the seizure of anti-tank guided missiles and missile
components in the Gulf of Oman. That underlines the
continued fragility of the situation and the need to
ensure strict adherence to the arms embargo.
In conclusion, Malta would like to extend its
appreciation to United Nations colleagues for their
tireless work regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The
purchase of a very large crude carrier last week is a
critical development in the United Nations-coordinated
operation to avoid a catastrophic environmental,
economic and humanitarian disaster. We hope that,
in achieving that major step, the United Nations plan
will be expedited to ensure that the imminent threat to
Yemen and the region is resolved without further delay.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Affairs, Ms. Joyce Msuya, for their briefings. We also
thank the Deputy Permanent Representative of Albania,
Ms. Albana Dautllari in her capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014), for her briefing.
The situation on the ground in Yemen can be
characterized as relatively stable. The return to a
large-scale military confrontation has been avoided
even in the absence of an official ceasefire. We hope that
the calm in Yemen will continue and not be broken by a
new round of tensions and that key Yemeni players will
continue to adopt a constructive stance to allow for the
resumption of the ceasefire and pave the way for a fullfledged political process. Under such circumstances, it
is important to exercise restraint and avoid provocative
actions. At the same time, as we continue to work
towards de-escalation, we must not forget that, without
broad dialogue on all political issues, achieving longterm stability will remain impossible.
We welcome all efforts to move the settlement of
the Yemeni issue forward and reduce tensions in the
Middle East, as a whole. We are convinced, however,
that restoring the ceasefire in Yemen and consolidating
its results through United Nations mediation and other
important channels and mechanisms requires the
harmonization of external approaches. We support the
efforts of the Special Envoy to consolidate international
assistance to the Yemeni parties.
The logical consequences of Hans Grundberg’s
efforts should be the development of a comprehensive
and sustainable plan for a political settlement under
United Nations auspices. That is not an easy job — it
will require a constructive approach, flexibility and
willingness to comprise. Besides, the international
legal framework for a Yemeni settlement will need to
be updated to reflect the realities on the ground. Our
ultimate collective goal must be reaching a lasting and
comprehensive solution to the many problems faced
by Yemen and that greatly affect its neighbours. We
believe that the emerging positive trends affecting
Yemen’s neighbours at the regional level could also
contribute to that end.
For our part, we continue to encourage the official
Yemeni authorities, represented by the Presidential
Leadership Council, and the Houthis to adopt a
constructive approach to resolving their differences.
We are convinced that, in the current situation, we must
focus on launching direct inter-Yemeni dialogue with

S/PV.9282

the participation of all parties involved in the conflict,
including the Houthis. Such a format could be the
prelude to returning the situation in Yemen to the path
leading towards a peaceful political process.
We would like to recall that sanctions are one of
the Security Council’s most powerful instruments, and
they are intended to restore peace and security, not
punish anyone. They should be applied in a targeted
and flexible manner and regularly reviewed until they
are completely lifted, which also ultimately holds true
in the context of Yemen. Accordingly, the work of the
2140 Committee should be carried out in a strictly
neutral and depoliticized manner. The main task of its
Chairs is to facilitate the search for consensus solutions
in the face of what are sometimes the irreconcilable
positions of its members. Their work must be as
objective and impartial as possible. Care must also be
taken to ensure that the Panel of Experts adheres to its
mandate in its work. Its work should result in progress
towards much-needed regional détente and create the
conditions necessary for further de-escalation.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
the difficult socioeconomic situation in Yemen
unfortunately persists, despite the many efforts of
international and regional donors. We have consistently
called for a lifting of all restrictions on the delivery of
food, medicine and other essential goods to all areas of
Yemen, without exception. We call on all stakeholders
in the Yemeni settlement to continue their cooperation
in that area with international financial organizations
and to support the work of specialized United Nations
agencies. We reiterate our support for the work of the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
for Yemen.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would also to express my condolences to
Mozambique and Malawi for the effects of the onslaught
of Cyclone Freddy. Let me thank Special Envoy for
the Secretary-General Hans Grundberg, Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya and Ambassador
Albana Dautllari for their briefings. I also welcome the
presence of the representative of Yemen at this meeting.
Currently, the security situation in Yemen remains
fragile. It has been more than five months since the
truce ended. There have been sporadic exchanges of
fire in some areas of the country. We call on the parties
to the conflict to remain calm, exercise restraint and
refrain from any action that may undermine mutual

23-0760111/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

trust and ignite tensions. Recently in Geneva, the two
parties began talks on a prisoner exchange, brokered by
Special Envoy Grundberg. China commends such talks
and hopes the dialogue can yield positive outcomes and
add to the enabling conditions for rebuilding trust and
positive interaction.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains dire.
The eight-year conflict has claimed nearly 400,000
lives, caused at least 13,000 casualties among women
and children and forced more than 5 million people
into displacement. Just when the Yemeni people are
in urgent need of food, health care and infrastructure,
many of the Organization’s assistance programmes in
the country are facing the risk of shutdown owing to
insufficient funding. We welcome the United Nations
high-level humanitarian pledging conference on
Yemen. We call on the international community to scale
up humanitarian and development input in Yemen in
order to guarantee adequate funding for United Nations
operations in the country.
China also calls on the parties concerned to
lift unnecessary restrictions on the Organization’s
humanitarian operations. The risks posed by the FSO
SAFER oil tanker affect the economic, humanitarian,
security and environmental sectors and must be
addressed without delay. China welcomes the
announcement by the United Nations Development
Programme that a replacement tanker has been found.
We look forward to an early start of crude oil transfer.
Dialogue and negotiations are the only realistic way
to resolve the Yemeni issue. China calls on all parties
concerned to uphold the overriding goal of political
settlement, put the interests of the Yemeni people
first, fully demonstrate their political will and move
proactively and positively in the same direction. The
international community must make efforts to create a
favourable atmosphere in that regard.
China commends Saudi Arabia, Oman and other
Arab countries of the Gulf for their mediation efforts
and fully acknowledges Special Envoy Grundberg’s
work in that regard. We are keen for countries with
influence on the Yemeni situation to contribute
constructively to that end. Last week, the delegations
of Saudi Arabia and Iran held talks in Beijing and
achieved an important outcome, with the announcement
of the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between
them. That outcome is uplifting news for today’s world,
fraught with uncertainties and instability. It has injected
12/19

15/03/2023

a positive element into the peace, stability, solidarity
and cooperation landscape of the region. We hope it
can also create conducive conditions for improving the
situation in Yemen.
The Beijing dialogue was a success story of
diplomacy. It was a victory for peace and a small
showcase of the Global Security Initiative in action, an
initiative proposed by President Xi Jinping. Alongside
the rest of the international community, China stands
ready to continue its unwavering efforts towards
resolving the Yemeni issue and maintaining peace and
stability in the Middle East.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me start by joining others in extending our condolences
and support to the people of Mozambique and
Malawi who were affected by the disaster of Cyclone
Freddy — by all accounts, a truly horrific storm. I
thank Special Envoy Grundberg, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya and Ambassador Dautllari for their
insightful updates.
Last month’s pledging conference represented an
important step towards meeting the dire humanitarian
need in Yemen, where two thirds of the population need
aid. Much more is needed, however, as a $3.1 billion
shortfall remains. We commend those donors who
pledged to help and urge the international community
to give generously in order to help raise the $4.3 billion
needed to address the world’s worst humanitarian crisis.
The United States remains resolute in its
commitment to alleviate the suffering of millions
of Yemenis. Secretary Blinken announced our
additional contribution of more than $444 million to
the humanitarian response in Yemen, with more to
come this year. That announcement brings our total
humanitarian aid to more than $5.4 billion since the
conflict began. We are concerned that if the United
Nations and its partners do not receive additional
funding, the humanitarian community will be forced
to make cuts to critical programmes. We cannot afford
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation
or disruption of the positive environment created by
the truce.
We reaffirm the importance of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism in facilitating
the flow of essential goods, including food and fuel,
into Yemen. Unfortunately, inside Yemen, we are
concerned about reports that the Houthis are blocking
the flow of essential goods from the south. Such threats
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

to economic activity increase the suffering of all
Yemenis and exacerbate the humanitarian crisis. Those
Houthi actions further compound the humanitarian and
economic consequences of Houthi attacks on Yemeni
ports, which deprive Yemen of hundreds of millions of
dollars in resources for salary payments and services.
We are also increasingly concerned about
diminishing humanitarian access to Yemen’s
most vulnerable, exacerbated by Houthi mahram
requirements, which hinder aid operations, as others
have raised today. We continue to call on the Houthis
to release our detained Yemeni staff members, who
have done nothing wrong, and to reunite them with
their families. The United States remains supportive of
intensive discussions among the parties and is hopeful
that they will lead to an expanded Yemeni-Yemeni
agreement, under United Nations auspices, that paves
the way for a durable ceasefire and inclusive political
process. That is the only path to address Yemenis’ calls
for justice, accountability and redress for human rights
violations and abuses.
We welcome the Republic of Yemen Government’s
continuous support for United Nations efforts and
appreciate the support from Saudi Arabia, Oman and
other countries of the region. We urge the Houthis
to engage in negotiations in good faith and to work
with the United Nations to keep Yemen on the path to
peace. We hope that the recently announced agreement
between Saudi Arabia and Iran will contribute to
efforts to secure a durable solution to the conflict in
Yemen, address the continued flow of Iranian lethal aid
to the Houthis and ensure Iranian support for a Yemeni
political process. Efforts to achieve stability in the
region are welcome.
On sanctions, we are pleased that the Council
renewed the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and sanctions measures last month. We
would also like to thank the Panel of Experts for its
annual report (S/2023/130) and excellent coverage
of investigations into violations of the targeted arms
embargo under resolution 2140 (2014). We are dismayed,
however, to see weapons continue to flow from Iran to
the Houthis. So far this year, the United States, France
and the United Kingdom have intercepted four vessels
carrying thousands of such weapons, in direct violation
of the Council’s targeted arms embargo. We remind
the Member States involved in those illicit transfers
that they are in violation of Council resolutions and

S/PV.9282

that only by ending such shipments will they allow the
Yemeni people the greatest possible chance at peace.
Finally, we welcome the Organization’s recent
announcement regarding the acquisition of a very
large crude carrier onto which oil from the decaying
FSO SAFER oil tanker will be offloaded. This effort
will prevent an environmental catastrophe in the
Red Sea that would have dramatic humanitarian and
economic repercussions. We urge the United Nations
to move forward as expeditiously as possible with this
operation and call on donors to help raise the additional
$34 million in funding needed.
This is a hopeful moment for Yemen. We stand
ready to support peace. After eight long years of war,
we hope that Yemen and its neighbours will choose
peace and work to bring its rewards to a population that
has suffered for far too long.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by joining those who have expressed
condolences to and solidarity with Malawi and your
country, Mozambique, Mr. President, following the
irreparable loss of life and damage caused by Tropical
Cyclone Freddy.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening the
monthly briefing on the situation in Yemen. We take note
of the information provided by Mr. Hans Grundberg,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
by Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and by Ambassador Albana
Dautllari, Deputy Permanent Representative of Albania,
in her capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
We welcome the representative of Yemen to
today’s meeting.
Ecuador acknowledges that it is imperative to
strengthen strategies to establish a solid structure for
dialogue, based on trust and good faith, with a view
to brokering a definitive ceasefire and implementing
lasting solutions and sustainable peace. Nonetheless,
despite the progress about which Ms. Msuya informed
us, it is estimated that more than 17 million Yemenis
depend on humanitarian assistance to survive.
According to the statistics of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 4.5 million
people have been forcibly displaced. Women, boys,

23-0760113/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

girls, persons with disabilities and persons with mental
illness face a humanitarian situation that is aggravated
by the collapse of public services and adverse climate
conditions. Against that backdrop, we deplore the use
of practices that impede safe access to humanitarian
assistance, such as bureaucratic obstacles — or worse
still, the obligation for female personnel to travel in the
company of male guardians. We support the difficult and
productive work on negotiations conducted by Special
Envoy Grundberg. Political signals are encouraging
and give us reason to believe that we are very close to
creating an environment that is conducive to and ideal
for political negotiation, which is influenced by the
regional momentum to which Mr. Grundberg referred.
Along those lines and as signatories of the shared
commitments initiative of the women and peace and
security agenda, we urge parties to ensure that, in
accordance with resolutions 2624 (2022) and 2643
(2022), negotiations processes include the full, equal
and substantive participation of all stakeholders, in
particular women. We call on the teams on the ground
to evaluate the best alternatives that will allow for
the implementation of the national action plan on
women and peace and security in Yemen. We also urge
them to consider as a priority in the negotiations the
implementation of an immediate action plan for the
removal of mines and improvised explosive devices,
which are the main cause of mutilation among civilians,
especially minors.
Ecuador believes that there is no better time to
reconsider the need to establish effective mechanisms
for accountability and access to channels of justice.
Similarly, we urge the Houthis to release political
prisoners and officials of the United Nations and
humanitarian aid agencies, who have been arbitrarily
deprived of their freedom. We reiterate our concern
about the issue concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker
and the imminent environmental threat posed to
Yemen, the region and the planet. All efforts to remedy
that situation are feasible. I would like to conclude by
calling on the Council to continue its efforts towards
establishing a serious and constructive political dialogue
with the primary objective of bringing about peace,
stability and well-being to the resilient Yemeni people.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to join others in expressing our profound
condolences following the natural disaster that hit your
country, Mozambique, Mr. President, and Malawi. Our
thoughts are with the families that have been affected.
14/19

15/03/2023

I would like to thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
and Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Joyce Msuya for their briefings, in particular
their efforts to promote peace and protect civilians
in Yemen.
I also thank Ambassador Albana Dautllari of
Albania for her briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
The international community met in Geneva on
27 February to reaffirm its solidarity with the Yemeni
people at a high-level donor conference. In addition
to the generosity shown by many States, Switzerland
notes the vibrant appeal of Ms. Naeam Al Kulaidi of the
Tamdeen Youth Foundation, who said,
“We have the impression that the world is beginning
to forget us... Nothing is more important for Yemen
than to end the conflict so that the people can have
a chance to live in security and dignity”.
After eight years of conflict, the time for hesitation has
come to an end. We must respond to those legitimate
aspirations without delay. The decision by Saudi Arabia
and Iran to restore diplomatic relations last week
represents an important signal for peace and stability
in the region, which Switzerland, the protecting Power
of both countries, welcomes. Echoing the appeal made
by Ms. Al Kulaidi, Switzerland would like to highlight
the following three points.
First, we welcome the commitment of the Sultanate
of Oman and Saudi Arabia to the ongoing dialogue
for peace and urge the parties to engage resolutely
to silence weapons for good. We also note with
satisfaction the willingness of the parties to fulfil their
obligations under the Stockholm Agreement to release
all detainees. In that regard, the current discussions of
the oversight committee in Switzerland are a step in
the right direction and must be implemented as soon as
possible. In addition, we call on all parties to exercise
restraint and show full readiness for an intra-Yemeni
national dialogue. Indeed, the positive momentum we
are witnessing must be reflected in the finalization
of an inclusive political settlement under the auspices
of the United Nations, with the participation of the
entire society. Last week’s open debate (see S/PV.9276)
reminded us that in Yemen, as elsewhere, the inclusion
of women in the peace process is essential for a just and
equal future.
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, we would like to thank the many countries
that demonstrated their support for the people of Yemen
at the donors’ conference. That momentum of solidarity
must not stop; some activities remain underfunded, such
as those related to water, sanitation and the protection
of civilians. It also implies a more sustainable and
systematic approach that goes beyond short-term aid.
Despite last week’s important and welcome milestone
in averting an oil spill in the Red Sea, the FSO SAFER
tanker rescue plan requires the continued attention of
the entire international community.
Thirdly, the continued restrictions on humanitarian
actors, including women, are unacceptable and must
be lifted immediately. The economic warfare being
waged by the parties to the conflict has had a severe
impact on Yemenis, who are increasingly dependent
on humanitarian aid. Children remain among the
main victims of mines and explosive remnants of war.
However, reconstruction work is not possible without
addressing that issue. We therefore urge the authorities
and the international community to make mine action
a priority.
In conclusion, Switzerland calls on all parties to
the conflict to respect international humanitarian law
and the relevant human rights provisions. The year
2023 must be the year of change. The truce must be
restored and extended to a permanent ceasefire. Time is
of the essence, and the civilian population cannot wait
any longer.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Mr. President, let me join
others in expressing my condolences to your country,
Mozambique, and to Malawi.
Returning to our discussion today, we thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya for their informative briefings.
We are encouraged by the recent developments
in and around Yemen. The core benefits of the truce
brokered last year still hold today, increasing the
hope of putting an end to a war that has devastated
the country for nearly eight years. We commend the
Special Envoy’s efforts in fostering trust between the
parties and beginning the long-awaited healing process
that Yemen so desperately needs. We fully support
all efforts that move the parties closer to a political
solution to this bloody conflict. The Yemeni people and
their aspirations must be central to reaching a just and
lasting political settlement, which must be a Yemenowned and Yemeni-led process facilitated by the United

S/PV.9282

Nations. We support the efforts of President Al-Alimi
and the Government of Yemen, as well as the regional
efforts of Saudi Arabia, Oman and other regional actors
in that regard.
Yemen still faces challenges that need to be
overcome. Continued international support is crucial,
and the outcomes of the high-level pledging event held
on 27 February demonstrated that there is a willingness
to support the Yemeni people. However, the maximalist
demands of the Houthis do not allow for a constructive
engagement with Special Envoy Grundberg and do not
allow regional actors to find a political solution to the
conflict. All the developments in the region should in
time enable a peaceful settlement of the war in Yemen.
We continue to be concerned about the continuous
violations of resolution 2216 (2015) by the Houthis,
who continue to smuggle weapons and ammunition,
as demonstrated by the weapons seizure by the British
navy on 2 March. Such weapons are used by the
Houthis to attack civilian infrastructure. We condemn
those acts and call for full accountability for violations
of humanitarian law.
The international and local aid workers on the
ground must be fully protected from all the impediments
and security challenges. We are concerned about the
observation of mahram for local aid workers and call on
the Houthis to end that practice, which affects women
and children especially. We are also worried about
the misuse of Internet platforms to spread inaccurate
information to people on health services, and we call
for that practice to be stopped. We reiterate our call
for the immediate release of the staff of the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations, as well
as other civilians, who were abducted by armed groups
or forcibly disappeared, and for putting an end to the
continued detention of Yemenis employed by the United
States and the United Nations.
On a separate note, I would like to commend
the efforts of the Government of Yemen in allowing
more goods to come into the country from the port of
Al-Hudaydah.
In conclusion, let me commend the United Nations
Development Programme for its work in acquiring the
proper vessel for preventing FSO SAFER oil tanker
from turning into the ecological tragedy of our times.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): Mr. President, I would like to
join other speakers in expressing our heartfelt sympathy
to and solidarity with your country, Mozambique, as

23-0760115/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

15/03/2023

well as Malawi, and the people of those two countries,
for the recent damage caused by Cyclone Freddy.

Nations Development Programme to implement that
high-risk and unprecedented operation.

Let me thank Special Envoy Grundberg and
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for their briefings.
We are grateful for the efforts that they and their teams
continue to make for the Yemeni people. I also thank the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) for her briefing.

The importance of continuing to support people
in need and deliver life-saving livelihood programmes
cannot be overstated. Japan respects and appreciates
the efforts of aid workers operating in a challenging
environment, and urges the parties concerned to
improve access for and secure the safety of aid workers,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.

Japan welcomes the ongoing engagement by the
parties to the conflict and the countries of the region
with a view to establishing a long-lasting peace. The
unanimous adoption of resolution 2675 (2023) indicates
the strong will of the Council that the ongoing sanctions
should be continuously implemented. Realizing a
durable peace will require not only a mere extension
of the truce but also Yemeni ownership of a longterm national reconstruction. Japan fully supports the
Special Envoy’s role to promote that process towards
establishing a sustainable peace. We also hope that the
agreement between Saudi Arabia and Iran will be a
positive step towards resolving the Yemeni issue.
However, we are deeply concerned about the
unchanged pattern of the supply of arms to the Houthis,
as reported by the Panel of Experts on Yemen in its
final report (see S/2023/130). We urge Member States
to implement the arms embargo and support the efforts
to establish peace in Yemen. Japan is also concerned
about the various disruptive actions taken by the
Houthis inside Yemen to undermine the Government
of Yemen’s economic capability. We urge the parties
concerned to prevent any behaviour that leads to
economic instability. The peace process should be
underpinned by a stable economy. In that regard, we
commend the strong support of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates for the economy of Yemen. The
peace process and national reconstruction should go
hand in hand with economic development. In March,
the project to strengthen the functions of the Port of
Aden will be launched, with development assistance
from Japan. That project shows our strong commitment
to the reconstruction of Yemen’s economy, as Minister
for Foreign Affairs Hayashi stated at the pledging
conference held in February.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we are
encouraged by the agreement made to purchase the oil
tanker in order to finally proceed with the emergency
phase project. Japan commends the efforts of the United
16/19

In conclusion, we continue to stand ready to support
the peace and recovery process, and we urge all the
parties, in particular Yemenis, to seize the momentum
to reconstruct the country, prioritizing the lives of the
Yemeni people.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I join my colleagues in expressing my
condolences to Mozambique and Malawi following the
cyclone that hit their countries. I would like to thank
Hans Grundberg and Joyce Msuya for their briefings
and I also welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the representative of Yemen. I would like to share
three points.
First, the current momentum is encouraging. A de
facto truce continues to hold on the ground, which we
must maintain and transform into a durable cessation of
hostilities. France calls on the parties, first and foremost
the Houthis, to act responsibly to reach a political
agreement with the Government of Yemen. The current
calm must be accompanied by confidence-building
measures — that is the only way to build a lasting
peace. In that regard, France welcomes the meeting
currently being held in Geneva on prisoner exchanges.
We also hope that other mechanisms for dialogue
and de-escalation, such as the military coordination
committee, can be reactivated under the auspices of the
United Nations.
Secondly, France reaffirms its commitment to the
United Nations mechanism for inspecting the ships
arriving in Houthi-controlled ports. In that context,
we welcome the decision by Saudi Arabi and Iran to
re-establish diplomatic relations. We hope that it will
contribute to advancing the ongoing negotiations
between the Yemeni parties and to strengthening
regional security and stability. From that point of view,
it is essential that Iran cease its destabilizing activities.
That momentum must lead to a comprehensive
and inclusive political solution, which will involve
developing a peace plan that takes into account the
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

concerns and interests of all Yemenis. France will
continue to lend its full support to the Special Envoy
in order to achieve that. In that connection, we reiterate
the importance of involving Yemeni women in defining
the future of their country. We call on the Houthis to
engage in negotiations without delay and in good faith.
Thirdly, we must not forget the Yemeni people
and the severe humanitarian crisis they have been
suffering for years. We announced our pledge of almost
€23 million for 2023 at the donors’ conference held
last month in Geneva. However, aid cannot benefit the
Yemeni people if the working conditions and safety
of humanitarian staff are not fully guaranteed. That
is why France reiterates its call for the preservation
of the humanitarian space. The restrictions imposed
on United Nations and other humanitarian personnel
by the Houthis must cease, including for the women
humanitarian workers forced to have male chaperones.
France calls on the Houthis to immediately and
unconditionally release all detained United Nations and
humanitarian personnel.
In conclusion, as members are aware, the situation
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker continues to pose the
imminent risk of an ecological and humanitarian
disaster. In that regard, we welcome the purchase by
the United Nations of a replacement vessel to enable
the transfer of millions of barrels of oil as an important
first step. We call for the swift and full implementation
of the United Nations-coordinated plan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the Security Council’s presidency for this
month. I wish you every success in discharging your
tasks. I also congratulate your Japanese predecessor on
his successful presidency in February.
I join previous speakers in conveying my sincere
condolences to your country, Mozambique, and to
Malawi, for the lives and property lost due to the
recent cyclone.
My thanks also go to Ms. Joyce Msuya and
Mr. Hans Grundberg for their briefings, and
to Ms. Albana Dautllari, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Albania, for her report on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014).

S/PV.9282

The Presidential Leadership Council reaffirms
its commitment to a lasting and comprehensive
peace on the basis of the agreed political terms of
reference — namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its implementation mechanism, the
outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), which
forms the basic foundation and framework of the United
Nations-led peace process. My country reiterates our
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and for all regional and international
efforts aimed at reviving the truce and resuming the
comprehensive political process led by the United
Nations and owned by Yemenis.
However, peace cannot be achieved without a true
partner who renounces war, believes in a political
partnership and in equal rights for all Yemenis, rejects
violence as a means of imposing a political agenda and
believes in the State as the sole holder of power and
arms. Any negotiated peaceful solution to the conflict
in Yemen must therefore involve a comprehensive
process that includes all those pillars and allows for
a settlement of all issues, including the true cause of
the conflict. The Houthi militias must renounce their
so-called divine right to rule the Yemenis; otherwise,
the long-awaited peace we desire will only serve as a
temporary cure and a means for the Houthi militias to
attempt imposing what they could not achieve through
the war. That will lead to a new cycle of violence and
chaos, with new waves of displacement and migration.
That will also be the beginning of a long period of
instability, ultimately leading to further conflicts that
will threaten the security and stability of Yemen and the
region, as well as the safety of international navigation.
In order to bring about an end to the humanitarian
suffering, we must first end the war and achieve
peace. The truce agreement reached in April last year
presented us with a real opportunity to achieve that.
The Government of Yemen provided all the necessary
compromises in order to extend and sustain the truce as
a starting point for realizing a comprehensive ceasefire
and resuming the political process. We have respected
all the truce provisions — namely, opening Sana’a
airport to international flights and allowing ships to
enter the port of Al-Hudaydah, despite the fact that
the Houthi militias insist on refusing to open the main
roads to the besieged city of Taiz and on refusing to
approve a truce extension, thereby imposing obstacles

23-0760117/19

S/PV.9282

The situation in the Middle East

to peace and continuing their violations. Recently,
they targeted the national economic facilities and the
oil-export ports, which led to the interruption of oil
exports and deprived the State of its most important
national revenues for the payment of salaries and the
provision of basic services. State institutions and food
security were also jeopardized and the humanitarian
crisis was exacerbated.
Moreover, Houthi militias continue to instil terrorist
and extremist ideologies in children and are recruiting
them in their war against the Yemeni people. We warn
of the future catastrophic results of child recruitment
in schools and derailing the education process from
its objectives, as a result of which Yemenis will pay
the price for generations to come. The Houthi militias
continue to drive citizens from their homes. In Yemen
today, more than 4 million people are internally
displaced. Civilians are subjected to arbitrary detention,
torture and forced disappearance in the prisons of those
militias. In addition, the widespread and arbitrary use
of mines and unexploded munitions is causing innocent
people — mostly women and children — to lose their
lives on a daily basis. In addition, the Houthi militias are
creating obstacles to hinder the work of international
humanitarian organizations, including by impeding
access to humanitarian aid and relief operations.
The conflict in Yemen has lasted almost nine years.
Now, when the sixty-seventh session of the United
Nations Commission on the Status of Women is being
held, we note that many of the gains made by Yemeni
women have been eroded. The Houthi militias continue
to violate the rights of Yemeni women and repress
them. The militias use sexual violence against women
and deny them their political, economic and social
rights, while abducting hundreds of Yemeni women
and putting them in secret jails. The Houthi militias
fabricate charges against women, while torturing,
blackmailing, intimidating and sexually harassing them
in retaliation for their political, media and human rights
activities. Like the Taliban, the Houthi militias impose
restrictions on women in the areas under their control.
The Houthis restrict women’s movement and deprive
them of their basic rights by not allowing them to move
among cities and governorates, unless accompanied
by a male mahram. Those militias separate the people
in educational facilities and governmental institutions
on the basis of their gender. They deprive women of
their right to a good education and to work outside
the house. Yemeni women have been deprived of the
18/19

15/03/2023

ability to participate in political and social life and the
opportunity to contribute to building their society.
The economic dossier is a top priority for the
Presidential Leadership Council. The Government is
committed to supporting economic and development
stability in Yemen. We have been putting plans in
place to advance economic recovery, reconstruction
and resilience. During recent months, the Yemeni
Government, with the support of the Presidential
Leadership Council, implemented a number of structural
reforms to strengthen the role of vital institutions and
ensure economic and monetary stability in the country,
along with reforms of monetary policy and measures
to strengthen banking and financial institutions, while
also combating money-laundering and the funding
of terrorism.
Today, there is an opportunity for humanitarian
support to play a role in achieving economic stability
by channelling humanitarian funds through the Central
Bank of Yemen. That will greatly strengthen the efforts
under way to achieve economic recovery, maintain
currency value and improve living standards, while also
integrating development priorities and needs in order to
achieve a rapid recovery. Those are urgent issues. We
cannot wait until the end of the war to deal with them,
in particular because the emergency assistance offered
to the Yemeni people will not last for a long time.
My country’s Government commends the intensive
international efforts under way to implement the arms
embargo imposed by the United Nations. Since the
end of the truce, several operations to smuggle Iranian
weapons, munitions, rocket fuel and explosive material
have been aborted, including through the confiscation
of thousands of assault rifles that were on route to the
Houthi militias. That demonstrates that the Iranian
regime is stepping up its arms smuggling to the Houthi
militias. We call on the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security, and to put an end to the destructive behaviour
of the Iranian regime, which continues to interfere in
my country’s domestic affairs by continuing to support
those militias and to hinder all efforts to end the
Yemeni crisis The Iranian regime insists on prolonging
the conflict in Yemen and the region and endangering
regional and international peace and security.
The Yemeni Government sincerely believes in
dialogue and the peaceful and diplomatic resolution
of disputes. We underscore the importance of the
23-07601

15/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

principle of non-interference in the domestic affairs of
other States. We support all serious and sincere efforts
undertaken in good faith to achieve peace and stability
in the region. We also hope that the agreement between
the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Iran will lead
to a new phase of good relations in the region. We hope
to see Iran stop interfering in Yemeni affairs and to see
a real change in the behaviour of the Iranian regime
and its destructive polices towards my country and
the region.
The month of Ramadan is drawing near. The Yemeni
people are closely following the seventh meeting of
the Supervisory Committee on the Implementation of
the Detainees Exchange Agreement, which is being
held in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations. I thank Switzerland for hosting that round of
negotiations. We reiterate that the Yemeni Government
is committed to releasing all detainees, hostages and
prisoners, in accordance with the principle of the
unconditional release of all detainees, in order to put
an end to their suffering and to allow them to reunite
with their families based on the Stockholm Agreement.
We underscore that the issue of the detainees remains a
priority for the United Nations, the Special Envoy and
the Security Council. Indeed, that issue has remained
unresolved for too long. Pressure must be brought to
bear on the Houthi militias to release all detainees
and abducted persons, including the four individuals
noted in the relevant Security Council resolutions, as
well as the journalists, academics and others who have
been imprisoned for their opinions. Efforts aimed at
ensuring the release of those prisoners and putting an
end to obstacles by the Houthi militias to the resolution
of that humanitarian issue must continue.
Yemeni cultural property and heritage are being
systematically looted, destroyed and smuggled as a
result of the conflict. We call on the international
community, in particular the Security Council, to take
effective and practical measures to safeguard Yemen’s
cultural heritage. We call on the Council to take the
necessary measures to facilitate the safe return to the
competent Yemeni institutions of the looted Yemeni
cultural heritage. In that connection, we are grateful
for the efforts of the American security services, which
made it possible to seize and return 77 cultural items
to the Yemeni Government. I also thank Switzerland
and Sweden for having hosted the high-level pledging
conference as part of the humanitarian response plan
for 2023. I thank the brotherly and friendly countries

S/PV.9282

for their humanitarian honourable positions and their
support for the humanitarian response plan in Yemen
and their continued efforts to reduce the suffering of
the Yemeni people. We will always remember their
positions, and they will form an integral part of our
fraternal and friendship relations. We also value
the brotherly roles of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates in various economic,
development and humanitarian matters, which seek
to assist Yemen and support its efforts to restore the
State, peace and stability, in particular those countries’
support for promoting the Yemeni Central Bank
reserves, as well as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s
provision of oil derivatives in order to support the oil
sector and maintain basic services.
In conclusion, we also welcome the implementation
of the first phase of the United Nations plan for
addressing the situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
My country values those efforts and stands ready to
facilitate United Nations efforts to avert an imminent
environmental, humanitarian and economic disaster. We
emphasize the need to continue to work expeditiously
in that regard, and to ensure the necessary financing to
implement all phases of the rescue plan and to avert that
imminent and ongoing threat.
The President: In my capacity as the representative
of Mozambique, I wish to wholeheartedly thank all
delegations for their expressions of solidarity and support
to our people and our Government in the aftermath
of the devastation caused by the cyclone — one more
cyclone — this one called Freddy. In this hour of grief,
we are certain that we will enjoy Council members’
support for and solidarity with our people. This tragedy
once again underscores the urgency of addressing as
a matter of priority the detrimental impact of natural
disasters and their causes. As we assess the damages,
we will keep States and the United Nations family
informed and updated. I thank Council members from
the bottom of my heart.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

23-0760119/19
