12

General Assembly -

submit those_ studies together with the Council's corn
ments to the Assembly at its sixtc-cnth session.
CJfSth plenary mrrti1u_1,
15 nrrcm/Jrr 1960.

1520 (XV). Improv.-ment of the term!s of
trade between the intht!strial antl the undt•rdeveloped ,·ountrie1-1
The Grneral Asscmhly,
Recalling that one ()f the greatest l'conomic development problems in most of tl 1c 11ndcr-c\cvclopcd countries
is the imbalance 1)(_'(\\TCll the prices of the pmrlucts they
export anc\ those of the merchan<lise anrl other goods
which they need to i111port,
Considering that these terms of tracle ha \'e b<"en deteriorating steadily in recent years, thereby contributing
to the difficult situation of economic and social instability
in the countries rnncerned,
Appreciating that the means these countries can adopt
in isolation to protect the prices of the raw materials
or primary products which they produce are very weak
and for the most part ineffective,
Expressing the hope that agree111ents similar to the
international agre{'nwnts concluded between producers
and consumers in the case of sugar, wheat and tin might
be concluded in the case nf other primary commoclities
and implemented on a wider basis 1110n' favourable tn
the under-developed countries,
N otin_r; further that thne ar<' other measures which
States Members of the Un:ted T\ations and members
of the specialized agencies might take to alleviate the
export problems of uncler-develop<'d countries through
improving their access to the markets of the more developed countries for their present and potential ('xport
products,
R.ecognizing that by such procedures a considerable
improvement could be brought about in the terms of
trade between the industrial and the under-developed
countries,
1. Recommends that the 1,~conomic and Social Council and the Commission on International Commodity
Trade intensify the study of m<"asures, including in
particular nmltilateral agreements among States, which
might be adopted in order to extend and improve markets
for the sale of primary commodities which form the
basis of the economies of the uncler-developecl countries;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
report to the General Assembly at its sixteenth session
on any results of such studies as well as other similar
studies now under way in various international organizations which might promote the above ends.
948th plenary nicetinr1,
15 December 1960.

1521 (XV). Establishment of a United Nations
capital development fund
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of
the United Nations to employ international machinery
for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recognizing the urgency of accelerating the economic
and social development of under-developed countries,
Recognizing further that the present flow of capital
from the economically advanced countries to the under-

Fifteenth Session

den'loped countries ior the economic and social development ui the latter is wholly inadequate in nature and
;;cope,
Consid!'ring the need for the United Nations tu s11pplcnw11t ,tll existing C'itorts for capital assistance to the
1111dcr-ck\'eloped cuu11t ries,
/frcolli11y its re;;olutions 1219 (XTI) of 1--1- December
J<JS7, 12--1-0 (X11l) of 14 October 195~. 1317 (XIII)
oi 12 lkn·mhn Jl)5:--; and 1424 (Xl\') of 5 lkce111lier
J()5<). and Fronomic and Social Conncil resolntions
(1(1.2
(\.:\l\'1 lli .\0 and 31 fulv JCJS7 and 740
I'-:\'.\ 111) of 31 Juh lC/59.
. .
1. /),•rides in principle that a L.:nitecl T\:ations capital
, kvclop1nent funcl shall he estalilishcc\;
2. f,',•soln·s that a committee of twenty-live rcprest·ntati\·cs of l\femllt'r States, to he designated liy the
1'rcsidl'nt of thl' ( ;l'lll'ral .\ssemhly 011 the basis of
e'luitalilc gcographiL·al di,trih11tio11, shall cnnsidn all
concrl'l<' prt'paratory measures, inclnding draft legislati(l\1. 11tTes.,ary to tint end:''
J. f,',·q11,·sts the crn11111ittl't' to submit its recommendati"ns, i11d11ding the draft kgi,lation, to the Economic
and - Social Crntncil a, its thirt \·-second SL'ssion, \\'hich
shall tran,mit them, togl'thcr \\ ;th it, cn111111ents, to the
General ,\ssemhh· at its sixtl'enth session for action;
-L Ri'q1u·sts the Secrl'tan--(~cneral tn pro\'idc the
rn1rn11itk<' with tlw necessary fal·ilities.
<J/Sih /'lnzar_,' 111ccli11_,1,
75 Drcrmbcr 1060.

1522 (XV). Accel.-ratf.'11 flow of capital anti lt•chnil'al assi!stance to tht· ,lt>veloping 1·ountrit•s

The General Assembly,
Bmring in mind the responsibilities laid upon Member States by Article SS of the Charter of the United
~ations to promote higher standards of living, full
employment and conditions of economic arnl social
prngrl'ss and clevelopment, and by Artide 56 to take
joint action in co-operation \\'ith the United Nations
for the achievement of these purposes,
Hmriny in mind also the \\'iclening gap in standards
of living between the economically advanL-e<l and the
less developed countries, ancl the necessity to deal with
it through international co-operative action,
Rccoyni:::ing the urgency and importance of accelerating the economic and social development of the underdeveloped countries for the maintenance oi world peace
and security and the promotion of better 11nclerstancling
among nations,
Reco_<;ni~iny further that, while the primary responsibility for their economic clevclopment, whether through
the creation of appropriate social and economic conditions or the generation of internal capital, is and must
remain that of the economically under-developed countries themselves, this development would he greatly
aided by improving the nature and increasing the volume
of the present flow of capital and the scope of technical
assistance from the economically advanced countries to
the under-developed countries,
Appreciating the steady contribution al read\' made
over the years to the promotion of develcpment by the
regular flow of international assistance,
~. The members of the committee will be designated at the
resumed fifteenth session.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

--------------------

Believing however that this present flow is inadequate,
l. Expresses the hope that the flow of international
assistance and capital should be increased substantially
so as to reach as soon as possible approximately 1 per
cent of the combined national incomes of the economically advanced countries;
2. Urges that, while the flow of capital and technical
assistance to the under-developed countries could be
through public or private channels, whether bilaterally,
multilaterally or through international organizations, an
appropriate part thereof should be channelled through
the United Nations and the specialized agencies, and in
such a manner as not to bear heavily on the future
balance of payments of the less developed countries ;
3. Recommends that all States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies,
economically advanced as well as under-developed, take
such measures as may be appropriate both to accelerate
the flow of capital and technical assistance and to
ensure its effective utilization ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report annually
to the General Assembly through the Economic and
Social Council on the progress made towards the objectives of the present resolution, taking into account
Assembly resolution 1034 (XI) of 26 February 1957
and Council resolution 780 ( XXX) of 3 August 1960.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1523 (XV). International credit insurance
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1318 (XIII) of 12 December
1958,
Taking not~ with appreciation of the SecretaryGcneral' s report on the promotion of the international
flow of capital, 6
Taking note also of Economic and Social Council
resolution 762 (XXIX) of 21 April 1960,
Conscious that all feasible measures should be adopted
at the earliest possible date to assist and expand the
flow of private funds for the purpose of developing
the economically less developed countries,
Requests the Secretary-General, when reporting on
measures designed to promote the flow of private capital
as envisaged in Economic and Social Council resolution
762 (XXIX), to report also on the feasibility of extending the scope of activities of existing national credit
insurance institutions, of creating new institutions or
arrangements of this kind and of establishing international credit insurance organizations, keeping in view
especially the difficulties encountered by the economically less developed countries with regard to their
balance of payments.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1524 (XV). Financing of economic development
of less developed countries through longterm loans and in other advantageous ways,
and ensuring an increasing share in world
trade for their prmlucts

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the urgent necessity of further fae E/3325 and Corr.I

and 2.

13

cilitating the financing of the development of the less
developed countries with a view to accelerating their
economic development,
Recogni::;ing the need to accelerate the industrialization of the less developed countries through the provision of an increasing flow of capital in a manner
acceptable to the receiving cot''ltries,
Rcali:::ing that the diversification of the economies of
the less developed countries implies industrialization
and is becoming increasingly more urgent in view of the
instability of their export earnings and their limited
financial resources,
Believing that diversification, the establishment of
modern industries in the less developed countries and
the development of their economies must take place in
such a manner as to provide them with an opportunity
to participate to a greater extent in the world market
and, especially, to realize larger earnings from exports
of their products, including exports of products of their
newly established industries,
Taking into account the establishment of new international sources of credit,
1. Recommends all Member States:
(a) To encourage, on a bilateral and a multilateral
basis, the extension as appropriate of long-term loans,
grants, or credits on favourable terms, including
interest-free loans or loans at the lowest possible interest
rates, the longest possible repayment periods and repayment in local currencies or in other beneficial forms,
as well as the influx of other forms of foreign capital
and assistance, which are important factors in the economic and social progress of the less developed countries;
( b) To avoid, except for balance-of-payments reasons, reliance on the practices of restricting economic
aid to particular sources of supply or exclusively to
particular projects; when aid involves the supply of
goods or services they should be made available at competitive world prices;
( c) To co-operate in financing industrial, agricultural,
social and other projects for productive purposes in
harmony with the needs and requirements of the development programmes of the less developed countries;
2. Calls upon Governments of Member States to
encourage the development and the diversification of
the economies of the less developed countries with a
view to increasing their share in world production and
world trade, including trade in industrial products;
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council and
the regional economic commissions to continue to studv
this important question, and requests the Committe'e
for Industrial Development to make suggestions on the
matter.
948th plenary meetiny.
75 December 1960.

1525 (XV). Activities of the United Nations in
the field of industrial development

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 1431 (XIV) of 5 December
1959, which recommended that the Economic and Social
Council give consideration to the prompt establishment
of a commission for industrial development,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 751
(XXIX) of 12 April 1960 on the establishment of the
Committee for Industrial Development,
