S/2016/833

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 October 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraphs 50 and 52 of Security
Council resolution 2277 (2016). It covers major developments that have occurred in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo since my report of 28 June 2016
(S/2016/579) and progress made in the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Rep ublic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and provides an update on the degree of preparedness of
MONUSCO with regard to addressing security risks and monitoring and reporting
on human rights violations and abuses in the context of the upcoming elections.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The national dialogue proposed by the President of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, commenced on 1 September. The period leading up to
the beginning of the dialogue was marked by continued tensions between the ruling
coalition and significant segments of the opposition and civil society over the
national dialogue and the electoral process. Divisions among and within political
parties persisted, albeit with some nuances on the modalities and objectives of, and
prerequisites for, the national dialogue. The issue of the facilitation of the dialogue
remained divisive, with some opposition leaders rejecting the appointment by the
African Union Commission of the former Prime Minister of Togo, Edem Kodjo, as
the African Union Facilitator of the national dialogue and calling for a greater role
for international partners in the facilitation.
3.
On 29 June, on the eve of the celebration of the fifty-sixth anniversary of the
independence of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the President deliver ed an
address to the nation, rejecting incessant foreign interference in the internal affairs
of the country, urging the Facilitator to finalize consultations and launch the
national dialogue as soon as possible and calling upon the population to participa te
in the upcoming voter registration process. On the same day, he promulgated the

16-16674 (E)

041016

*1616674*

S/2016/833

amendment to the electoral law governing the voter registration process, which
provides for the enrolment of those who have attained the legal age to vote since the
holding of the general elections in 2011 and Congolese voters living abroad.
4.
The polarized debate over respect for constitutional provisions continued. On
30 June, the leader of the opposition party Union pour la démocratie et le progrès
social and the opposition coalition the Rassemblement des forces politiques et
sociales acquises au changement, Etienne Tshisekedi, issued a statement stressing
the need for presidential elections to be held within the constitutional time frame.
On 6 July in Brussels, Mr. Tshisekedi and the presidential candidate Moïse Katumbi
reportedly stated that the President should step do wn at the end of his term on
19 December in accordance with the Constitution. On 11 July, in remarks to the
press, the Secretary-General of the ruling party Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction
et la démocratie, Henri Mova, noted that there would be no transitional government
after 19 December, given that the 11 May ruling of the Constitutional Court
provided that, should elections be postponed, the President has legal grounds to
remain in office until the assumption of duties of the President -elect. He indicated
that the question of a third presidential term could be put before the people.
5.
Both the ruling coalition and opposition platforms held politi cal rallies to
mobilize popular support for their positions regarding the national dialogue and the
electoral process in Kinshasa and other cities. On 27 July, Mr. Tshisekedi returned
to Kinshasa after a two-year absence for health reasons. He was welcomed by a
significant number of supporters, estimated at 10,000 people.
6.
On 29 July, the Majorité présidentielle organized a meeting attended by an
estimated 65,000 supporters, calling for participation in the voter registration
process and the national dialogue proposed by the President. The Secretary-General
of the Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie and the Speaker of the
National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, reiterated the importance of the national
dialogue for peaceful elections.
7.
On 31 July, a rally of the Rassemblement opposition platform took place in
Kinshasa without incident and brought together supporters whose numbers were
estimated at several tens of thousands of people. In his speech, th e President of the
Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social urged the National Independent
Electoral Commission to announce, on 19 September, the organization of presidential
and legislative elections to be held in November. He added that the Head of State
would be guilty of high treason should he stay in office beyond the end of his
second and final term in office, which ends on 19 December, and called for the
release of all political prisoners as a precondition for participation in the dialogue.
8.
Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region engaged with a wide range of stakeholders in an effort to help to ease
tensions and to create conditions conducive to the holding of an inclusive an d
credible national dialogue in support of the efforts of the Facilitator. Their
engagement was part of the efforts of the support group to the African Union
Facilitator, which was established on 4 July. The support group comprises my
Special Envoy and my Special Representative, as well as representatives of the
European Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the

2/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

International Organization of la Francophonie and the Southern African
Development Community. The support group held meetings in Kinshasa on 23 July
and 4 August and carried out extensive consultations with Congolese stakeholders in
Kinshasa from 2 to 5 August to support the launching of the national dialogue, in
line with Security Council resolution 2277 (2016).
9.
Following the presidential pardon of a number of prisoners on 22 July, the
support group issued a communiqué on 23 July reiterating the importance of
launching the national dialogue by the end of July and urging a ll Congolese
stakeholders to take part in a dialogue within the framework of the Constitution,
relevant legal instruments of the African Union and resolution 2277 (2016). It also
endorsed launching the dialogue process on 26 July and the work of the preparatory
committee on 30 July. At a press conference on 23 July in Kinshasa, the Facilitator
announced that the work of the preparatory committee of the dialogue would
commence on 30 July. On 24 July, the leader of the opposition coalition
Rassemblement issued a statement rejecting the communiqué of the support group
and recusing the Facilitator. The Rassemblement argued that its preconditions of the
unconditional release of all political prisoners and the tra nsformation of the support
group into a group of facilitators had not been met. On 25 July, the Speaker of the
National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, and the Spokesperson of the ruling Majorité
présidentielle, André Atundu, rejected the statement and reaffirmed their support for
the Facilitator. The African Union Commission Chairperson and the support group
reaffirmed their support to the Facilitator on 26 July and 4 August, respectively.
10. Following démarches by the Facilitator, my Special Representative and my
Special Envoy encouraged the Government to create an environment conducive to
the holding of an inclusive dialogue, presidential pardons were granted to activists
and human rights defenders, nine of whom were released from prison. Six members
of the activist movements Filimbi and the Lutte pour le changement were among
those released. Two media outlets affiliated with opposition leaders of the
Mouvement de libération du Congo and the Union pour la nation congolaise were
also reopened.
11. From 23 to 27 August, the preparatory committee held meetings and
completed its work, which defined the agenda, venue and participants for the
national dialogue and validated the road map of the national dialogue and the
representation quota for each category of political stakeholder. Whereas some
individual political parties and civil society organizations took part in the process,
the opposition platforms Dynamique de l’opposition and Rassemblement boycotted
the meetings. On 29 August in Kinshasa, Mr. Tshisekedi issued a communiqué on
behalf of the Rassemblement calling upon the population to reject any outcome from
the “pseudo-dialogue contravening the Sun City Agreement and the Constitution ”
and to take part in peaceful protests beginning 1 September. The communiqué also
called upon the Congolese people to stage sit-in demonstrations on 19 September to
call for the immediate announcement of the holding of presidential elections in
November.
12. The question of participation in the national dialogue created some fissures
within opposition coalitions. Divisions within the Dynamique de l ’opposition
platform emerged over participation in the dialogue process. Its initial hesitation
notwithstanding, the Mouvement de libération du Congo eventually aligned itself

16-16674

3/19

S/2016/833

with the position of the Rassemblement, although some party representatives in the
National Assembly decided to participate in the preparatory committee. The Union
pour la nation congolaise decided to join the dialogue process and was subsequently
expelled from the Dynamique de l’opposition. The Secretary-General of the Union
pour la nation congolaise, Jean-Bertrand Ewanga, and its Deputy Secretary-General,
Claudel-André Lubaya, resigned from their positions in protest of the decision of
the party leader, Vital Kamerhe, to join the process. They were expelled from the
party by its leadership on 3 September.
13. Divisions also surfaced within the leadership of the Union pour la démocratie
et le progrès social, with the party leader Mr. Tshisekedi removing Bruno Mavungu
as its Secretary-General on 11 August owing to a divergence of views with regard to
the national dialogue. On 12 August, Mr. Mavungu announced that he had created a
new party, the Union des démocrates pour la renaissance du Congo, whereas some
members of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social et alliés parliamentary
group in the National Assembly decided to take part in the dialogue process. On
29 August, a group of five political parties decided to leave the Rassemblement in
protest of what they regarded as the undue influence of “so-called new opposition
members”, by which they meant the Groupe des sept, on Mr. Tshisekedi and the
positions of the Rassemblement with regard to the national dialogue process. The
dissident group formed the Front national coalition and announced that it would
participate in the national dialogue.
14. Against this background of political tensions and posturing, the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo supported the efforts of the Facilitator by engaging a
number of Congolese stakeholders to broaden participation in the dialogue. The
President of the Republic of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, held several
meetings in Brazzaville with stakeholders from across the political spectrum of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Facilitator in an effort to support a more
inclusive dialogue. On 2 September, the President visited Kinshasa and held
consultations with the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, members
of the Rassemblement, my Special Representative and some members of the
diplomatic corps. My Special Representative and my Special Envoy were in contact
with the President of the Republic of the Congo to coordinate efforts aimed at
making the dialogue process in the Democratic Republic of the Con go more
inclusive and credible.
15. On 17 September, the National Independent Electoral Commission submitted
to the Constitutional Court a request to postpone the elections, g iven that it was not
in a position to announce the holding of presidential and legislative elections for
November as envisaged in the Constitution.
16. On 19 September, opposition supporters held demonstrations in several cities
across the Democratic Republic of the Congo, following calls by the
Rassemblement for the holding of elections in November and demanding that the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo step down by 19 December.
Demonstrations in Kinshasa deteriorated into violence, with the police firing live
ammunition and tear gas at demonstrators who reportedly tried to divert from the
agreed itinerary and pelted stones at the police. The headquarters of several political
parties affiliated with the Majorité présidentielle, including a local headquarters of
the Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie, the President ’s party,

4/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

were set ablaze. According to investigations conducted by MONUSCO, at least
49 people, including at least one police officer, were killed and 127 peo ple were
injured, while security forces arrested approximately 299 demonstrators, journalists
and human rights defenders across the country. On 20 September in Kinshasa, the
headquarters of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social, the Mouvement
de libération du Congo and the Forces novatrices pour l ’union et la solidarité were
attacked. Three people were killed and six were wounded when the h eadquarters of
the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social was set ablaze. Two government
buildings were also reportedly vandalized and set ablaze.
17. The same day, France, the United States of America, the African Union, the
European Union and the United Nations issued statements calling upon the security
forces to exercise maximum restraint, stressing the need for the Government to
ensure respect for fundamental human rights and urging political leaders to resolve
their differences through dialogue and other peaceful means. MONUSCO engaged
the authorities to stress the need to avoid the excessive use o f force by the police
and urge for the de-escalation of tensions. The Mission conducted day and night
patrols to monitor the security and human rights situation.
18. In the light of the violent incidents in Kinshasa, on 19 September, the
Facilitator suspended the talks at the national dialogue. On 20 September, the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo suspended its participation in the dialogue
process, arguing that the prevailing circumstances were not conducive to dialogue.
Delegates of the opposition also suspended their participation, citing similar
reasons. On 23 September, the dialogue resumed briefly, with the participation of
opposition leader Mr. Kamerhe. The Facilitator shared a draft agreement with
participants. Talks at the dialogue remained suspended as at 29 September.
19. During the reporting period, the President undertook visits to several
provinces, including Haut-Katanga, Maniema, North Kivu, Tanganyika and Tshopo.
Whereas the visits to Lubumbashi, Haut-Katanga, Kalemie, Tanganyika, Kindu,
Maniema, and Kisangani, Tshopo, served to mobilize support for the national
dialogue and the voter registration processes, the visits to Beni, Buleusa, Butembo,
Miriki, Goma and Rutshuru, North Kivu, aimed at addressing issues of insecurity
and demonstrating the commitment of the Government to that end.

B.

Electoral developments
20. The calendar for the voter registration process was on the agenda of the
national dialogue, and progress was made with regard to the review of the
legislative framework for the process and the preparations for the revision of the
voter register. On 4 August, the President publicly stated that the revised electoral
calendar would only be published upon completion of the voter registration process,
a statement which led to criticism by the political opposition. According to the
National Independent Electoral Commission, the voter registration process would
last 16 months. The Dynamique de l’opposition and the Rassemblement issued
statements, warning the Commission of the political risks relating to the
postponement of elections beyond the constitutionally mandated deadlines.

16-16674

5/19

S/2016/833

21. On 31 July, the National Independent Electoral Commission launched the pilot
phase of the voter registration process in Gbadolite, North Ubangi province, which
is expected to be completed by late October. As at 30 August, nearly 120,000 voters
had registered in 365 of 412 registration centres. The target set by the Commission
is the registration of some 850,000 voters in the province. MONUSCO prov ided
technical and logistical assistance during the pilot phase, including airlifting electoral
materials and providing warehouse space. MONUSCO finalized its plan for supporting
the revision of the voter register, which envisages the provision of technica l
assistance and logistical support for the distribution of nearly 22,000 registration
kits to 16 hubs, 107 antennas of the Commission and 18,000 registration centres.
22. By 15 July, the Government had disbursed $120 million of the total
$300 million pledged for 2016 to the National Independent Electoral Commission in
support of preparations for the elections. The multi-partner basket fund for the
Projet d’appui au cycle électoral au Congo, managed by the United Nations
Development Programme, remained funded at only around 6 per cent of a budget of
$123.3 million required to support the electoral process.

C.

Security situation
23. Armed violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to
place civilians at risk, resulting in an increase in population displacement and
insecurity. Joint MONUSCO-Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) operations contributed to containing the violence, while
cooperation with FARDC improved.
24. In Beni territory, North Kivu, recurring attacks against civilians were carried
out by elements presumed to be members of the Allied Democratic Forces. On
5 July, unidentified armed elements believed to be members of that group, killed
nine civilians in Tenambo village. FARDC troops launched an operation to engage
the assailants, with the support of MONUSCO, reportedly killing eight of them.
Clashes have continued between the armed forces and presumed Allied Democratic
Forces elements, the latter at times dressed in FARDC uniforms, especially in the
vicinity of the former stronghold of the group, known as the “triangle”, in the
Abyalose area and near Mayi-Moya. On 30 July, FARDC, with MONUSCO support,
clashed with suspected Allied Democratic Forces elements east of Oicha. Two
FARDC soldiers were killed and another two were wounded, and one MONUSCO
peacekeeper was slightly injured. Three presumed elements of that group were
killed and two were captured by FARDC. On 8 August, FARDC launched a
coordinated operation with MONUSCO against the Allied Democratic Forces in the
triangle area in Abyalose, during which five FARDC and one MONUSCO
peacekeeper were injured. During the operation, one main camp of the group was
captured and occupied by FARDC on 13 August. A MONUSCO helicopter was hit
by three bullets while attempting a medical evacuation in the area but managed to
land safely. MONUSCO was directly targeted, including on 4 August, when
suspected Allied Democratic Forces elements fired a rocket-propelled grenade
round towards the MONUSCO base in Semliki. As a result of the sustained pressure
from the operations, Allied Democratic Forces elements continued to move north,
including into Ituri province.

6/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

25. The most serious security incident took place on 13 August, when presumed
Allied Democratic Forces elements massacred at least 50 civilians, including
15 women and 2 children, in the Rwangoma and Beni areas, on the border with
Virunga National Park. The assailants, disguised as park rangers, established a
barrier at the entrance of the park, near Paida, where they detained, tied up and
killed farmers returning to their homes. The assailants then proceeded towards
Rwangoma, torching houses along the way and killing more civilians. FARDC and
MONUSCO reinforced their positions in the Beni and Rwangoma area s the next
day. A MONUSCO verification patrol was denied access to the site of the killings
by an angry crowd protesting against what it considered to be inaction by
MONUSCO. On 15 August, a senior MONUSCO team travelled to Rwangoma to
assess the situation, followed on 16 August by a multidisciplinary team to review
the response of the Mission. A high-level government delegation led by the Prime
Minister, Augustin Matata Ponyo, visited Goma and Beni on 15 and 16 August to
assess the situation and review the response of the national security forces to the
threat of the Allied Democratic Forces. A meeting of the National Defence Council
was held in Goma on 16 August. The FARDC hierarchy restructured the command
of Operation Sukola I to improve the effectiveness of operations against the Allied
Democratic Forces.
26. The massacres attributed to the Allied Democratic Forces sparked criticism
from civil society and the political opposition against the Government and
MONUSCO, which were accused of not doing enough to protect civilians. The
killings also prompted popular protest. Youth and civil society groups rallied over
2,000 protestors, who staged demonstrations against the perceived lack of action
from FARDC and MONUSCO and, on 17 August, marched from Butembo t o Beni,
where they clashed with police. At least two civilians and one police officer were
killed, several civilians were shot and wounded by the police and at least 10 houses
were burned down by the protesters. Authorities arrested at least 100 protestors ,
who were later released. The attacks triggered incidents of popular revenge but also
retaliation by FARDC against civilians perceived to be collaborating with the
assailants. Two women were burned alive by an angry crowd in Butembo, and six
civilians were abducted and killed by FARDC in the Rwenzori area.
27. The Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda and allied elements
remain a serious threat to civilians in North Kivu, notwithstanding the ongoing
FARDC-led Operation Sukola II to neutralize them. Deepening tensions were
reported within the group, with a split in the command structure following the
creation of the Conseil national pour le renouveau et la démocratie, led by a former
commander of the group, Wilson Irategeka. The split also led t o violent
confrontations between the two sides on 29 and 30 July around Bibwe, northwest of
Kitshanga, in Rutshuru territory.
28. Inter-communal tensions remain an increasing source of violence in North
Kivu. The continuing activity of the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du
Rwanda, the growing presence of opposing Mayi -Mayi groups and fighting among
various groups along ethnic lines fuelled the situation, contributing to an overall
deterioration of the security situation and further displacement of the population.
The violence mainly shifted from Walikale and Masisi territories into Rutshuru and
Lubero territories, reflecting the deepening intercommunal conflict among the Hunde,

16-16674

7/19

S/2016/833

Hutu and Nande populations. From 3 to 8 August, in the area of Kiribizi , near
Nyanzalé, in Rutshuru territory, North Kivu, attacks by Mayi -Mayi groups (mainly
Mayi-Mayi Mazembé and Mayi-Mayi Nyatura) and the Forces démocratiques pour
la libération du Rwanda on the civilian population along ethnic lines reportedly
resulted in the death of five Hutu, two Hundé and 11 Nande civilians, the torching
of more than 90 houses and the displacement of some 8,000 civilians, 300 of whom
sought refuge in the area near a MONUSCO base in Rwindi.
29. The activities of Mayi-Mayi groups involved in illegal poaching activities and
the exploitation of natural resources and the continuing trend of kidnapping for
ransom by Mayi-Mayi and suspected Forces démocratiques pour la libération du
Rwanda elements continued to drive insecurity in R utshuru territory. On 13 and
14 July, in response to cooperation between Congolese security forces and
MONUSCO that aimed at preventing illegal activities in Virunga National Park,
Mayi-Mayi Charles elements fired at MONUSCO helicopters and burned down a
FARDC post near the park.
30. In South Kivu, FARDC continued operations against Mayi -Mayi Raiya
Mutomboki and other Mayi-Mayi groups in Fizi, Mwenga, Shabunda and Uvira
territories. In Fizi territory, the combination of Forces démocratiques pour la
libération du Rwanda activities and direct clashes between FARDC and armed
elements crossing over from Burundi posed a particular threat to civilians. Although
FARDC reported some progress against the major Mayi -Mayi groups during the
reporting period, it has thus far not resulted in any significant disarmament. Illegal
mining in Shabunda territory remains a source of instability owing to the
involvement of armed groups operating in the area.
31. In Ituri province, elements of the Forces de résistance patriotique de l ’Ituri
continued to attack civilians and loot villages, with a total of 47 attacks against the
population occurring during the month of July alone. FARDC operations against the
group, with support from MONUSCO, resulted in the dismantling of 11 Forces de
résistance patriotique de l’Ituri camps. In Mambasa territory, Hutu and Nande
population movements from North Kivu, driven partially by the ongoing violence in
Beni territory, fuelled inter-ethnic tensions. A new Mayi-Mayi coalition, the Union
des patriotes pour la libération du Congo, was created and targeted isolated FARDC
posts. In that context, the sporadic return of former combatants from Kamina and
Kitona national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration camps to Ituri, North
Kivu and South Kivu, without adequate support for community reintegration,
presents serious security risks owing to the likelihood of re -recruitment by the
Forces de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri and other groups.
32. In Bas-Uélé and Haut-Uélé, the Lord’s Resistance Army was increasingly
active owing to the continued infiltration of elements of the group from South
Sudan and the Central African Republic. The increased presence of the Lord ’s
Resistance Army in that area is in part owing to ongoing military pressure by the
African Union regional task force within the framework of the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord ’s Resistance Army
in neighbouring countries. The Lord’s Resistance Army continued to ambush and
harass civilians along the two key axes of Dungu and Niangara territories and in
Ango territory. The group released 18 abductees in Ango territory, and another one
managed to escape. MONUSCO repatriated seven dependants of members of the

8/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

group to Uganda and South Sudan and handed over eight others to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for tracing and repatriation.
33. On 15 August, the Mission was alerted to the presence of former first Vice President of South Sudan, Riek Machar, inside the Garamba National Park in Haut Uélé province, along with several hundred armed elements and some civilians. At
the request of the Government, on humanitarian grounds, the Mission coordinated
the extraction of Mr. Machar, his wife and his son, as well as 10 other individuals.
Since then, MONUSCO has evacuated from the park some 755 elements of the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition who were considered to be in critical condition with regard to their
health and has collected 134 weapons and ammunition. The Mission has handed
over 117 individuals, including Mr. Machar, to the Congolese authorities. As at
20 September, a total of 633 individuals remained in MONUSCO facilities.
34. In Tanganyika province, there was a surge in Mayi -Mayi Kata Katanga activity
and a significant shift in targeting of security forces and intensity of the attacks. At
least 10 incidents were reported in July and 4 in August, including attacks against
national police stations and FARDC posts during which six Mayi -Mayi were killed
and six were captured and four civilians, one local chief and one national police
officer were killed. There were also reports of a large number of children being
recruited into the group on 31 July in Kyalwa village.

D.

Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
35. Cooperation with FARDC continued to improve following instructions by the
FARDC hierarchy to the armed forces to cooperate with MONUSCO in order to
work towards neutralizing all armed groups by December 2016.
36. MONUSCO increased its focus on the protection of civilians, in particular in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, pursuing efforts to neutralize the
main armed groups through a renewed emphasis on political action, enhanced
analysis and targeted political and military strategies. The Mission carried out day
and night patrols and joint assessment missions, as well as visits of joint protection
teams to areas of concern in Bas-Uélé, Haut-Uélé, Ituri, North Kivu and South
Kivu. MONUSCO intensified its efforts with regard to community liaison activities
and early warning reporting by reinforcing analytical capacity, harnessing social
media technologies and establishing two toll-free telephone lines for civilian alerts
in the areas most affected by the activities of the Allied Democratic Forces. The
Community Alert Network system transmitted an average of 225 early warning
alerts per month, which represents an 18 per cent increase from the previous
reporting period mainly owing to the increase in armed group activities and the
ongoing military operations against the Allied Democratic Forces and the Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda. The Government and/or MONUSCO
responded to nearly 90 per cent of the alerts. Those alerts not responded to were
regarding areas with limited State capacity and/or no MONUSCO presence.
37. In the Beni area, North Kivu, the Mission continued to reinforce its analytical
capacity through better integration among civilians and military and police
personnel, which resulted in improved protection responses. This allowed for more

16-16674

9/19

S/2016/833

rapid MONUSCO reaction in support of FARDC to repel attempted attacks by
suspected Allied Democratic Forces elements. On 30 July, a civilian alert from
Oicha village prompted immediate action from FARDC, which quickly deployed to
the area. MONUSCO provided support to the FARDC-led Usalama Operation in the
Eringeti area in early August, with a view to dislodging the Allied Democratic
Forces from key positions, including the group’s camp “Garlic”, and replacing them
with an enduring FARDC protective presence. The Mission instituted new tactics,
emphasizing the use of foot patrols to ensure better situational awareness and to
provide a more frequent, visible presence in areas where civilians are at risk.
Challenges persist, however, in terms of geographical coverage, mobility and
information flow, resulting in limitations on the capacity of MONUSCO and the
national security forces to reduce violence, instability, human rights violations and
population displacement in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition,
the integrated strategy for the fight against urban insecurity in Beni was extended to
include Oicha and subsequently replicated in Goma, Bunia and Uvira.
38. MONUSCO applied several measures to protect civilians and reduce the threat
posed by the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda in North Kivu and
South Kivu, including through support to Operation Sukola II. Specifically,
MONUSCO directly supported FARDC operations against elements of the armed
group in Rutshuru territory, with the involvement of MONUSCO troops in
Kanyabayonga and Nyanzale. In late June, MONUSCO provided air and ground
support to operations against Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwan da
positions in North Kivu. In addition, following the killing of nine civilians in
Kibirizi in August, MONUSCO deployed temporarily to key areas to s ecure the
civilian population.
39. In the context of rising inter-ethnic tensions, MONUSCO facilitated a number
of high-level visits in the Buleusa area, including by the Head of State and the
Minister of the Interior, following violence against internally displaced members of
the Hutu community. This resulted in a reconciliation ceremony on 23 July. Efforts
are ongoing to develop a comprehensive strategy with the humanitarian community
to address key drivers of the conflict.
40. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to support MONUSCO in
the protection of civilians and its stabilization efforts through the destruction of
5,645 explosive remnants of war, 470 weapons and 21,608 rounds of small arms
ammunition. The Service provided infrastructure for safe weapons storage, technical
advice and weapons and ammunition management training to national poli ce in
Bukavu, South Kivu, and Bunia, Ituri.

E.

Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration
41. Efforts under the Programme national de désarmement, démobilisation et
réintégration III focused on returning former combatants to their communities,
although with little preparation. Following the 15 June violence in the Kamina
reinsertion camp, between late June and 23 July, the Government transferred
688 ex-combatants and their dependants from Kamina and Kitona reinsertion camps
to communities in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. MONUSCO closely

10/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

monitored the return of ex-combatants with a view to minimizing the negative
security impacts of this return. Tensions remain high among the 3,591 ex-combatants
and their 559 dependants who remain in the two reinsertion camps, awaiting return
to their communities.
42. Surrenders by elements of foreign armed groups, in particular the Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda, have remained at a relatively constan t
level since the previous reporting period. Since 29 June, 36 forei gn combatants
(31 Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda, 2 Lord ’s Resistance Army
and 3 Nyatura), 2 children associated with armed groups and 64 dependents were
repatriated. The recent split within the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du
Rwanda seems not to have resulted in a surge in surrenders as it has largely served
to strengthen the resolve of the remaining hard-core elements to stay and fight.
Since 29 June, MONUSCO processed 37 Congolese combatants (6 Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda, 23 Nyatura and 8 Mayi -Mayi), 63
children associated with armed groups and 17 dependants.
43. MONUSCO continued to provide life support assistance to 1,322 Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda combatants and their dependants in
transit camps at Kanyabayonga, North Kivu, and Walungu, South Kivu, as well as in
the Government-run camp at Kisangani, Tshopo.

F.

Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
44. MONUSCO pursued efforts to assist the Government through the
implementation of provincial stabilization strategies and action plans, with funding
from the Peacebuilding Fund and the Governments of the Netherlands, Norway and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The establishment of
governance mechanisms within the framework of the Stabilization Coherence Fund
was evidence of the Government’s continued engagement with the International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, along with international partners and
the United Nations. On 18 July, the South Kivu Trust Fund Board approved the
stabilization programme for the Rusizi plains, Uvira territory. The provincial trust
fund boards in North Kivu and South Kivu became operational, and the Ituri Trust
Fund Board was established on 10 August. On 2 August, the Ministry of Planning
approved the manual of operations for the Stabilization Coherence Fund, thus
creating a basis for the transparent management of funds and the protect ion of donor
investments.
45. On 8 August, MONUSCO established a working group to provide advisory
and technical support to the Government in establishing a prison warden system, as
envisaged in the national justice reform, and training a specialized poli ce unit to
ensure prison security for a three-year period. The Mission developed an action plan
for the operationalization of the national interministerial body set up to establish a
specialized prison police corps to address the rampant escapes and ensure safe
custody of offenders.

16-16674

11/19

S/2016/833

G.

Human rights situation
46. From 1 July to 31 August, MONUSCO registered 776 allegations of human
rights violations. State agents were responsible for 480 allegations of human rights
violations, resulting in the death of 51 civilians. Armed groups were responsible for
296 allegations of human rights violations, with 178 civilian deaths. MONUSCO
documented 135 allegations of violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms linked to the restriction of the democratic space throughout the country,
bringing the total to at least 563 violations since January 2016, which represents an
increase of more than double compared with the 2015 statistics. During his first
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from 18 to 21 July 2016, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights echoed the concerns regarding the
increasing trend towards the restriction of political space, while also noting the
situation of political prisoners, the excessive use of force by the national police and
the manipulation of justice, in particular in cases involving opposition leaders and
civil society representatives. An increase in the targeting of human rights advocates
was also noted during the reporting period.
47. No major incident was registered during the 27 July opposition demonstrations
on the occasion of the return to Kinshasa of Mr. Tshisekedi. At least 18 supporters
of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social, however, were arrested and
subsequently released during similar events organized in other cities in the country.
48. MONUSCO continued to assist military justice authorities in carrying out
investigations and prosecutions relating to serious crimes allegedly perpetrated by
FARDC, the Police nationale congolaise and armed groups. During the period under
review, in Gety, Ituri, MONUSCO provided support to mobile court hearings against
14 FARDC elements allegedly involved in human rights violations committed in
2013 and 2014 during military operations against the Forces de résistance patriotique
de l’Ituri. MONUSCO also provided assistance to military justice authorities during
two missions in Beni territory, North Kivu, aimed at investigating reports of human
rights violations committed by suspected Allied Democratic Forces elements.
49. On 15 July, the Tribunal de grande instance in Buta, Bas-Uélé, resumed criminal
hearings that had been pending for more than three years owing to an insufficient
number of judges in the province. The Mission deployed advocacy efforts resulting
in the nomination of two judges and provided support to t he deployment of the
President of the Tribunal from Kinshasa to Kisangani. In July, MONUSCO organized
a series of capacity-building activities on arrest and detention for 124 judicial police
officers, magistrates, lawyers and judges in Tanganyika and Tshop o provinces.

H.

Sexual violence
50. Forty-three women, including 24 girls, were reported as victims of conflict related sexual violence. State actors were responsible for 44 per cent of those abuses
and armed groups for 56 per cent. FARDC soldiers reportedly accounted for 40 per
cent of the violations, whereas elements of the Forces de résistance patriotique de
l’Ituri, Mayi-Mayi Nyatura and Mayi-Mayi Raiya Mutomboki were allegedly
responsible for 33 per cent, 9 per cent and 7 per cent, respectively.

12/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

51. MONUSCO assisted the FARDC Commission on the Fight against Sexual
Violence with the dissemination and implementation of the FARDC action plan in
Bas-Uélé, Haut-Uélé, Ituri, Maniema, North Kivu, South Kivu and Tshopo. Between
19 July and 11 August, MONUSCO supported the Commission in organizin g four
sensitization sessions on sexual violence targeting FARDC commanders from the
third defence zone. A total of 200 FARDC commanders signed commitments to
apply a policy of zero tolerance of sexual violence in their ranks, committing to take
specific steps to prevent and respond to crimes of sexual violence in accordance
with the FARDC action plan and the joint communiqué on the fight against sexual
violence signed by the United Nations and the Government in March 2013.

I.

Child protection
52. MONUSCO documented 155 grave violations of children’s rights, which is a
decrease compared with the previous reporting period, during which 589 cases were
registered. A total of 115 children (104 boys and 11 girls) were separated or escaped
from armed groups, compared with 495 children documented in the last reporting
period. The main armed groups recruiting children were the Forces de résistance
patriotique de l’Ituri (50 children), Mayi-Mayi Nyatura (16 children), the Union des
patriotes pour la défence des innocents (10 children), the Forces démocratiques pour
la libération du Rwanda-Forces combattantes Abacunguzi (9 children), Mayi -Mayi
Yira (8 children) and Mayi-Mayi Raiya Mutomboki (6 children). Ten children
formerly associated with armed groups were released from FARDC custody in
North Kivu (8 children) and South Kivu (2 children).
53. The Bukavu military tribunal sentenced a member of the child protection unit
of the Police nationale congolaise to ten years’ imprisonment for raping an eight year-old girl.

J.

Humanitarian situation
54. The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo owing to armed group activity and increasing intercommunal
violence. The estimated number of people in need of humanitari an assistance
remained at 7.5 million, including some 1.7 million internally displaced persons.
Nearly 367,000 people were newly displaced in the first half of 2016, 38 per cent of
which were in North Kivu. As at 31 July, there were some 388,000 refugees a nd
asylum seekers in the country, including approximately 245,000 from Rwanda,
95,000 from the Central African Republic, 30,000 from Burundi and 15,700 from
South Sudan.
55. Insecurity remained a major obstacle to humanitarian access in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and continued to impact the delivery of assistance
to people in need. There were reports of several ambushes of vehicles belonging to
non-governmental organizations and kidnappings by armed groups. The number of
incidents against humanitarian workers has increased by 16 per cent since 2015.
56. As at 31 August 2016, the Humanitarian Response Plan of $690 million
remained funded at 43 per cent, amounting to a total of $295 million, a situation that
affects the humanitarian response.

16-16674

13/19

S/2016/833

K.

Economic situation
57. MONUSCO documented a downward macroeconomic trend owing to a
decrease in commodity prices, resulting in a scarcity of financial resources, which is
particularly felt at the provincial level. Civil servants from South Kivu provi nce had
not received their salaries in eight months, whereas a 50 per cent reduction in wages
was announced in Kongo Central on 24 August. Financial problems also prevented
the inauguration of the government in Tshopo. The Congolese franc continued to
depreciate by roughly 0.7 per cent in July, with signs of stabilization observed as at
8 August. Projections of annual inflation rates were estimated at 3.2 per cent,
against a target of 4.2 per cent. The steepest increase in prices was reported in
telecommunications.

L.

Regional developments
58. The President pursued efforts to maintain and improve diplomatic ties at the
regional level. He met with his Ugandan and Rwandan counterparts on 4 and
12 August, respectively, to reinforce bilateral cooperation, including with regard to
the fight against the Allied Democratic Forces and the Forces démocratiques pour la
libération du Rwanda, and expedite the repatriation of former Mouvement du
23 mars combatants.
59. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework and representatives of the National Oversight
Mechanism pursued efforts to advance the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. Particular emphasis was placed on addressing the delayed repatr iation
of former Mouvement du 23 mars elements, empowering women to effectively
participate in the implementation of the Framework and strengthening regional ties
to facilitate the national dialogue and the neutralization of armed groups.
60. On 27 June, the National Oversight Mechanism organized a technical assessment
meeting, in the presence of a Mouvement du 23 mars delegation, to harmonize views
on the release of the group’s prisoners, including the list of those subject to amnesty,
and discuss preliminary steps for developing a timeline for the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations. On 14 July, the coordinator of the National Oversight
Mechanism, François Muamba, resigned and the deputy coordinator, Léon Engulu,
replaced him.
61. On 20 July, ministers of defence of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region convened in Nairobi to review progress and identify challenges
relating to the neutralization of negatives forces in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region and reinforce their common strategy to address illegal
cross-border trade by armed groups. On 1 and 2 September, defence ministers from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda met in
Kampala, under the auspices of the secretariat of the International Conference, to
formulate a joint follow-up mechanism to address the threat posed by the Allied
Democratic Forces.

14/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

III. Deployment of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
implementation of its mandate
A.

Strategic dialogue and development of an exit strategy for
the Mission
62. MONUSCO continued to work with the Government to advance the
development of a conditions-based approach to the eventual drawdown and exit of
the Mission. The development of a one-year technical agreement on cooperation
between the Mission and FARDC contributed to strengthening the planning and
conduct of coordinated military operations with MONUSCO support in accordance
with the human rights due diligence policy. Progress has also been made in the
development of joint programming between the Mission and the United Nations
country team, which is a core component of the United Nations transition plan in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

B.

Transformation of the force
63. Progress was made in relation to the redeployment of the force in North Kivu
to better respond to threats posed by armed groups and efficiently protect civilians,
including through the establishment of a reserve capability in Goma and the
redeployment of the Force Intervention Brigade from Lubero and Miriki to the Beni
area. Capability deployment continues to be pursued through preparations for the
establishment of rapidly deployable battalions located in North Kivu and Sou th
Kivu. Although part of the equipment for the first rapidly deployable battalion is
still pending delivery, some elements were positioned in Bijombo, South Kivu, for a
two-week period, in response to inter-ethnic tensions between the Bafuliro and
Banyamulenge ethnic groups. Planning continues for the induction of the second
rapidly deployable battalion in February 2017, and a review will be conducted
before the end of 2016. The force continued preparations for a phased
transformation of military engineering companies to achieve greater effectiveness
through a leaner structure with integral force protection capability.

C.

Preparations for the elections
64. MONUSCO continued to reinforce its monitoring and reporting capacity on
human rights violations and restrictions on political space throughout the reporting
period, while improving overall preparedness to prevent, mitigate and appropriately
respond to elections-related violence. The Mission focused its efforts on prevention,
prioritizing such efforts as providing support to political processes and promoting
an environment that contributes to a peaceful and credible electoral process.
65. In that regard, my Special Representative and my Special Envoy continued to
use their good offices to promote dialogue among all stakeholders, which remains
the most important avenue for reducing the likelihood of violence and political
instability in the coming months. The Mission’s advocacy efforts for the respect of

16-16674

15/19

S/2016/833

constitutional rights, fundamental freedoms and human rights targeted local and
provincial government actors, security forces and civil society, including key
women’s and youth groups. The Mission pursued efforts to establish mobile civilian
monitoring and reporting teams in Kinshasa, Goma and Lubumbashi that would be
available to deploy on short notice to areas deemed to be at a high risk of electoral
violence and those areas that have no MONUSCO footprint.
66. The Mission continued to strengthen the capacity of the national police in
managing public order without resorting to lethal force and raise awareness of the
importance of respect for human and constitutional rights. MONUSCO provided
support to a sensitization programme launched on 1 July on the role of the
Inspectorate General of the national police, which is expected to monitor crowd
control units during the electoral period. As a result of MONUSCO advocacy, the
Government issued a ministerial order prohibiting the use of lethal weapons in the
context of managing public order.
67. The Mission continued to update its contingency plans for responding to
deteriorating situations, within available resources, while factoring in deployment
limitations and its insufficient presence in western Democratic Republic of the
Congo. MONUSCO plans include moving civilian and uniformed personnel and
assets to hotspots as required, within existing resources, while bearing in mind the
impact on the delivery of mandated tasks and operations. MONUSCO also updated
its risk analysis for elections-related violence.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
68. MONUSCO assessed that its support to FARDC-led operations against armed
groups did not lead to any significant increases in threats to United Nations
personnel and installations. Forty-eight significant security-related incidents were
reported involving United Nations personnel in the country, of which 16 were
hazard and safety-related. On 8 July, one MONUSCO staff member was abducted
near Katweguru in Rutshuru territory and held for 12 days in poor conditions before
being released.

V. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
69. MONUSCO continued to implement robust preventive and enforcement
actions to address sexual exploitation and abuse among its personnel. Prevention
activities focused on raising awareness of my policy of zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse among Mission personnel and local communities through
effective training and sensitization. Around 3,000 members of high -risk communities
in Bukavu, Bunia, Goma, Mavivi and Uvira were sensitized on the adverse impact
of sexual exploitation and abuse. MONUSCO conducted 15 risk assessments,
35 training sessions for new personnel, seven outreach activities of the community based complaint networks in Bukavu, Bunia, Goma, Sake and Uvira, and two
workshops in Goma and Kinshasa for uniformed personnel.

16/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

VI. Observations
70. I am deeply concerned about the impasse in the electoral process, rising
political tensions and related incidents. I condemn in the strongest terms the
violence that marred demonstrations staged by the opposition on 19 and
20 September and resulted in the loss of life and the destruction of property.
I reiterate my call for all political leaders and their supporters to refrain from any
further violence that could exacerbate the situation. I call upon the Congolese
authorities to exercise restraint in their response to protests and to abide by the
principles of necessity and proportionality. Perpetrators or instigators of violence
will need to answer for their actions. I urge all political leaders to address their
differences peacefully and through dialogue, in line with Security Council
resolution 2277 (2016). In that regard, I commend the steps taken by the
Government, the African Union Facilitator of the national dialogue and other
international partners to help unblock the process. I welcome the presidential pardon
and subsequent ministerial decisions on the release of a number of civil society
activists, human rights defenders and political figures and reopen two media outlets
affiliated with the opposition and the engagement of the President with citizen
activists. I urge the Government to adopt further co nfidence-building measures
aimed at creating conditions conducive to continued dialogue.
71. Dialogue should be a continuous process. A sustained dialogue involving all
major political stakeholders that put the interests of the nation and its people first
remains the only means for reaching the necessary consensus to allow for credible
elections to be held and would avoid the escalation of tensions and violence. I urge
the political groups who have not yet joined the process to play a constructive role
that contributes to the holding of timely and credible elections.
72. It is the primary responsibility of the Government and all concerned
stakeholders to maintain peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and preserve the hard-won gains made in recent years. The Congolese people
have suffered enough. MONUSCO has continued to develop and regularly review
contingency plans for addressing potential political and security risks linked to the
electoral process, however, a major deterioration in the situation would require a
response that is beyond the capacity of the Mission. I call upon the Government,
political leaders across the spectrum and concerned international and regional
partners to ensure that the increasingly tense political situation in the country is
managed through peaceful means and dialogue. Dealing with the consequences of a
major political crisis and the suffering that this would inflict upon the civilian
population would be far more costly than prompt and decisive preventive ac tion,
while there is still time to come to a compromise, find solutions and avoid violence.
It is essential that all political leaders show a sense of responsibility. The United
Nations stands ready to support such efforts and my Special Representative wil l
continue to engage with all stakeholders in that regard.
73. I am profoundly concerned about reports of increasing violations of fundamental
civil and political rights by State actors. They include violations of freedom of
expression and of peaceful assembly — rights anchored in the binding international
treaties to which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is party and enshrined in
the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Respect for the human

16-16674

17/19

S/2016/833

rights of all people is at the core of any inclusive, credible dialogue. People must be
able to express their views and work together without fear of retribution by the
security forces or judicial authorities. I encourage the Government to continue bringing
perpetrators of human rights violations to justice, in line with its commitment to end
impunity.
74. I am also concerned about the situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially in North Kivu where urgent action is needed to avoid further
deterioration. I condemn the brutal killings perpetrated in the Beni area by
suspected Allied Democratic Forces elements. Such continued attacks on civilians,
FARDC and MONUSCO are reprehensible and have devastating consequences for
the civilian population. It is therefore imperative that the national authorities take
robust political action and deploy the security forces in a determined effort to
address the threat posed by armed groups. I welcome the engagement and efforts of
the President and senior government officials to foster closer coo peration with the
Ugandan and Rwandan authorities in addressing the threat posed by some armed
groups. I am encouraged by the improved cooperation between FARDC and
MONUSCO in that area.
75. The process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration remains at the
heart of peacekeeping efforts, not only in bringing stability to areas affected by
conflict, but in addressing the threat posed by armed groups. More needs to be done
to provide former combatants with alternative livelihoods and prevent them fr om
taking up weapons again. To that end, I encourage closer cooperation between the
Government, MONUSCO and the World Bank to ensure the smooth transition of
former combatants from the reinsertion camps at Kamina and Kitona to the
reintegration phase. I call upon the Government to take additional steps to minimize
the risk of further violence in the camps and in the communities to which former
combatants are returning.
76. I am grateful to my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for his leadership in implementing the Mission’s mandate. I also wish to
extend my appreciation to all staff members of MONUSCO and the specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system for their commitment
to promoting peace and stability in the country. I am appreciative of the work of all
troop- and police-contributing countries, bilateral partners and other international
and regional partners, which continue to provide invaluable support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

18/19

16-16674

S/2016/833

16-16674

19/19
