S/2021/966

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 29 November 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8909th meeting of the Security Council
convened on 22 November 2021 under the agenda item “Small arms: The impact of
the diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security”. The interventions of the
in-person participants will be published as an official record of the Security Council
(S/PV.8909).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
the 8909th meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies
of which are enclosed: Egypt, Peru, and Spain. These statements will be issued as
an official document of the Security Council in accordance with the procedure set
out in the letter by the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent
Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which
was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, and reference to the official document will be made in (S/PV.8909).
(Signed) Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
President of the Security Council

21-17568 (E) 061221 211221

*2117568*

S/2021/966

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
I should like at the outset to sincerely congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the Security Council presidency for the month of November.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Izumi Nakamitsu, for the Secretariat’s support for its
activities to fight the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. My delegation
aligns itself with the statement made by the delegation of Qatar on behalf of the
Group of Arab States.
Egypt reiterates its support for the Programme of Action on Small Arms and its
International Tracing Instrument, with a view to curbing the negative impact of the
spread of small arms and light weapons in the Middle East and the African continent.
In that connection, Egypt commends the proceedings of the seventh Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects, which was held in July 2021, and welcomes its outcome document
and conclusions. We eagerly await the eighth meeting, to be held in 2022, so that we
can build on the outcomes of the seventh meeting.
The various crises in the Middle East over the past decade have been
accompanied by a proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which are being
used by extralegal troops, militias and terrorist groups to threaten peace and security,
thereby exacerbating conflicts. Other regions of the world have seen a similar
exacerbation of conflict owing to the spread of small arms and light weapons. We
must therefore work together to address and curb illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons.
In view of the foregoing, Egypt believes that it is important to support
implementation of the Programme of Action on Small Arms to help mitigate conf licts
and restore security and stability in countries in the Middle East and around the
world. That would help peoples to achieve their aspirations for comprehensive and
sustainable development. Egypt submits regular reports on its national efforts to
combat the illicit trade in small and light weapons every two years, most recently
in 2020.
Egypt stresses that the United Nations Programme of Action addresses the
issue of small arms and light weapons in an innovative way and should be supported
by maintaining consensus among Member States. Divisive topics should not be
introduced within the context of the Programme of Action and its International Tracing
Instrument. Nor should the Programme of Action be linked to any conventions or
treaties that do not enjoy international consensus, such as the Arms Trade Treaty and
the Firearms Protocol. It must be borne in mind that the Programme of Action is a
political declaration rather than an agreement that is binding on Member States. That
means that consensus among Member States must be maintained on the Programme
and its objectives.
Egypt welcomes the final report of the Group of Governmental Experts on
problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in
surplus, which recommended the establishment of an open-ended working group to
address such stockpiles independently of the Programme of Action on Small Arms. That
recommendation has been adopted by the First Committee of the General Assembly.
2/7

21-17568

S/2021/966

The negative consequences of certain States illegally transferring small arms
and light weapons to extralegal groups and militias in other states in order to achieve
political objectives are clear. It fuels international crises and threatens the security of
United Nations missions and peacekeepers. Egypt affirms that it is illegal to transfer
small arms and light weapons to any groups, entities or individuals without prior
authorization from the receiving State.
Egypt stresses that international efforts to combat illegal trafficking in small
arms and light weapons should not interfere with the right of States to meet their
national security requirements and the legitimate right of self-defence.
Egypt believes it is important to step up cooperation and support transfer
of expertise and training for developing countries. They should be provided with
the necessary equipment to allow them to build their capacities when it comes to
marking and tracing small arms, and border control. We look forward to a follow-up
of efforts to establish and support a United Nations fellowship training programme
for small arms and light weapons as soon as possible as part of overall efforts combat
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

21-17568

3/7

S/2021/966

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I would like first of all to thank the Mexican presidency of the Council for the
invitation and especially the Mexican Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Marcelo Ebrard
Casaubón, for having taken the initiative to convene this meeting, which gives us
the opportunity to jointly evaluate the issue of illicit transfers of small arms and
light weapons, which pose a serious threat to international peace and security, as
recognized in a series of Security Council resolutions.
I must emphasize that the illegal arms trade also constrains the efforts that
the United Nations and its agencies have been making in transition processes
from conflict to peace and development, in which it is imperative to guarantee the
protection of the civilian population, as well as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.
The illicit trafficking of these weapons profoundly exacerbates the situation of
vulnerable populations affected by conflicts and armed confrontations, which have
been growing more intense and harm women, children, adolescents and young people.
The multilateral interest in limiting illegal arms trafficking is multidimensional
and cross-cutting in nature, which is why it is framed in Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and, more recently, in the Secretary-General’s report
Our Common Agenda (A/76/982), which considers the need to reduce strategic risks
through the effective control of conventional weapons to fall within the purview of
the new agenda for peace.
For Peru, the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is a matter of deep
concern because it is closely linked to terrorism, violent crime, organized crime and
drug trafficking. For these reasons, we support the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, of July 2001, and the International
Tracing Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, of June 2005.
Alongside the international community, Peru is committed to the achievement
of these objectives, which is why, in 2007, it created the National Commission against
the Manufacture and Illicit Trafficking of Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and
Other Related Materials, which acts as the national coordinating body with the
Programme of Action.
We consider it essential for the efficient implementation of the Programme
of Action to foster trust and promote transparency, as well as the exchange of
information and international cooperation to strengthen technical and specialized
knowledge. In addition to these actions, the effective implementation of crossborder cooperation is essential and imperative, for which reason we have established
coordination mechanisms with Bolivia, Colombia, Chile and Ecuador and participate
in cooperation schemes being implemented to that end by the Andean Community,
the Southern Common Market and associated States.
The complexity of the fight against illicit arms trafficking, caused by new
technologies and the evolution of its trade, requires comprehensive consideration and
joint efforts at the national, regional and global levels, which is why we consider
it essential to put into practice the approaches contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons (S/2021/839), particularly those
relevant to areas of greater violence and conflict where United Nations peacekeeping
4/7

21-17568

S/2021/966

missions are deployed, so that, in cooperation with the competent agencies of the United
Nations, participating nations and local authorities, coordinated and comprehensive
work can be carried out to facilitate the location of weapons and ammunition of illegal
origin, in accordance with international instruments and standards.

21-17568

5/7

S/2021/966

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Spain shares the concern over the humanitarian impact of the proliferation
and illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons, as well as their negative
consequences on sustainable development and the maintenance of peace. For that
reason, it thanks the Mexican presidency of the Security Council for this open debate
on the impact of the diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security.
The Security Council must be called upon to play a key role in preventing and
combating the diversion of arms to conflict zones or the illicit trafficking of arms of
a criminal or terrorist nature. Spain therefore supports the inclusion of the problem
of proliferation and illicit arms trafficking in the thematic debates and on specific
countries held by the Council.
In more specific aspects of its work, particularly in the resolutions relating
to the mandates of peace missions, it is considered necessary to integrate the
management of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition, including
systematic data collection, centralization and analysis activities on seized, found
and surrendered weapons and their ammunition. The information collected thereby
will make possible the subsequent analysis of the diversion and irregular transfer
of weapons and promote the adoption of measures based on the conclusions of
said analysis.
Within the scope of Council resolutions on arms embargoes, the Security
Council must ensure effective compliance and articulate an effective response to
evidence-based cases of arms trafficking to conflict zones, which not only call
into question the validity and effectiveness of the Council’s resolutions, but also
contribute to the continuity and aggravation of the consequences of the conflicts
that are intended to be addressed. In this same area, the Council must guarantee a
robust mandate for the expert groups that monitor the implementation of embargoes,
including sufficient resources and powers to collect information and investigate
cases of embargo violation.
However, illicit transfers affect not only armed conflicts, but also terrorism
and organized crime. In that regard, the Security Council, together with the United
Nations bodies specialized in this matter, must adopt a leadership role in closing
existing gaps and facing new challenges.
In recent decades, the United Nations has promoted relevant agreements
aimed at combating illicit arms trafficking, such as the e Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime; the Arms Trade Treaty; the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects; and the International Tracing Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons. The Security Council must support the calls of the Secretary-General to
promote the universalization of these instruments.
In addition, unequal levels and disparate capacities persist in their
implementation, so that it is necessary to determine specific needs and gaps at the
national or regional level to help States control small arms and light weapons. For
that reason, we recommend that the Security Council urge the adoption of measures
that enable a more uniform implementation of these agreements.
6/7

21-17568

S/2021/966

In the field of application of the law and in this matter, the consolidation of
criminal trends, such as the use of fast delivery services, the emergence of new
criminal trends such as the 3-D printing of weapons, or the illicit rehabilitation of
deactivated weapons have been detected.
Universal measures should therefore be urged to support the fight against
different types of illicit manufacturing and trafficking. Particular attention should
be paid, for example, to strengthening border controls, encouraging the training of
the agents involved or the exchange of information among States, the adoption of
criminal investigation approaches focused on the illicit origin of weapons, or the
integration of financial intelligence in investigations against the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.

21-17568

7/7
