Taking note of the invitation of the Economic Community
of West African States of20 October 1992 in Cotonou for the
Secretary-General to consider, if necessary, the dispatch of a
group to observe the encampment and disarmament of the
warring parties,

"Letter dated 28 October 1992 from the Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/24735);17
"Letter dated 18 November 1992 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/24825)". 17

Recognizing the need for increased humanitarian assistance

to Liberia,
Taking into account the request made by the Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations on behalf of the
Economic Community of West African States in a letter it
addressed to the President of the Security Council on 28
October 1992,325

Resolution 788 (1992)

or 19 November 1992

Also taking into account the letter of 18 November 1992327
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia addressed to
the President of the Security Council endorsing the request
made by the Permanent Representative of Benin to the United
Nations on behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States,

The Security Council,
Recalling the statements by the President of the Security
Council on its behalf on 22 January 1991322 and 7 May 1992321
on the situation in Liberia,
Reaffmning its belief that the Yamoussoukro IV Agreement of30 October 1991 324 offers the best possible framework
for a peaceful resolution of the Liberian conflict by creating the
necessary conditions for free and fair elections in Liberia,

Convinced that it is vital to find a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the conflict in Liberia,
1. Commends the Economic Community ofWest African
States for its efforts to restore peace, security and stability in
Liberia;

Taking into account the decision of20 October 1992 of the
Joint Meeting of the Standing Mediation Committee and the
Committee of Five on Liberia of the Economic Community of
West African States, held at Cotonou, 32S and the final communique of the first meeting of the Monitoring Committee of
Nine on the Liberian conflict issued at Abuja on 7 November
1992,326

2. Reaffirms its belief that the Yamoussoukro IV
Agreement 324 offers the best possible framework for a peaceful
resolution of the Liberian conflict by creating the necessary
conditions for free and fair elections in Liberia, and calls upon
the Economic Community of West African States to continue
its efforts to assist in the peaceful implementation of that
Agreement;

Regretting that parties to the conflict in Liberia have not
respected or implemented the various accords to date, especially the Yamoussoukro IV Agreement,

3. Condemns the violation by any party to the conflict of
the cease-fire established on 28 November 1990;

Determining that the deterioration of the situation in
Liberia constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
particularly in West Africa as a whole,

4. Also condemns the continuing armed attacks against
the peace-keeping forces of the Economic Community of West
African States in Liberia by one of the parties to the conflict;

Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations,

5. Calls upon all parties to the conflict and all others
concerned to respect strictly the provisions of international
humanitarian law;

Noting that the deterioration of the situation hinders the
creation of conditions conducive to the holding of free and fair
elections in accordance with the Yamoussoukro IV Agreement,

Also welcoming the endorsement and support by the
Organization of African Unity of these efforts,

6. Also calls upon all parties to the conflict to respect
and implement the cease-fire and the various accords of the
peace process. including the Yamoussoukro IV Agreement and
the final communiqu6 of the informal consultative group
meeting of the Economic Community of West African States
Committee of Five on Liberia, issued at Geneva on 7 April
1992,323 to which they themselves have agreed;

Noting the request of 29 July 1992 from the Economic
Community of West African States for the United Nations to
dispatch an observer group to Liberia to verify and monitor the
electoral process.

1. Requests the Secretary-General to dispatch urgently a
Special Representative to Liberia to evaluate the situation, and
to report to the Council as soon as possible with any recommendations he may wish to make;

Welcoming the continued commitment of the Economic
Community of West African States to and the efforts towards
a peaceful resolution of the Liberian conflict,

99

8. Decides, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, that all States shall, for the purposes of
establishing peace and stability in Liberia, immediately implement a general and complete embargo on all deliveries of
weapons and military equipment to Liberia until the Council
decides otherwise;

13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to
the Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution as soon as possible;

9. Also decides within the same framework that the
embargo imposed by paragraph 8 shall not apply to weapons
and military equipment destined for the sole use of the peacekeeping forces of the Economic Community of West African
States in Liberia, subject to any review that may be required in
conformity with the report of the Secretary-General;

Decisions

14. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously al the 3138th
mttting.

In a letter dated 20 November 1992,328 addressed to the
President of the Security Council for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General referred to
paragraph 7 of resolution 788 (1992) of 19 November 1992, by
which the Council had requested him to dispatch urgently a
Special Representative to Liberia to evaluate the situation and
to report to the Council as soon as possible with any recommendations he might wish to make. The Secretary-General
informed the Council that he intended to appoint Mr. Trevor
Gordon-Somers as Special Representative for Liberia.

10. Requests all States to respect the measures established
by the Economic Community of West African States to bring
about a peaceful solution to the conflict in Liberia;
11. Calls on Member States to exercise self-restraint in
their relations with all parties to the Liberian conflict and to
refrain from taking any action that would be inimical to the
peace process;

In a letter dated 23 November 1992,329 the President of the

Security Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 20 November 1992328 concerning the appointment of
Mr. Trevor Gordon-Somers as your Special Representative
for Liberia has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Council. They welcome your decision."

12. Commends the efforts of Member States, the United
Nations system and humanitarian organizations in providing
humanitarian assistance to the victims of the conflict in Liberia,
and in this regard reaffirms its support for increased humanitarian assistance;

THE SITUATION RELATING TO NAGORNY-KARABAKH

and widespread material damage, and by their consequences for the countries of the region.

Decisions

"The members of the Council commend and support
the efforts undertaken within the framework of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, as
well as other efforts aimed at assisting the parties in
arriving at a peaceful settlement and at providing humanitarian assistance.

At its 3072nd meeting, on 12 May 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled:
"The situation relating to Nagorny-Karabakh:
"Letter dated 9 May 1992 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/23894); 43

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier
among members of the Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:330

"The members of the Council welcome the urgent
dispatch by the Secretary-General of a mission to the
region for fact-finding and to study ways and means to
speedily assist the efforts undertaken within the framework
of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
to help the parties to reach a peaceful settlement. This
mission will also include a technical element to look into
ways the international community could provide prompt
humanitarian assistance.

"The members of the Council are deeply concerned by
recent reports on the deterioration of the situation relating
to Nagorny-Karabakh and by violations of cease-fire
agreements which have caused heavy losses of human life

"The members of the Council call upon all concerned
to take all steps necessary to bring the violence to an end,
to facilitate the work of the Secretary-General's mission
and to ensure the safety of its personnel. They recall the

"Letter dated 11 May 1992 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/23896)."43

100
