A/63/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

78

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 31 March 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/63/725/Add.1
and Add.2)
The President: I would like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to documents A/63/725/Add.1 and
Add.2, in which the Secretary-General informs the
President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communication contained in document
A/63/725, the Dominican Republic, the Marshall
Islands and Paraguay have made the necessary
payments to reduce their arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter. May I take it that
the General Assembly duly takes note of the
information contained in those documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 105 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(i) Confirmation of the appointment of the
Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/109)
The President: I would now like to draw the
General Assembly’s attention to the note by the

Secretary-General contained in document A/63/109,
which pertains to the confirmation of the appointment
of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.
In paragraph 22, part B, of resolution 1240 (XIII)
of 14 October 1958 on the establishment of the Special
Fund, the General Assembly provided that the
Secretary-General, after having consulted the
Governing Council of the Special Fund, would appoint
the Managing Director, subject to confirmation by the
Assembly. That procedure has been construed as
applying also to the appointment of the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme.
By its decision 59/417 of 5 May 2005, the
General Assembly confirmed the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Mr. Kemal Derviş as
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme for a four-year term of office beginning on
15 August 2005 and ending on 14 August 2009. In an
announcement on 8 January 2009, the SecretaryGeneral informed that he had accepted with regret the
resignation of Mr. Derviş, effective 1 March 2009.
Following consultations with members of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the Secretary-General now requests the
General Assembly to confirm the appointment of
Ms. Helen Clark as Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme for a four-year term
of office beginning on 20 April 2009. May I take it that
the General Assembly approves that proposal?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-28579 (E)

*0928579*

A/63/PV.78

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, I would like to express our sincere
congratulations to Ms. Helen Clark of New Zealand on
her nomination by the Secretary-General as
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). We take this opportunity to
extend to her our best wishes for a successful term of
office and to assure her of our support and cooperation.
The Group of 77 and China believe that the
development agenda is a major and basic pillar of the
Organization, and one where considerable effort is still
needed. Indeed, sustainable development should
remain the centrepiece of deliberations at the United
Nations. The achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, should continue to be the
overarching framework for the activities of the United
Nations. UNDP is one of the main institutions whose
goals are directly related to the development agenda
and are linked to the lives of millions in developing
countries. We therefore believe that UNDP can play a
crucial role in supporting our development objectives.
For this reason, it is imperative that the Administrator
act in the interests of developing countries within the
framework of their national development policies and
priorities.
Today, UNDP continues to be relevant as a forum
for the implementation of our common development
goals by translating them into operational activities and
concrete actions in the field. Our objective in this
period should be the implementation of what we have
agreed on in the major United Nations conferences and
summits to help the poor in their struggle against
poverty, especially in these times of economic crisis. In
that regard, the Group of 77 is convinced that the
implementation of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, is of the utmost priority.
This constitutes the framework in which the
Group of 77 and China hope to work with Ms. Helen
Clark. That is a challenge we have to face hand in hand
with the new Administrator. We are hopeful that, under
her leadership, UNDP will respond to these challenges
in a transparent and effective manner. I wish to assure
Ms. Clark that the Group of 77 and China will support
her efforts as Administrator of UNDP in strengthening

2

our much-needed global partnership for development
based on recognition of national leadership and
ownership of national strategies.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 105.
(k) Appointment of the judges of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal
Memorandum by the Secretary-General
(A/63/700/Add.1)
Report of the Internal Justice Council
(A/63/489/Add.1)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
76th plenary meeting, on 2 March 2009, the General
Assembly appointed, by way of an election, three fulltime and two half-time judges of the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal.
By its resolution 63/253 of 24 December 2008,
the General Assembly decided, inter alia, that, as an
interim measure, three ad litem judges would be
appointed by the General Assembly to the Dispute
Tribunal and that the judges would have all the powers
conferred on the permanent judges of the Dispute
Tribunal and would be appointed only for a period of
one year as from 1 July 2009.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
appointment, by way of an election, of three ad litem
judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal for a
one-year term of office commencing on 1 July 2009.
In connection with the appointment today of the
three ad litem judges, I should like to bring the
following matters to the attention of the General
Assembly. First, as indicated in document
A/63/700/Add.1, the appointment of the ad litem
judges to the Dispute Tribunal is not addressed in the
statute of the Tribunal. Accordingly, the appointment of
ad litem judges will be made in accordance with:
General Assembly resolution 63/253 of 24 December
2008; General Assembly decision 34/401; the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly; and the
recommendations of the Internal Justice Council, as set
out in its report to the General Assembly
(A/63/489/Add.1).
Secondly, also as indicated in document
A/63/700/Add.1, it is proposed that the General
Assembly proceed to appoint the ad litem judges of the

09-28579

A/63/PV.78

Dispute Tribunal, bearing in mind operative
paragraph 58 of General Assembly resolution 63/253,
in which the Assembly invited Member States, when
electing judges to the United Nations Dispute Tribunal
and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, to take due
consideration of geographical distribution and gender
balance. If there is no objection, may I take it that the
General Assembly agrees to those procedures?
It was so decided.
The President: For the three vacancies, the
Internal Justice Council has recommended for
appointment the following three candidates, whose
curricula
vitae
are
provided
in
document
A/63/489/Add.1: Michael Adams of Australia; JeanFrançois Cousin of France; and Nkemdilim Amelia
Izuako of Nigeria.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, all elections should be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations. However, I should
like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The President: As the number of candidates
recommended by the Internal Justice Council is equal
to the number of seats to be filled, may I therefore take
it that the Assembly wishes to declare the three
candidates, namely Michael Adams, Jean-François
Cousin and Nkemdilim Amelia Izuako, appointed
ad litem judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal
for a one-year term of office beginning 1 July 2009?
It was so decided.
The President: Finally, as the three ad litem
judges are appointed as a transitional measure only for
a period of one year pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 63/253 and have not been appointed as
permanent judges of the Dispute Tribunal, may I take it
that the General Assembly also wishes to declare that
those three ad litem judges will remain eligible for

09-28579

appointment as either full-time or half-time judges of
the Dispute Tribunal in accordance with its statute once
they have completed their one-year term?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate the judges on their
appointment as ad litem judges of the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America.
Mr. Rashkow (United States of America): My
delegation would like to comment on the reports of the
Internal Justice Council concerning the appointment of
the three ad litem judges to the United Nations Dispute
Tribunal. We are concerned that the appointment of
those judges, as recommended by the Internal Justice
Council, has been unnecessarily rushed, denying
Member States the opportunity to make an informed
decision.
The
Internal
Justice
Council
report
(A/63/489/Add.1), with the recommendations for the
three ad litem judges, was only issued in its final form
at the end of last week during the final hectic days of
the resumed session of the Fifth Committee. As far as
we can determine, notice for the election today was
only published in the Journal as of the beginning of the
week.
We do not concur with the Internal Justice
Council’s assessment that there are exigent
circumstances that necessitate action by the General
Assembly at this time. Resolution 62/228 specifies that
the Internal Justice Council should provide two or
three candidates for each vacancy in the United
Nations Dispute Tribunal. Instead, the Internal Justice
Council has provided only three names for three
ad litem positions, and we are called upon to act today.
The new Dispute Tribunal does not commence
operations until 1 July 2009. We have already elected
three regular judges and two part-time judges to the
Dispute Tribunal. In our view, the principle purpose of
the ad litem judges was to help the Dispute Tribunal
address the expected backlog of cases in the Tribunal
that will occur once the United Nations Administrative
Tribunal ceases operations at the end of 2009. Thus, it
appears that the real need for ad litem judges will occur
only after the end of the year, not as of 1 July. Under
the circumstances, while we agree that these judges

3

A/63/PV.78

should be appointed as of 1 July 2009, there was no
need to rush the appointment process in this manner.
In this respect, my delegation was also concerned
that Member States were not provided with an
opportunity to make an informed selection from among
a number of candidates. My delegation believes that
Member States should be provided a choice in this
matter.
For all of these reasons, we think that these
appointments should have been made in May or in
June. My delegation would emphasize, however, that
our concerns address process and not the qualifications
of the candidates. Given the circumstances and while
registering our concerns about the process, my
delegation nevertheless has joined the consensus to
appoint the three candidates before us.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (k) of agenda item 105?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 57 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution A/63/L.60/Rev.1*
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the high-level meeting on the
theme “Africa’s development needs: state of
implementation of various commitments, challenges
and the way forward” under agenda item 57 at the 3rd
and 4th plenary meetings on 22 September 2008.
Members will also recall that the General Assembly
held a debate on agenda item 57 and its sub-items (a)
and (b), jointly with agenda item 43, at the 26th, 27th
and 29th plenary meetings on 15 and 20 October 2008.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.60/Rev.1*.

Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and the Sudan,
representing the Group of 77 and China.
I wish to thank the delegation of Morocco, which
played the role of coordinator, and the delegation of
Tanzania, which also dealt with coordination for this
very important draft resolution, which in its
preambular paragraphs recalls the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly on the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, as well as the World Summit
Outcome and the political declaration adopted at the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008.
The operative paragraphs of the draft resolution
take note of the sixth consolidated report of the
Secretary-General and reaffirm the General Assembly’s
commitment to the full implementation of the political
declaration on Africa’s development needs, as also
reaffirmed in the Doha Declaration. The draft reaffirms
the General Assembly’s full support for the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a report on the implementation of the present
draft resolution.
It is our hope that the General Assembly will
adopt the draft resolution and all of its components by
consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/63/L.60/Rev.1*. I have
been informed that Greece, Israel, Luxembourg,
Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom have joined
as sponsors.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.60/Rev.1*?
Draft resolution A/63/L.60/Rev.1* was adopted
(resolution 63/267).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 57?
It was so decided.

Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I have
taken the floor to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.60/Rev.1*, entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support” and sponsored by Austria,

4

09-28579

A/63/PV.78

Agenda item 48 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the preparation of the 2008 Review
Conference
Draft resolution A/63/L.66
The President: Members will recall that, at its
74th plenary meeting, on 23 December 2008, the
Assembly decided to consider agenda item 48 directly
in plenary meeting.
Members will further recall that, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 63/239 of
24 December 2008, the Assembly decided to hold a
conference at the highest level on the world financial
and economic crisis and its impact on development,

09-28579

and that the conference would be organized by the
President of the General Assembly and that the
modalities of the conference would be defined by
March 2009 at the latest. The draft resolution on the
modalities of the conference has been issued as
document A/63/L.66.
I should like to inform members that action on
draft resolution A/63/L.66 is postponed to a later date
to allow time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on the draft resolution as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 48.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

5
