A /67/PV.30

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

30th plenary meeting
Monday, 5 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gaspar Martins
(Angola), Vice-President, took the Chair.

IAEA statute and the 1957 Agreement governing the
relationship between the IAEA and the United Nations.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency

The draft resolution is the means by which the
General Assembly takes note of the statement of the
IAEA Director General and of the resolutions and
decisions adopted by the General Conference, and
recognizes the work of the Agency.

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/67/152)

The draft text before the General Assembly was
discussed in Vienna among IAEA member States, as
well as during informal consultations here in New York.

Draft resolution (A/67/L.3)

It is a simple factual update of last year’s text
(resolution 66/7) that merely changes the relevant dates
and lists the relevant resolutions and decisions adopted
by the General Conference at its fifty-sixth plenary
meeting.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 85

The Acting President: Due to the extreme weather
conditions experienced last week, the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency was unable
to travel to New York to introduce the report of the
Agency for the year 2011. His prepared statement will
subsequently be issued as a note by the SecretaryGeneral. Copies of the prepared statement are also
available here in the Hall.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.3.
Ms. Ventura (Canada): On behalf of the Canadian
delegation, acting on behalf of the Chair of the Board
of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), it is my pleasure to introduce the
draft resolution entitled “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency”. As colleagues are aware,
the General Assembly considers this draft resolution
annually. It derives from a requirement pursuant to the

It is my pleasure to commend this text for
consideration by the General Assembly. We sincerely
hope that it will attract consensus again this year.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Area countries Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area; as

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-57291 (E)

*1257291*

A/67/PV.30

well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.
We are pleased to support the draft resolution
entitled “Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency” (IAEA), a report that again reaffirms the
indispensable role of the Agency with regard to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and in assisting
the development and practical application of atomic
energy for peaceful uses, as well as in technology
transfer and in nuclear verification, safety and security.
The European Union remains committed to effective
multilateral action against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and emphasizes the importance of
universalizing the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We call on States that have not
done so to join the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States.
The EU welcomed the consensus reached on the Action
Plan at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The Action Plan, as well as the agreement on a process
for the implementation of the 1995 NPТ resolution on
the Middle East, including a conference on a zone free
of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East to be
convened in 2012, demonstrated our common resolve
not only to uphold but also to strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation regime. In that respect, the EU
commends the Facilitator, His Excellency Mr. Jaakko
Laajava, for the professional work and consultations
carried out, as well as for his report on the preparation
of a 2012 conference on a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East presented during the
NPT Preparatory Committee meeting held earlier this
year in Vienna.
The European Union recalls the IAEA forum
held in November 2011 on that issue and welcomes
the Agency’s support for the implementation of the
1995 resolution, including through the preparation of
background documentation for the 2012 conference
regarding modalities for a zone free of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems, as requested by the 2010 NPT Review
Conference Action Plan. In that regard, with a view to
contributing to those international efforts, the European
Union is pleased to reaffirm its support for a process
leading to the establishment of a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East, as demonstrated
by the recent adoption, on 23 July, of a new EU Council
decision. As announced at this year’s NPT Preparatory
Committee, the EU is pleased to announce that a track

2

2 seminar by the EU Non-Proliferation Consortium is
taking place in Brussels today and tomorrow and is
expected to allow for an open exchange of views on all
aspects related to the creation of a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East.
The 2010 NPT Review Conference reaffirmed the
role of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
in verifying and ensuring compliance by States with
their safeguards obligations, with a view to preventing
the diversion of nuclear material from peaceful uses.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
by the protracted and serious challenges to the
non-proliferation regime posed by the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
the Syrian Arab Republic, concerns reinforced by the
recent reports of the Director General of the IAEA to
the Board of Governors. Once again, the Board felt it
necessary to adopt a resolution on Iran reaffirming the
requirements of its 2011 resolution and urging Iran to
comply fully and without delay with all its obligations
under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
as well as to meet the requirements of the Board of
Governors, including the application of modified
Code 3.1 and the implementation and prompt entry into
force of the Additional Protocol, The European Union
fully supported the adoption of that resolution.
The European Union would like to stress again
that the Security Council, as the final arbiter of
international peace and security, has the mandate to
take appropriate action in the event of non-compliance
with NPT obligations, including safeguards agreements.
The Agency’s system of safeguards is a fundamental
component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
plays an indispensable role in the implementation of
the NPT. In that respect, the European Union would
like to express its satisfaction that the IAEA General
Conference adopted by an overwhelming majority a
resolution entitled “Strengthening the effectiveness and
improving the efficiency of the safeguards system and
the application of the Model Additional Protocol”. The
European Union is grateful for the wide support received
from the IAEA member States for what is traditionally
an EU-sponsored resolution. The EU reiterates its view
that the measures contained in the model additional
protocol form an integral part of the IAEA safeguards
system, and that comprehensive safeguards agreements,
together with additional protocols, constitute the
current IAEA verification standard. The European
Union calls for the universalization of those two

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

essential instruments of the IAEA safeguards system
without delay.
With regard to nuclear safety, in particular with
regard to the EU responses to the Fukushima Daiichi
nuclear accident, I would like to mention that, on
25 March 2011, the European Council called for
comprehensive risk and safety assessments — stress
tests — to be conducted at European nuclear power
plants. The 17 national reports — from 15 EU countries,
Switzerland and Ukraine — covering all nuclear power
plants of the EU and of participating countries have
been assessed by 80 reviewers from Europe. Many
observers from third countries also took part in that
unprecedented initiative. The peer-reviewed report was
transmitted to the June 2012 European Council meeting.
In July, an action plan was agreed upon in order to
follow the implementation of the recommendations
of the report. As requested by the European Council
in March 2011, the European Commission will now
examine possible evolutions of European legislation,
notably of the nuclear safety directive, and submit them
to Member States.
The EU attaches the utmost importance to the
implementation of the highest standards of nuclear
safety worldwide. International cooperation is crucial
to promoting the global nuclear safety framework.
In that context, the Convention on Nuclear Safety,
the Convention on Assistance in Case of a Nuclear
Accident or Radiological Emergency, the Convention on
Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Joint
Convention are instruments of major importance. The
European Union calls on all Member States that have
not yet done so to become contracting parties to the
relevant safety Conventions without delay. The IAEA
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety is also an important
instrument that should be implemented by Member
States and the Secretariat.
We face a new era of threats from non-State actors,
particularly terrorists, who seek to acquire weapons of
mass destruction and related technology and materials
and present one of the potentially most destructive risks
to global security. In the light of such ongoing threats,
the EU actively supports Security Council resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1887 (2009), as well as a number of
other international initiatives, such as the Group of
Eight Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction, the Proliferation
Security Initiative, the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, the Nuclear Security Summits

12-57291

and the Global Threat Reduction Initiative. The EU
looks forward to the Agency’s July 2013 lnternational
Conference on Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global
Efforts, which is open to all States, and welcomes the
role that international processes and initiatives can play
in facilitating synergy and cooperation in the area of
nuclear security.
The EU supports IAEA activities in the areas of
nuclear security in the framework of the implementation
of the EU’s strategy against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. The EU, together with individual
member States, is one of the main contributors to
the Nuclear Security Fund, having provided around
€30 million to date. So far, more than 50 countries have
benefited from assistance funded through EU joint
actions and Council decisions. That number continues
to grow.
During the period 2007-2013, under the EU
Instrument for Stability, nearly €260 million has been
dedicated to chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear (CBRN) risk mitigation worldwide. Of that
amount, more than €100 million has been allocated
to the EU’s regional CBRN centres of excellence
initiative. The objective of the centres of excellence is
to invest in strengthening the institutional capacity of
stakeholders in partner countries to mitigate chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear risks, irrespective of
their origin. At the same time, the European Union has
stepped up its outreach and coordination efforts to key
partners and international organizations. On 19 April,
the Security Council welcomed the establishment of
the CBRN centres of excellence (see S/PV.6752); a
major conference on the centres was held at the United
Nations in New York on 22 June; and EU services are
about to finalize a broad understanding on coordination
with the IAEA’s Office of Nuclear Security that will
include regular work on a strategic and technical level
on the radiological and nuclear aspects of the CBRN
centres of excellence initiative.
Effective physical protection is of the utmost
importance in order to prevent nuclear material falling
into the hands of terrorists or being accidentally
misused, as well as to protect nuclear facilities against
unauthorized use and malicious acts. The EU therefore
urges all States that have not yet done so to become
party to the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and its 2005 amendment.
Finally, the European Union uses several of its
financial instruments to support both the IAEA and
3

A/67/PV.30

cooperation with third countries in the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and technology, amounting to a total
of some €150 million per year. Where the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy are concerned, the Agency
plays an important role in the areas of human health,
food and agriculture, water resources, the environment
and nuclear energy, as well as in nuclear and radiation
safety, in participating Member States. Part of the
EU’s funding through its financial instruments is
implemented in third countries through the IAEA’s
Technical Cooperation Fund, to which the EU and its
member States are among the largest contributors. We
also make substantial contributions to the Agency’s
Peaceful Uses Initiative. On 4 May, on the margins
of the meetings of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2015 Review of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the EU
organized a side event on the topic of peaceful uses,
with the participation of the Agency.
Mr. Ferguson (Australia): Australia commends
Director General Amano for his report (A/67/152) on
the achievements of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and on the challenges it will face over
the coming years.
As a member of the IAEA Board of Governors,
Australia takes very seriously the responsibilities that
entails. We attach great importance to the central role
played by the IAEA in improving the safety and security
of nuclear activities, enlarging the humanitarian
contribution made by nuclear technology and verifying
States’ non-proliferation commitments.
In the post-Fukushima accident era, Director
General Amano’s ongoing actions and initiatives have
improved international nuclear safety, particularly
through the implementation of the IAEA Action Plan
on Nuclear Safety. The Action Plan is a strong and
practical demonstration of the priority the international
community attaches to achieving the highest possible
standards in nuclear safety. We encourage States to be
proactive in undertaking the actions outlined in the
Plan, and any additional actions that are relevant to
their own circumstances.
Australia welcomes the positive outcomes of
the second Extraordinary Meeting of Parties to the
Convention on Nuclear Safety, held in August, especially
the upgrading of the rules and guidelines that will
strengthen nuclear safety through more comprehensive
national reporting and robust peer-review processes.

4

While important, safety measures are not the only
elements required to properly protect people and the
environment. The IAEA’s nuclear security programme
and its role in international nuclear security initiatives
and activities are equally important. The IAEA
safeguards system is one of the central pillars of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime. To be completely
effective, the IAEA’s safeguards system must have
universal coverage. The universalization of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
is indispensable to the system. We continue to call on
those States that have not signed and ratified the Treaty
to do so as soon as possible, and to place their nuclear
facilities under IAEA safeguards. We continue to call
on all those States party to the NPT that have yet to
fulfil their relevant obligations under the Treaty to
conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements and to
adhere to the Additional Protocols without delay.
States must comply with their safeguards obligations.
IAEA safeguards obligations are not voluntary. It is
therefore a matter of deep concern that certain States
continue to be in breach of their obligations. We call on
those countries to engage with the Agency to resolve
all issues, demonstrate conclusively the peaceful intent
of their nuclear activities, and comply fully with all of
their international obligations, including addressing
the concerns of the international community. Australia
commends the Agency for its continuing efforts to
resolve those issues.
Australia continues to support the Agency in
developing safeguards techniques and approaches.
Recently, the University of Western Australia became
the newest member of the Agency’s network of
analytical laboratories. In that role, it will analyse
environmental samples with the ability to detect illicit
nuclear activities.
Australia is committed to working closely with the
Agency and our neighbours in the Asia Pacific region
on peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Australia
shares its skilled scientific research base, equipment
and personnel with regional neighbours and other
Member States, and we provide strong support to the
Agency’s technical cooperation programme.
The Agency plays a vital role in enhancing States’
capacities to prevent, diagnose and treat health problems
through the use of nuclear techniques. We should never
lose sight of such humanitarian benefits, to which the
IAEA is uniquely able to provide worldwide support.

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

Australia has recently announced an expansion
of its nuclear medicine production capability, which
in coming years will be able to supply a large part
of global need for medical radioisotopes. It is crucial
that we advance both health outcomes from nuclear
medicine and global nuclear non-proliferation efforts
by minimizing the civilian use of highly enriched
uranium. Our new facility is based solely on the use
of low-enriched uranium. Australia is also further
developing its specialized nuclear waste management
technology, Synroc, to encapsulate and store safely the
waste from its expanded nuclear medicine production.
Finally, the external environment in which the
Agency operates is highly fluid, and we must ensure
that the Agency has the capability to respond quickly
and effectively to external developments, be they
related to nuclear safety, physical protection, nuclear
proliferation or sustainable development. Australia will
continue to provide the technical, financial and political
support to ensure that the Agency can help States meet
the challenges of today and tomorrow.
Australia is pleased to sponsor draft resolution
A/67/L.3 on the report of the IAEA.
Ms. Tandon (India): My delegation thanks the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) for preparing the annual report for the
year 2011, as transmitted in the note by the SecretaryGeneral (A/67/152).
The increasing global demand for energy, as well as
concerns about climate change, volatile fossil fuel prices
and the security of energy supplies, remain essential
factors in deciding an energy mix for any country.
This is aptly reflected by the observation in the report
that, despite the nuclear accident in Japan in March
2011, nuclear power remains an important option not
only for countries with existing nuclear programmes,
but also for developing countries with growing energy
requirements. We note that the IAEA’s post-accident
projections of global nuclear power capacity in 2030
are slightly lower than previously projected, as some
countries have deferred their decisions to introduce
nuclear programmes.
The Fukushima accident elicited a global response
to the issue of enhancing nuclear safety, with Member
States reassessing the safety of existing nuclear power
plants. While the results of these reassessments will
be further refined as necessary in the light of new
information that might emerge in the future, it is a

12-57291

matter of satisfaction that the data collected by the
IAEA and the World Association of Nuclear Operators
shows that in 2011 the level of nuclear safety among the
435 operating nuclear power plants in operation around
the world remained high.
However, as Fukushima has demonstrated, there
is no room for complacency. The IAEA should also
take all necessary measures to allay misapprehension
among the public and member States about the safety
of nuclear power plants, taking into account the current
advances in relevant design and technology areas.
Therefore, we would like to call on all stakeholders
to work collectively to continue to enhance nuclear
safety. In this context, we would like to encourage the
IAEA to make concerted efforts to enable the free flow
of the latest information, technology and equipment
pertaining to nuclear safety among member States.
Nuclear energy has a crucial role to play in
achieving the objectives of India’s sustainable economic
growth. At the same time, India is extensively engaged
in the development of nuclear technologies in diverse
fields extending beyond nuclear power. These include
applications for improved crop varieties, crop protection
and
radiation-based
post-harvest
technologies,
radiodiagnosis and radiotherapy for diseases, and
technologies for safe drinking water, among others.
The nuclear power programme in India is oriented
towards maximizing the energy potential of available
uranium resources and the utilization of its large
thorium reserves. We believe that available global
uranium resources cannot sustain the projected
expansion of nuclear power without adopting a closed
fuel cycle approach and subsequently adopting a
thorium fuel cycle.
In this context, we would like to mention the
IAEA technical meeting held in India in October
2011, where over 50 experts from 20 member States
deliberated on diverse subjects related to thorium. The
participants noted thorium’s promise in extending the
global deployment of nuclear power, and concluded
that the technology is sufficiently mature for an initial
commercial deployment. We encourage the IAEA
to further engage in the thorium fuel cycle. With its
excellent physical and nuclear properties, thorium is
widely and rightly viewed as the fuel of the future.
Currently, India has 20 operating reactors
with an installed capacity of 4,780 megawatts, and
seven reactors under construction with an installed

5

A/67/PV.30

capacity of 5,300 megawatts. The first unit of the
1,000-megawatt electrical pressurized heavy-water
reactor at Kudankulam is due to attain first criticality
very shortly. The second unit is to follow soon after.
Work is proceeding on four nuclear power plants
of indigenous design of 700-megawatt electrical
pressurized heavy-water reactor type, two each at
Rawatbhata, in Rajasthan, and Kakrapar, in Gujarat.
The prototype fast breeder reactor of 500 megawatts
is also in an advanced stage of construction. A number
of other reactor projects are under negotiation with
prospective foreign vendors for the setting up of nuclear
power plants at different sites.
We were happy to welcome three new members
into the fold of the International Project on Innovative
Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO) in 2011. India
has been associated with INPRO since its inception,
and has contributed to its progress. We believe that
this programme has great potential for making nuclear
energy accessible in a safe and sustainable manner,
particularly to new entrants embarking on this path.
The IAEA, through INPRO, should continue to play a
central role in developing innovative technology for the
safe utilization of nuclear power.
My delegation fully supports other activities of the
IAEA undertaken to stimulate innovation in nuclear
power through technical working groups for different
reactor technologies, small and medium-sized reactors,
and non-electrical applications. The coordinated
research projects organized by the IAEA provide an
excellent forum for understanding and developing
technology.
India attaches great importance to the IAEA’s
work in the field of nuclear science. We contribute to
these activities through participation in the technical
meetings and coordinated research projects and support
the IAEA’s programme in nuclear fusion.
My delegation believes that the IAEA’s programmes
and achievements in nuclear applications in food
and agriculture, human health and nutrition, water
resources management, protection of the environment
and industry go a long way towards meeting the needs
of developing countries. We will continue to provide
our support to these IAEA programmes, including
by offering experts’ services and seats in reputed
institutions for training fellows from member States.
With these comments, we take note of the IAEA’s
annual report for 2011. India supports the work of the

6

IAEA and has sponsored draft resolution A/67/L.3 on
the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Mr. Lazarev (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On behalf
of the delegation of the Republic of Belarus, allow me to
express our appreciation for the report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano, on the activities of the
Agency over the past year (see A/67/152). The Belarusian
delegation reiterates its support for the Agency as the
leading international organization contributing to the
safe, reliable and peaceful use of nuclear energy for the
purposes of sustainable development.
The past year has been difficult for the entire
international nuclear community, in particular the
IAEA, in the light of the accident at the Fukushima
nuclear power plant in Japan. A quarter of a century
after the Chernobyl disaster, the world was again
confronted by a nuclear accident. That has forced us
to reassess the issue of nuclear safety and of how to
ensure it.
We note the great amount of work undertaken by
the Agency’s secretariat, in cooperation with member
States, to adapt current approaches to ensuring a global
nuclear safety regime. Belarus has taken an active part
in that process and intends to make its own contribution
towards implementing the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear
Safety, endorsed at the fifty-fifth regular session of the
General Conference in September 2011.
Belarus attaches the utmost importance to ensuring
nuclear and radiation safety in the implementation of its
national nuclear power programme. The safety of such
future programmes is a State priority and our country
undertakes all the necessary phases of developing
nuclear energy in close cooperation with the Agency
and in strict compliance with its norms and standards.
That was reaffirmed by the successful hosting of the
Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure Review mission
in Belarus in June. The efforts of Belarus were
highly commended during visits to that country by
the Agency’s Director General, Yukiya Amano, in
April and by its Deputy Director General, Alexander
Bychkov, in October.
We note the fruitful cooperation with the Agency’s
Secretariat on strengthening nuclear security. With
IAEA assistance, Belarus is implementing a relevant
and coordinated plan of action. We believe such
activities to be a significant contribution of Belarus

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

towards bolstering nuclear security not only nationally
but also regionally.
Belarus is firmly convinced of the importance
of the IAEA’s coordinating role in the global efforts
to strengthen nuclear security and to prevent nuclear
terrorism. Only the agreed and joint actions of the
international community in that area can produce
tangible results. In that regard, we attach great
significance to the implementation of and broader
participation by States in the international legal
instruments adopted under the auspices of the Agency,
including the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material.
Belarus actively participates in the Agency’s
Technical Cooperation Programme, through which
provision is made for considerable assistance in
applying nuclear knowledge and technology. The main
national priorities are the development of the nuclear
power infrastructure, environmental protection, the
rehabilitation of territories that suffered as a result
of the Chernobyl disaster and health issues. We
believe that maintaining and bolstering the Technical
Cooperation Programme, as well as ensuring its robust
financial support, must remain a priority among the
IAEA activities. As a firm and steadfast champion of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, Belarus
strictly complies with its obligations under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its
safeguards agreement. We deem it very important to
strengthen the IAEA safeguards system, including the
additional protocol, as the standard for verification
activity.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our support
for the Agency’s work. We note that Belarus is a sponsor
of draft resolution A/67/L.3, which has been submitted
for the consideration of the General Assembly.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the report of Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, on the work of the Agency
(see A/67/152).
Over the past year, the IAEA has conscientiously
performed its duties in accordance with its statutory
mandate by maintaining a balanced development of
its two major mandates of promoting the peaceful use
of nuclear energy and of preventing the proliferation
of nuclear weapons, and has achieved fruitful results
in various areas of its work. In the field of nuclear

12-57291

safety in particular, the Agency has taken a series of
measures to ensure the comprehensive and effective
implementation of the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety
since its adoption at the fifty-fifth regular session of
the General Conference of the IAEA. China believes
that such efforts by the Agency are of great importance
to restoring public confidence in nuclear energy, to
improving international nuclear safety and emergency
response and to ensuring the safe and sustainable
development of global nuclear energy.
At the same time, through its Technical
Cooperation Programme, the Agency has promoted
the application of nuclear technology in a broad range
of areas, such as public health, medical services,
agriculture and environmental protection. On the basis
of the Programme, the Agency has provided important
guidance to developing countries on developing nuclear
energy. It has also supported and assisted member
States in strengthening their nuclear security and
safety capabilities by establishing the Nuclear Security
Guidance Committee and by drawing up guiding
documents, such as the Nuclear Security Fundamentals.
The Agency continuously strives to promote the
universality of the comprehensive safeguards agreement
and its additional protocol, and has resolutely carried
out its safeguards functions. The Chinese delegation
is glad to see that the Agency’s work has been widely
recognized and supported by member States.
The Fukushima nuclear accident triggered deep
reflection within the international community on the
use of nuclear energy, and countries increasingly have
a sound understanding of nuclear power development.
On the one hand, nuclear power, as a clean and efficient
form of energy, still plays an irreplaceable role in
safeguarding energy security, in promoting economic
development and in combating climate change. The
global trend for nuclear power development has
essentially remained the same. On the other hand,
safety is a priority for and fundamental to developing
nuclear energy.
China always adheres to the principle of safety
first in developing nuclear energy. We have established
a comprehensive system of legal standards and a
regulatory framework for nuclear safety, and will
continue to improve such structures. We have enhanced
the management of our nuclear safety and emergency
response, stepped up efforts in staff training and
technology research and development and have a good
track record in nuclear safety. China has endorsed

7

A/67/PV.30

and actively participated in relevant international and
regional exchanges and cooperation in order to further
improve nuclear safety. To that end, it has also worked
tirelessly to develop and to implement advanced nuclear
energy technology.
China also attaches great importance to nuclear
security capacity-building and supports and actively
participates in relevant international cooperation. In
March 2012, President Hu Jintao attended the Nuclear
Security Summit in Seoul, where he expounded on
China’s policy and measures on nuclear security issues
in a comprehensive manner. China played a constructive
role in ensuring the success of the Summit and
made a great contribution to promoting international
cooperation on nuclear security.
At present, the construction of the centre of
excellence on nuclear security in China, in cooperation
with relevant countries, is proceeding in an orderly
fashion. China will strive to make it a regional centre
of excellence, and cooperate and interconnect with
other centres to raise the level of nuclear security in
the region. In addition, China supports the leading
role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the field of nuclear security, and will continue to offer
contributions to the Nuclear Security Fund.
The Agency is the most authoritative and
representative international organization in the nuclear
field. Member States have high expectations for it.
It is China’s hope that, facing the new situation, the
Agency will give priority, first, to further promoting
the implementation of the Action Plan on Nuclear
Safety and international exchanges and cooperation on
nuclear safety, and to helping member States enhance
nuclear safety and emergency response capabilities;
secondly, to further improving the standards and
guidelines in nuclear security and assisting Member
States in upgrading their national nuclear security
system with a view to playing a more important role in
enhancing nuclear security at the global level; thirdly,
to strengthening the safeguards regime and effectively
preventing nuclear proliferation; and, fourthly, to
maintaining an objective and impartial stand on
sensitive and controversial nuclear issues, and playing
a constructive role in peacefully resolving those issues
through dialogue and cooperation.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes and supports the important role of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The application of nuclear technologies in such
8

priority areas as health, food security, environmental
protection and the management of water resources is
an important contribution to improving life on our
planet. Cuba attaches particular importance to the
technical cooperation activity of the Agency because
it is an essential way to promote nuclear technology in
developing countries. Among other aspects, that can be
seen in the strict fulfilment of our obligations to the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme. In 2011,
Cuba fulfilled on time its financial commitments to the
Technical Cooperation Fund and paid 100 per cent of
its expenses for its national participation, achieving a
92 per cent implementation rate for national projects,
which is a figure higher than average.
In the case of Cuba, IAEA technical cooperation
projects fit harmoniously with our development
programmes, which guarantees their impact and
continuity. Cuba continues to increase its contributions
to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme through
various actions, among which I note the contribution of
44 experts who have participated in 70 missions, and
the organization of 20 courses and/or regional training
workshops.
Cuba also considers it vitally important to continue
cooperation between developing countries. That is why
we reiterate our support of the Regional Cooperative
Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and
Technology in Latin America, an essential mechanism
for promoting nuclear cooperation among the countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean. We welcome
the measures that have been taken to strengthen that
programme, both by participating countries and by
the IAEA itself. Cuba is playing an active role in that
process.
The economic trade and financial embargo applied
by the United States of America to Cuba for more
than 50 years affects the activities of the IAEA in our
country and violates the statutes of that body. Because
of the blockade, the IAEA has had problems purchasing
specialized equipment for projects in Cuba, since North
American companies or those that provide training to
Cubans are not allowed to sell their equipment for use
in Cuba because of the sanctions. Furthermore, it is
difficult for Cuban nationals to participate in training
courses organized in the United States, which also
affects the implementation of projects linked to the
fight against cancer, which is an IAEA priority. Once
again, I denounce the unjust and criminal blockade.
Cuba recognizes, however, the ongoing efforts of the

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

IAEA secretariat to find alternatives or solutions to
that problem.
My country appreciates the work of the
Organization in the area of nuclear safety, and
stresses the fundamental responsibility of States in
that area. In March, Cuba and the IAEA signed an
integrated support plan for physical nuclear safety, the
implementation of which is advancing satisfactorily.
We welcome the excellent level of cooperation that has
been achieved with the IAEA Department of Nuclear
Safety and Security in the implementation of projects
to improve physical nuclear safety in border control and
installations with Category 1 and 2 radioactive sources.
Cuba has also hosted regional training events, an area
of IAEA support that we consider to be fundamental.
My country also welcomes the preparations being
carried out by the International Atomic Energy Agency
to host the important international conference on
nuclear security that will take place in Vienna from 1 to
5 July 2013, with the participation of all member States.
In that context, I would like to inform the Assembly
that Cuba is at an advanced stage of the constitutional
process of ratifying the Amendment to the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. We
reaffirm the need to strengthen the nuclear security
regime at the international level, and stress that this
is the primary responsibility of States with nuclear
installations. Moreover, we recognize the IAEA’s
central role in promoting and coordinating international
efforts and cooperation to strengthen nuclear security
at the global level.
Cuba is part of the small group of countries that
have met their commitments in the area of safeguards,
as certified by the IAEA, which confirms that we are a
country that does not have undeclared nuclear material
or engage in undeclared nuclear activities. We attach
great importance to the sensitive issue of safeguards and
to the impartial and professional conduct of the IAEA
secretariat in the activities undertaken in that area.
We have repeatedly criticized the manipulation and
politicization of the Agency for political purposes, as
well as the double standards that unfortunately prevail
in its analyses. Activities in that area are the exclusive
competence of the IAEA, and we therefore reiterate
our rejection of the decisions that have involved the
Security Council in their consideration.
Cuba reaffirms that verification activities must
first and foremost respect the sovereignty and national

12-57291

interests of member States. We call on the IAEA
secretariat to continue to work to provide a climate of
impartiality, trust, understanding and transparency,
based on objectivity and truth, which will help resolve
the specific issues of compliance with safeguards
agreements being considered by the Board of Governors
and/or the General Conference of the IAEA. In that
regard, we reaffirm the need to respect the inalienable
right of all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes.
We once again affirm our support for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and for a
negotiated solution to the issue on the part of all those
involved. We are firmly convinced that only through
diplomacy and dialogue through peaceful means will
it be possible to achieve a long-term solution to the
nuclear issue on the peninsula.
We would also reiterate our support for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons in the
Middle East. That would be an important contribution to
achieving the goal of nuclear disarmament and a major
step forward in the peace process in the region. In order
to bring that about, Israel should join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons without further
delay or conditions and submit its nuclear installations
to the broad safeguards of the IAEA. Cuba hopes that
the conference on the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East will be held with success in 2012
with the participation of all States of the region.
While we support the important role played by the
IAEA and its links with the United Nations system, in
particular with the disarmament machinery, we would
take this opportunity to reiterate that our joint efforts
must be to continue to defend nuclear disarmament
as the highest priority owing to the serious threat to
international peace and security and the survival of the
human race posed by the existence of more than 20,000
nuclear warheads and military doctrines and strategies
that perpetuate their possession and use.
Finally, we wish to emphasize that nuclear
disarmament cannot be a goal that is postponed or
subject to conditions. Cuba will stand firm in the battle
for a better world free of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): One and a half years after the
Great East Japan Earthquake and its resulting tsunamis
and the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Power Station of the Tokyo Electric Power Company,

9

A/67/PV.30

Japan is continuing its efforts, including those directed
towards decontaminating and restoring the stricken
areas. We once again express our gratitude for the great
support and assistance that we have received from the
international community to date.

The IAEA is the only international organization
that has expertise in all aspects of nuclear energy; its
expertise is not limited to nuclear safety and security.
We should not lessen our efforts aimed at supporting
the IAEA as it undertakes all its roles.

I take the opportunity afforded by today’s debate
to talk about some of the major steps we have taken
to contribute to progress in the Nuclear Safety Action
Plan of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) over the past year. That issue is of particular
importance to Japan, as my country is organizing the
Fukushima Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety
next December, in co-sponsorship with the IAEA. We
find it important to urge the international community to
implement the Action Plan and to share lessons learned
and knowledge derived from the accident.

Japan attaches importance to the steady
implementation of the Action Plan agreed at the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in concert
with the IAEA and others. In that connection, Japan
welcomes the ongoing efforts by the United States
and Russia towards the control and disposal of certain
weapons-grade plutonium and the implementation of
the IAEA verification system. We expect similar efforts
from the other nuclear-weapon States.

First of all, in order to strengthen international
nuclear safety, we have fully imparted information and
knowledge about the accident with the international
community. Japan has already presented two detailed
reports to the IAEA on the course of events.
Secondly, Japan decided to strengthen its national
nuclear regulatory body. A new regulatory body, the
Nuclear Regulation Authority, was established in order
to separate the authority to regulate nuclear energy
from that of promoting it, and to ensure that the new
Authority will enjoy a high degree of independence
so that it can assume responsibility for all important
nuclear regulatory functions — safety and security,
radiation protection and, beginning in April 2013,
safeguards issues, that is, each of the three “S”
functions. Furthermore, Japan welcomes Director
General Amano’s expressed intention to prepare a
comprehensive report on the Fukushima Daiichi
accident, which will be finalized in 2014. Japan will
actively cooperate with that effort.
In order to strengthen global nuclear security,
Japan will continue to endeavour to provide assistance
to developing countries through the activities of the
Integrated Support Centre for Nuclear Non-proliferation
and Nuclear Security, working in concert with other
countries and the IAEA. Japan appreciates the IAEA’s
efforts aimed at promoting the entry into force of
the amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material. Japan, recognizing that
the amendment will bring important changes to global
nuclear security, will make the necessary efforts to that
end.

10

Years of constant effort by the international
community to improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of the IAEA safeguards have been indispensable. Thanks
to them, the number of States with additional protocols
in force increased from 110 to 119 over the past year,
which is progress that Japan welcomes. Accordingly,
Japan will further contribute to efforts for the
universalization of the additional protocol. Specifically,
we will do our utmost through the joint efforts of the
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI),
which is a cross-regional group that aims to promote
the implementation of the consensus outcome of the
2010 Review Conference and to contribute to the steady
reduction of nuclear risks. Japanese Foreign Minister
Gemba co-chaired the most recent ministerial level
meeting of the NPDI, which was held on 26 September
at the margins of the General Assembly. As expressed
in the joint ministerial statement of that meeting, the
NPDI is working on the ministerial letters that will
urge action on the additional protocol.
Regional nuclear issues remain the most pressing
challenge for the international community. The IAEA,
carrying out its mission to, inter alia, prevent the
diversion to military uses of nuclear energy, has been
playing important roles on those issues in the light of
the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
The nuclear issue of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is a threat to peace and security in
East Asia and for the entire international community.
Its uranium enrichment programme constitutes a
clear violation of Security Council resolutions and the
September 2005 Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks.
Japan supports the critical role that the IAEA continues

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

to play in resolving the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea nuclear issue.
With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, it is
indispensable for Iran to take substantive measures to
assuage the concerns of the international community
and build its confidence. Japan will continue to act in
concert with the international community for a peaceful
and diplomatic settlement of the issue.
The IAEA, which is pivotal in the nuclear
non-proliferation system, has also been working
decisively for the resolution of regional nuclear issues.
For instance, last November, the IAEA hosted the
Forum on Experience of Possible Relevance to the
Creation of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the Middle
East to contribute to confidence-building efforts by the
States concerned.
The IAEA’s promotion of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy in a manner that ensures nuclear safety,
security and safeguards is sure to benefit all the States
Members of the United Nations. Japan attaches great
importance to IAEA technical cooperation and, as part
of our action in that regard, will make a contribution
to the IAEA in the amount of $3.5 million in this
fiscal year, in addition to the contribution made in the
2011 fiscal year, in order to ensure the success of the
IAEA’s Peaceful Uses Initiative. In addition, Japan will
continue to contribute to the promotion of technical
cooperation in areas such as radiological science.
In the light of the accident at Tokyo Electric Power
Company’s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station
on 11 March 2011, the Japanese Government, with a
view to realizing a society not dependent on nuclear
power by the 2030s, and while constantly reviewing
and re-examining policies and carefully assessing the
future outlook, including the international situation
regarding energy, will mobilize all possible policy
resources to demonstrate to the world a model that
strikes a good balance between economic growth and
the shift towards green energy.
As a responsible country where this nuclear
accident took place, we are taking the lessons from this
accident fully into account with a view to enhancing
safety in the peaceful use of nuclear energy worldwide,
Japan will continue to cooperate with the international
community. Japan is resolved to overcome the
challenges posed by this historic accident by benefiting
widely from the wisdom of the world. Japan will
endeavour, through cooperation with the IAEA and

12-57291

other countries, to ensure the world of the highest level
of safety and security in its peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, and further secure confidence that there is no
cause for concern regarding nuclear proliferation in or
by Japan.
Ms. Hussain (Singapore): The delegation of
Singapore would like to thank the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr Yukiya Amano, and his secretariat for the
comprehensive annual report of the Agency (see A/67/152).
As the global focal point for nuclear cooperation, the
IAEA makes important contributions to international
peace and security through its promotion of the safe,
secure and peaceful uses of nuclear science and
technology, and nuclear non-proliferation. Its mission
of safety and security, safeguards and verification, and
science and technology constitutes a comprehensive
regime. Singapore strongly supports the IAEA’s
important work and is pleased to co-sponsor draft
resolution A/67/L.3 on the report of the IAEA.
The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident in March
2011 was a wake-up call against complacency with
regard to the safe operation of nuclear power plants
and the effective regulation of the nuclear industry.
It was a painful reminder that safety can never be
taken for granted. In the aftermath of the accident,
in September 2011 IAEA member States adopted the
IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, which is now
being implemented.
Progress has been made in many areas, and we
commend the efforts of the secretariat to oversee
the implementation of the Action Plan in the 12 key
areas to enhance the global nuclear safety framework.
However, much more work remains to be done. The full
and effective implementation of the Action Plan will
require the cooperation and commitment of all member
States, the secretariat and other relevant stakeholders.
In this regard, we look forward to a meaningful and
constructive outcome at the upcoming Fukushima
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety, to be held in
December 2012.
At the same time, while the primary responsibility
for nuclear safety rests with individual States, the farreaching and potentially devastating transboundary
impact of a nuclear accident means that ensuring and
strengthening the safety standards of nuclear facilities
are of concern to the international community as a
whole, and in particular the IAEA. Proposals to enhance

11

A/67/PV.30

the effectiveness of the Convention on Nuclear Safety
were also discussed during the Second Extraordinary
Meeting of Contracting Parties to the Convention, held
in Vienna in August. We welcome efforts that would
strengthen the Convention.
We also encourage the IAEA to step up its capacitybuilding cooperation with regional organizations to
promote and uphold the IAEA standards of safety
and security in the development of nuclear energy
for peaceful uses. This would help to enhance and
strengthen nuclear safety in the world. In this regard,
we are pleased to report that good progress has been
made on the Network of Nuclear Regulatory Bodies or
Relevant Authorities of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), an initiative of Thailand,
to establish a network of nuclear regulatory bodies
among South-East Asian countries, and to enhance
regional cooperation on nuclear safety, security and
safeguards matters, including emergency preparedness
and response and environmental radiation monitoring.
We look forward to close collaborations between the
ASEAN nuclear regulatory network and the IAEA and
international partners.
Nuclear non-proliferation remains a core aspect of
the IAEA’s mission. Singapore firmly believes that all
States have the right to develop and use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes. At the same time, the IAEA
has the vital task of ensuring that nuclear material
and technology meant for peaceful purposes are not
diverted for non-civilian uses that could threaten
regional and international peace and stability. The
IAEA’s safeguards and verification regimes remain
central to multilateral efforts to curb the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. It is therefore both in the interests
and the responsibility of all States to comply with
these regimes. In this connection, Singapore strongly
urges all States which have not done so to accede to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the IAEA’s comprehensive safeguards agreements
and additional protocols. Those States that have done
so should fully implement these agreements.
The IAEA plays a central role as the global platform
for strengthening nuclear security. It focuses on helping
to minimize the risk of nuclear and other radioactive
material falling into the hands of terrorists, or of
nuclear facilities being subjected to malicious acts.
In this regard, the IAEA Illicit Trafficking Database,
which monitors thefts and other unauthorized activities
involving nuclear and radioactive materials, is the

12

authoritative global source of information on illicit
trafficking. Singapore is pleased to announce that we
joined the IAEA Illicit Trafficking Database in March.
The IAEA’s work goes beyond nuclear
non-proliferation and nuclear energy. The Agency
makes important contributions to tackling fundamental
global problems such as food security, water and energy
shortages, and climate change, as well as in the area of
human health. Member States must continue to support
the IAEA’s role in promoting the peaceful application
of nuclear science and technology, such as for use in
cancer treatment in developing countries.
Singapore recently completed its term as a member
of the IAEA Board of Governors. We would like to
reiterate our continued support for the Agency’s vital
role and tasks. Over the past decade, Singapore has
hosted 23 scientific visits, 92 fellowship attachments
and 25 regional training events with the IAEA. More
recently, in June this year we hosted the Asia-Europe
Meeting seminar on nuclear safety, with a specific focus
on emergency preparedness and response, which is one
of the key areas of focus in the Action Plan on Nuclear
Safety. As part of our continued cooperation with the
IAEA, Singapore will jointly host a regional workshop
on notification, reporting and requesting assistance in
December. In addition, we will continue to support the
IAEA in promoting capacity-building, in particular
among developing countries, through various technical
assistance and cooperation projects.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Once
again, the past year has been very important for the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
challenges facing the IAEA are no less important.
Switzerland would like to underline three.
First, Switzerland welcomes the fact that, unlike
last year, the IAEA General Conference in September
adopted its traditional resolution on safeguards without
opposition. However, the debate surrounding the
adoption of the resolution highlighted the concerns
of some member States as to the direction taken
by the secretariat on the conceptual development
of safeguards, namely, the “State-level concept”.
Switzerland fully supports efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of safeguards. In this regard, we believe
that increased transparency in the participation not
only of the secretariat regarding the progress of its
work, but also of the member States with respect to

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

their real concerns, could contribute to overcoming
these difficulties.
Secondly, Switzerland welcomes the decision of the
Second Extraordinary Meeting of Contracting Parties
to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, held in August
in Vienna, to establish a working group to address the
strengthening of the Convention.
Switzerland will actively participate in that
working group and in the ministerial conference on
nuclear safety to be held in December in Fukushima.
Switzerland is indeed convinced that a credible global
nuclear safety regime requires the firm commitment
of States to conducting periodical peer reviews and to
addressing safety issues in a fully transparent manner.
Finally, Switzerland welcomes the decision of the
IAEA to organize a conference on nuclear security
in Vienna in July 2013. This decision will allow us
to continue, in a more inclusive way, the discussions
already initiated during the three most recent nuclear
security summits.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): The Chernobyl
nuclear power plant accident in 1986 triggered not only
the revision of international nuclear safety standards,
but the creation of numerous international instruments
to ensure both the highest level of nuclear, nuclear
waste and radiation safety worldwide and a relevant
system of emergency preparedness and response.
In 2011, those instruments were put to the test in
response to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant
accident. We believe that, given its unique expertise,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
a leading role to play in any nuclear-related accident or
emergency, and that its on-site involvement is vital in
addressing situations such as that at Fukushima.
While responsibility for nuclear safety rests with
each member State, we believe that the IAEA safety
fundamentals and requirements should constitute a
minimum obligatory basis for States that have advanced
civil nuclear programmes.
We believe that activities under both the
Convention on Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management enhance the
safety of nuclear energy uses worldwide. We call upon
all countries that have not yet done so to join these
important instruments. We consider that participation
in those conventions is in the best interest of any

12-57291

country that has or is planning its own nuclear power
programme. The existing international treaty basis
concerning nuclear safety and the reaction to nuclear
accidents requires further improvement. The relevant
work has already started in Vienna, and we believe that
positive results could be achieved.
Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate
our gratitude to those countries and international
organizations that continue to provide us with support
and assistance in overcoming the consequences of the
Chernobyl accident. I am pleased to report that, in
April 2012, we reached an important milestone — the
start of work on assembling the new safe confinement
construction over the destroyed unit 4 of the Chernobyl
nuclear power plant. This work, to be completed in
2015, will pave the way for further transformation of
the shelter object into an ecologically safe system.
Nuclear security is an essential programme of the
Agency. Ukraine commends the IAEA for its activities
aimed at assisting States in preventing and combating
nuclear terrorism. We would like to emphasize the
important role of the Agency in fostering international
cooperation on nuclear security, in establishing a
comprehensive set of nuclear security guidelines, and in
assisting member States, upon their request, to enhance
their nuclear security.
Ukraine reaffirms its view that the responsibility
for nuclear security rests with each individual State. All
States have the responsibility to establish appropriate
systems of accounting and control to take the necessary
measures to prevent, detect and respond to malicious
acts involving nuclear material. Ukraine supports the
implementation of the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan
for 2010-2013. We acknowledge the progress achieved
by the Agency in improving control over radioactive
sources.
Providing a contribution to the success of both
the Washington, D. C., and Seoul Nuclear Security
Summits, Ukraine announced and implemented in full
its decision to get rid of all national stocks of highly
enriched uranium. The meaning of our voluntary step is
crystal clear. Ukraine remains a consistent, predictable
and reliable member of the international community
and makes an active contribution to combating nuclear
terrorism, focusing its efforts on strengthening the
physical protection of nuclear materials. In this regard,
we would like to recall that, during the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly, the delegations of
Ukraine, Mexico and Chile jointly declared themselves
13

A/67/PV.30

to be countries that have voluntarily exerted efforts
to minimize the use of highly enriched uranium. We
call upon other Member States to follow our example
and to take a practical step in support of international
non-proliferation efforts.

key to effectiveness is to meet the needs of member
States. In order to maximize the socioeconomic
impact of technical cooperation projects, it is crucial
that the IAEA further develop partnerships with other
international organizations where appropriate.

Ukraine reaffirms the Agency’s role in verifying
and ensuring compliance by States with their safeguards
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Ukraine reiterates the paramount
importance of IAEA safeguards in providing effective
control over sensitive materials and activities. The
Agency’s system of safeguards is a fundamental
component of the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Measures contained in the Model Additional
Protocol are an integral part of this system. The
comprehensive safeguards agreement, together with
the Additional Protocol, currently constitute the best
verification standard.

We recognize the importance of the Agency’s
research activities regarding nuclear energy, particularly
in the fields of safety, waste management, radiation
protection, innovative reactor technologies and fuel
cycles. Ukraine will continue to participate actively
in the International Project on Innovative Nuclear
Reactors and Fuel Cycles. Maintaining competence and
know-how across the nuclear sector is fundamental to
these activities.

We would like to say that we strictly fulfil our
obligations under our Safeguards Agreement and the
Additional Protocol. Since January 2006, Ukraine
has had a comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
Additional Protocol in force. In 2010, Ukraine received
positive broad conclusions from the IAEA regarding
our nuclear activities. We continue to work with the
Agency to establish the necessary conditions for the
effective application of IAEA integrated safeguards in
Ukraine.
In 2011 and 2012, the Agency continued to make
significant contributions to global development
objectives. We commend the Agency for its efforts,
and call upon the IAEA and member States to increase
further the contribution of nuclear technology to
health and economic development, and to promote the
dissemination of knowledge on the peaceful application
of nuclear technologies among States.
Ukraine has always been a strong supporter of
the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, which
constitutes an important statutory function of the
Agency. Ukraine considers the implementation of
the Programme to be the cornerstone of international
cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We
acknowledge the work done by the IAEA in planning
and implementing technical cooperation activities that
reflect the needs of different countries and regions.
We believe it is important to ensure fair access to
technical cooperation funds and the predictable
funding of technical cooperation programmes. The

14

In conclusion, we would like to join other delegations
in welcoming the IAEA report to the General Assembly
at its sixty-seventh session (see A/67/152), and to
express our appreciation for the work of the Agency.
Mr. De Vega (Philippines): Cognizant of the
crucial role played by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) as the central multilateral forum for
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the Philippines welcomes the report of the IAEA
(see A/67/152) and lends its full support to achieving
the Agency’s goals and objectives.
The IAEA and its important role took centre
stage last year amid concerns on nuclear safety in the
aftermath of the Fukushima accident. More importantly,
the nuclear accident provided opportunities for member
States to consider ways to strengthen the Agency’s
work in nuclear safety. The Philippines welcomes the
significant progress achieved in the implementation of
the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, and lauds the
combined efforts of the secretariat and member States
in pursuing concrete actions. These include conducting
stress tests of nuclear power plants, carrying out
capacity-building activities, and enhancing emergency
preparedness response measures.
For our part, the Philippines is working with the
IAEA secretariat in looking at the possibility of tapping
our former nuclear power plant in Bataan, which we
closed in 1986, to serve as a regional and international
training facility on nuclear power plants.
The Philippines also welcomes the important work
done by the Inter-Agency Committee on Radiological
and Nuclear Emergencies this past year. We reaffirm
our commitment to working with the IAEA to facilitate

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

improvements in nuclear and radiological incident and
emergency preparedness and response systems.
Following the Fukushima accident, the Philippines
conducted environmental radioactivity monitoring in
nine provinces and shared the data collected with the
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation. The Philippines continues
these monitoring activities through the regional
technical cooperation project on the assessment of the
environmental impact of the Fukushima accident in the
Asia-Pacific region.
The Philippines also welcomes the regional
initiative within the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) to establish the ASEAN Network
of Regulatory Bodies on Atomic Energy, which will
serve as a forum for the exchange of information on
best practices among the nuclear regulatory bodies of
ASEAN member States. The Network is also expected
to enhance cooperation and develop national capacities
in nuclear safety, security and safeguards.
Despite the Fukushima accident, countries keen to
use nuclear power as a safe and clean source of energy
have turned to the IAEA for technical assistance in
the development or expansion of their national nuclear
power programmes. In August, the Agency provided
technical assistance to the Philippines in organizing
a national workshop on the evaluation of alternative
energy strategies and establishing a national position
on nuclear power. This workshop and future related
activities will aid the Philippine Government in crafting
its position on nuclear power.
The Philippines believes that the IAEA continues
to play an important role in helping countries achieve
their Millennium Development Goals through its
Technical Cooperation Programme and its various
activities in nuclear applications. The Philippines
especially welcomes the Director General’s focus this
year on nuclear applications related to food, which is of
particular importance to my country, with its growing
population. In June, the Philippines hosted the IAEA
regional meeting on supporting climate-proof rice
production systems on the basis of nuclear applications.
This project not only addresses the impact of climate
change on rice production, but provides an opportunity
for scientific exchanges as well.
In the field of health, the Philippines continues
to address the health problems caused by dengue and
malaria. In that regard, we commend the work of the

12-57291

Insect Pest Control Laboratory of the Joint IAEA/Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in
Seibersdorf, Austria, on the development of a sterile
insect technique package for disease-transmitting
mosquitoes. The Philippines is open to working closely
with the Seibersdorf Laboratory in the future to further
its work.
In the area of nuclear medicine, the IAEA’s
assistance allowed the Philippines to establish a
technetium-99 generator facility, which makes nuclear
procedures using technetium-99 now affordable
to the public. Through another regional technical
cooperation project, the Philippines looks forward to
the establishment of a medical cyclotron facility that
will supply affordable positron emission tomography
radiopharmaceuticals to local hospitals.
On water resources assessment and management,
the Philippines undertakes activities to develop
sustainable and socially responsible water resource
management plans under the IAEA Water Availability
Enhancement Project. We encourage the Agency to
remain involved in this area in order to assist member
States in strengthening their national capacities to
conduct comprehensive water resource assessments.
The Philippines reaffirms the importance of
strengthening the Agency’s activities in addressing
the threats posed by nuclear terrorism and the illicit
trafficking of nuclear and radioactive material.
Under the Philippines’ national nuclear security
plan, we commit to securing nuclear and radioactive
materials used for peaceful purposes. We also commit
to preventing the illicit trafficking of such materials.
The Philippines will update this plan in coordination
with the IAEA.
In January 2012, the Philippines hosted the
third review meeting of the Radiological Security
Partnership, which looked at the developments and
challenges in subscribing to and implementing nuclear
guidance documents in nuclear and radioactive security.
In partnership with the IAEA, we will host in
February 2013 the International Forum on Effective
Border Controls: Global Status, which will develop
recommendations to strengthen border controls
in combating the illicit trafficking of nuclear and
radioactive materials.
With the continuing proliferation of nuclear
weapons, we underscore the need to strengthen the

15

A/67/PV.30

Agency’s nuclear verification capabilities and establish
confidence in the peaceful nature of nuclear activities.
Finally, the Philippines shares the vision of a
world free of nuclear weapons and strongly supports
the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones as a
way to contribute to international peace and security.
We remain hopeful of the convening of the 2012
conference on the Middle East, as laid out in the Final
Document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol.I)) before the end
of the year.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I am very
happy to see you, Vice-President Gaspar Martins,
presiding over this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly. I take this opportunity to wish you every
success in your high-level work in the Assembly’s
Bureau. I would also like to express my delegation’s
thanks to the Secretariat for the excellent analysis
provided in the annual report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for 2011 (see A/67/152).
The issue of nuclear safety is once again at the
heart of our concerns. Indeed, although nuclear energy
is indispensable to finding new solutions for our needs
through its applications in health, agriculture, the
production of electricity and many other areas, its use
presents real security and safety risks. That is why
the IAEA verification programme remains crucial to
the efforts of the international community to bring
about a world free of nuclear weapons, as it limits the
proliferation of such weapons.
The Agency should therefore continue, in
cooperation with concerned States, to play its role in
following up on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and other treaties, such as those
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones. Indeed,
nuclear power cannot be developed unless the optimal
conditions for safety and security are in place. Therefore,
all necessary measures must be adopted in order to
strengthen these elements. I reaffirm my country’s
commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear energy in
full transparency and in a safe and sustainable manner.
With regard to technical cooperation, we are
reassured by the fact that the IAEA continues to
fulfil its mandate “to accelerate and enlarge the
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world”. Indeed, the peaceful
applications of nuclear energy offer solutions to a

16

series of socioeconomic and development issues that
are essential to meeting the needs of humankind and
thus to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
As underlined in the report, technical cooperation
projects on issues as varied as nuclear-powered
electricity, knowledge management, human health,
the improvement of water management, more accurate
determination of the sources of pollution and nuclear
safety or security enable Member States to find
solutions to serious development problems.
Senegal therefore recognizes and values the
scientific and technical cooperation that it has with
the IAEA. This rich and varied cooperation covers
many areas. First, it includes support for research in
the area of water resource management, agricultural
productivity
improvement,
livestock
farming
development, protection from radiation and research on
solutions to malnutrition.
Second is the acquisition of a gamma camera, which
represents major progress in the treatment of diabetes,
thyroid disease and cancer. Third is support for the
fight to eliminate the tsetse fly along the Atlantic coast,
north of Dakar. Fourth is cooperation with the IAEA,
which has raised research facilities in Senegal to the
status of world-class scientific centres. We are grateful
for the support provided by the United States State
Department since 2010 in the fight against the tsetse
fly in West Africa. Further examples of cooperation
are management training, technology transfer and
exchanges of experts in the context of the various
projects on which Senegal is working with the Agency.
Fifth is energy production and planning and research to
improve nutrition for women.
Strengthened by such fruitful experience, Senegal
will spare no effort to expand its excellent cooperation
with the IAEA, through an aggressive policy to
promote socioeconomic development through nuclear
science and technology. My delegation therefore calls
for increased support for the Agency in implementing
its mandate.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Amano, Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
for his circulated statement on the annual report of
the Agency (see A/67/152), for the period 1 January to
31 December 2011. Malaysia also wishes to commend
the Director General for his commitment to, and
stewardship of, the IAEA.

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

At this juncture, Malaysia wishes to welcome
the Republic of Fiji, the Republic of San Marino and
the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago as new States
members of the Agency. The latest addition has resulted
in a total of 155 countries becoming States members
of the Agency. That in turn has further strengthened
and universalized the membership of the Agency,
and has helped it to carry out its role and mandate in
assisting in the development and practical application
of atomic energy for peaceful uses, technology transfer
to developing countries, and promoting nuclear safety,
verification and security. It is indeed pleasing to note
that, despite its limited resources, not only has the
Agency managed to successfully carry out its work, but
in fact its work has expanded in recent years.
As with other developing countries, Malaysia fully
supports the peaceful use by member States of nuclear
power as a source of energy. Currently, the Government
of Malaysia is undertaking an in-depth study on
developing a nuclear power programme in the country,
including on its legal and regulatory frameworks. The
overarching objective of the study is to ensure that the
highest standards of nuclear safety and security are
observed at all times.
Malaysia has always attached the utmost importance
to nuclear safety. The Fukushima Daiichi incident
has therefore weighed heavily on Malaysia’s mind as
it embarks on a nuclear power programme. There are
certainly valuable lessons to be learned. In that regard,
Malaysia welcomes the formulation and implementation
of the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, following
the unprecedented Fukushima accident.
Malaysia also welcomes the report entitled
“Highlights of the Lessons Learned from the IAEA
Integrated Regulatory Review Service in 2006-2010”,
which was presented at the third Workshop on Lessons
Learned from Integrated Regulatory Review Missions
in October 2011. The report addresses areas that need
improvement, such as the governmental, legal and
regulatory frameworks, certain areas of core regulatory
practices, and the efficiency and effectiveness of the
missions themselves. It also provides recommendations
on how countries can meet the Agency’s safety
requirements for national safety infrastructures.
Malaysia wishes to extend our support in enhancing
nuclear safety, and looks forward to participating in the
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety, to be held in
Fukushima later this year.

12-57291

For our part and in response to the Agency’s
request, Malaysia has hosted a number of events related
to nuclear radiation, transport and waste safety. In the
light of the IAEA’s newly revised International Basic
Safety Standards, Malaysia hosted a regional workshop
on the IAEA General Safety Requirements in April
2012. We stand ready to assist in hosting similar events
in the future.
Malaysia has consistently considered the issue
of nuclear security to be an inseparable component
of nuclear energy. To that end, we have implemented
various
legal
mechanisms
and
conventions,
including the Convention on Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material and its 2005 Protocol, the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, the Additional Protocol
to the IAEA Safeguards Agreement, the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the
various IAEA codes of conduct.
Malaysia appreciates the opportunity to share its
knowledge on nuclear security, as well as its expertise,
with a few selected member States. In that regard,
Malaysia will host a regional workshop on radioactive
source security for industrial radiography with various
donor member States by the end of 2012. Malaysia also
looks forward to discussing the possibility of Malaysia
being recognized as a centre of excellence for nuclear
security training in the region and beyond.
Malaysia continues to stress the importance of the
Technical Cooperation Programme in promoting the
peaceful use of nuclear technology. The extension of
the Programme should obviously be based upon the
needs and requests of member States. We believe that
the programme should take into account the evolving
requirements of member States, as well as the issue of
funding. At the most recent meeting of the Preparatory
Committee for the Review Conference of the Parties to
the NPT, some States parties called for the Technical
Cooperation Programme to be supported by the regular
budget instead of relying on the Technical Cooperation
Fund. My delegation joins in that call, and we look
forward to further discussions on the matter under the
working group for financing the Agency’s activities.
Malaysia has indeed benefited from the Technical
Cooperation Programme. At the same time, it has
also contributed in-kind to the Programme, as well
as provided training and sharing expertise with other
member States.

17

A/67/PV.30

As for the new project cycle for the period 2013-2014,
my delegation hopes to work closely with the Agency to
ensure that the projects under the Programme will be
adequately funded. My delegation also appreciates the
confidence that the Agency has placed in Malaysia’s
continuing to host the Post-Graduate Education Course
in Radiation Protection, which we would execute to the
best of our abilities.
Malaysia accords high importance to the peaceful
uses of nuclear science and technology in agricultural,
biotechnology, industrial, environmental and medical
applications. In that context, Malaysia has always believed
that research, development and knowledge-sharing are
key to the successful and sustainable development of
nuclear technology by any member State. Therefore,
Malaysia attaches great importance to research and
development activities within the framework of
coordinated research activities, which are an important
avenue for multilateral cooperation and the sharing of
knowledge among scientists and engineers across the
globe.
On the issue of cancer treatment and research,
Malaysia is committed to further upgrading its cancer
detection, monitoring and treatment systems. Malaysia
recognizes and appreciates the role of the IAEA on
nuclear techniques in that regard. We therefore decided
to join the World Health Organization-IAEA Joint
Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy by requesting
an Integrated Mission for Programme of Action for
Cancer Therapy to Malaysia. We wish to thank the
Agency for acceding to our request.
As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, Malaysia will continue to play
a constructive role in both bilateral and multilateral
cooperative arrangements in ensuring the security of
nuclear materials. Malaysia commends the consensus
reached in the Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference (see NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol.I)).
We believe that efforts to convene a conference
in 2012 on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East should be supported by all. Such a
conference would give momentum to the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle
East, which would undoubtedly contribute to greater
peace and security in the region. Malaysia welcomes
the appointment of Mr. Jaako Laajava of Finland as

18

facilitator for the conference and wishes him success
in this regard.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
Malaysia’s commitment to continuing its long-standing
cooperation with the work of the Agency in fulfilling
its mandate. Malaysia is confident that the Agency
could play a greater role in responding to all the needs
of its member States in the future if it were provided
with greater resources. Nevertheless, we wish to once
again express our appreciation to the Director General
of the IAEA, as well as to the IAEA secretariat, for the
significant and valuable work that they have carried out
thus far. In this regard, Malaysia is pleased to sponsor
the draft resolution on the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (A/67/L.3) at the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan wishes
to congratulate Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on
the outstanding work of the Agency. The annual report
(see A/67/152) demonstrates the shift in the nature of
the Agency’s functions from pure verification activities
to safety and security measures for nuclear power
plants, countering potential nuclear terrorism, focusing
on nuclear applications and technical cooperation for a
better and safer world.
As a member of the Agency, Kazakhstan is proud
of its record of collaboration in seeking to apply nuclear
energy, nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
at the national and Central Asian regional levels. It
is clear today more than ever that it is important to
bring international legal norms in line with the reality
of the existence of de facto nuclear-weapon States,
necessitating compliance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) by States
parties. This is to ensure improved global mechanisms
for managing processes in the development of nuclear
power. We therefore propose conducting, under the
auspices of the IAEA, regular stress tests of nuclear
plants and protection systems, as well as rapid rescue
responses.
Kazakhstan is a major producer of uranium ore and
has the fuel fabrication capability to further expand the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy within the framework
of IAEA safeguards. We collaborate with the Russian
Federation in making its uranium available for
enrichment at the national centre in Angarsk, Siberia,
for use in nuclear power reactors. We are also working

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

on the Kurchatov Nuclear Technologies Park, which is
under IAEA surveillance.

global focal point for nuclear and radiological safety or
security-related incidents.

We support the IAEA initiative to develop a new
framework for nuclear energy based on multilateral
approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle that are non-political
and non-discriminatory. These should be available to
all safeguards-complying member States, so that no
State will need to give up its rights under the NPT.

Despite being a key and responsible member
of IAEA, Kazakhstan is denied the opportunity to
participate in the work of elective bodies due to the
existing rules of procedure. Kazakhstan fully supports
the early entry into force of the amendments to article
VI of the IAEA statute, and hopes that a solution will
be found.

Kazakhstan has officially confirmed in writing to
the Agency its readiness to host an IAEA nuclear fuel
bank on two of its sites for countries unable to acquire
a nuclear fuel supply on the market. As soon as the site
has been determined, steps will be taken to establish
the bank. The national atomic energy company,
Kazatomprom, is in the process of creating a vertically
integrated establishment with a complete nuclear fuel
cycle meeting IAEA standards.
The Central Asian nuclear-weapon-free zone is
another contribution of our efforts towards a world free
from nuclear weapons, to reduce the risk of nuclear
terrorism and the smuggling of nuclear weapons and
radioactive materials in the region, as well as to address
environmental concerns regarding ecological radiation.
Kazakhstan supports the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East as a solution for
peace in that region. We will work collaboratively with
the Facilitator and other Member States towards that
goal.
We are consistently implementing the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism, as well as Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004), to strengthen measures
to combat illegal trafficking of nuclear and other
materials. As a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group
and the Zangger Committee, Kazakhstan maintains the
strictest controls over its equipment and installations
that enrich uranium and reprocess spent nuclear fuel.
Last year, Kazakhstan ratified and acceded to four
major nuclear security conventions, and is reviewing a
draft law to accede to the Vienna Convention on Civil
Liability for Nuclear Damage. We are decommissioning
the BN-350 nuclear reactor and, with the support of the
United States Department of Energy, implementing a
project to convert the second research reactor to produce
radioisotopes from low-enriched uranium. My country
welcomes the proposal to strengthen the infrastructure
of the IAEA Incident and Emergency Centre as the

12-57291

Kazakhstan’s technical cooperation with IAEA
from 2010 to 2015 includes nuclear education, medicine,
agriculture, research reactor safety, and radioisotope
and radiation applications for collective global human
security. My country contributes regularly to the IAEA
budget, as well as to the Technical Cooperation Fund,
and stands ready to fulfil its financial obligations.
We express our gratitude to IAEA for its support
to the International Day against Nuclear Tests, and in
the ongoing activities of the Nuclear Discussion Forum,
initiated jointly by Kazakhstan and the EastWest
Institute.
To conclude, we fully support the mandate of the
IAEA, and look forward to another cycle of even more
productive collaboration on current and future issues in
nuclear technology.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to thank the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and its Director General, Mr. Yukiya
Amano, for their valuable work over the past year, as
reflected in the Agency’s report (see A/67/152). Egypt
is eager to join the list of sponsors of the annual draft
resolution on the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (A/67/L.3).
I would like first to underline the contribution of
nuclear technology to electric power generation. This
demonstrates in turn our continued interest in the
exercise of the inalienable right to the development,
production and peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
as enshrined in article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
For almost half a century, Egypt has devoted
attention to nuclear energy and its peaceful applications.
Following Egypt’s transition to a new democratic era
resulting from the revolution of 25 January 2011, we
will pursue the implementation of Egypt’s peaceful
nuclear programme by establishing our first nuclear
plant for power generation. Egypt looks forward to

19

A/67/PV.30

continued close cooperation with the IAEA in that
area, given the Agency’s growing role in support of
sustainable development.
In commenting on the IAEA’s report on its activities
in 2012, I would like to highlight the following points.
First, the Agency’s technical cooperation activities
are a priority for developing countries in terms of
employing nuclear applications, including radioisotope,
radiation and other technologies, in the areas of health,
agriculture, food and water resources in order to
promote progress towards development. Egypt calls for
increased funding for technical cooperation activities,
as well as equitable funding of all of the other activities
of the IAEA. Technical cooperation is a key component
of the work of the Agency pursuant to its statute.
Second, it is important to enhance international
cooperation in strengthening national capacities in
nuclear safety and emergency response to radiological
and nuclear accidents. That would help to ensure easy
access to safety information and equitable transfer of
related technology. My delegation takes this opportunity
to emphasize that the Agency should intensify efforts
to assist member States in emergency preparedness and
response to nuclear accidents by promoting technology
transfer and capacity-building activities, including
education and training in the field of crisis management.
Third, we stress that any rules or guidelines on
nuclear security and safety must be developed and
negotiated within a multilateral framework. Measures
and initiatives aimed at strengthening nuclear security
and safety should not be used as an excuse to restrict
the inalienable right of developing countries to develop
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in accordance
with the statute of the Agency.
Fourth, the role of the IAEA in verification and
nuclear non-proliferation is closely related to its role in
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in support
of States’ development programmes that fulfil their
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the statute of the IAEA.
Fifth, all countries of the Middle East except
Israel have joined the IAEA comprehensive safeguards
system. Israel remains the only country in the region
with ambiguous nuclear activities that are not subject to
international control and supervision. Israel continues
to ignore the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the General Conference of the IAEA urging it to accede
to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State and to subject

20

all of its nuclear facilities to IAEA comprehensive
safeguards. There is no doubt that this situation has
increased the nuclear proliferation risk in the Middle
East and continues to prevent the achievement of the
goal of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
Sixth, Egypt stresses the importance of holding the
2012 conference on the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East, as agreed at the 2010 Review Conference
of the Parties to the NPT. Egypt also emphasizes the
need for the conference to adopt a concrete and binding
outcome with a view to achieving its objectives, as
set forth at the 2010 Review Conference. Egypt looks
forward to the contribution of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the 2012 conference and to receiving
as soon as possible the background documentation
that the IAEA has been mandated to prepare for
the conference. Egypt notes its appreciation for the
Agency’s efforts in organizing a forum in November
2011 on the relevance of the experience gained through
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone to the
Middle East.
Seventh, Egypt stresses that any retraction from the
commitment to convene the conference on schedule this
year, in accordance with the Final Document of the 2010
Review Conference (see NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)),
will affect the effectiveness and benefit of verification
activities in the Middle East. It will also affect the
integrity of international efforts to prevent nuclear
proliferation and the credibility of the NPT review
process. It could even lead to the failure of the next
Review Conference in 2015.
Eighth, Egypt reiterates the need to enable
the International Atomic Energy Agency to carry
out verification activities related to disarmament
agreements,
including
those
concerning
the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, now and
in the future. We look forward to the Agency’s active
role in that domain in the Middle East, through the
implementation of its five-year Medium-Term Strategy
for the period 2012-2017.
In conclusion, Egypt calls on all Member States
to support the three pillars of the International Atomic
Energy Agency — verification, nuclear safety and
security, and peaceful uses of nuclear energy — in an
integrated manner in order to contribute to fulfilling
the purposes of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security and in achieving
sustainable development.
12-57291

A/67/PV.30

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have carefully studied the report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
the General Assembly (see A/67/152). Russia highly
commends the work of the Agency aimed at improving
and strengthening the global non-proliferation regime
and at guaranteeing the widespread and safe use of
nuclear energy.
The Agency is making a noteworthy contribution
to resolving the issues of a secure energy supply, the
fight against the global effects of climate change,
and maintaining the health and well-being of people
throughout the world. It is important that the Agency
continue to formulate its efforts based on broader
international cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear
energy.
In speaking of the Agency’s activities, we cannot fail
to note the unique nature of its verification mechanism,
which enables the highly efficient tracking of States’
implementation of their obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We advocate improvement of the Agency’s
verification capacity, including through the adoption of
the additional protocol to its comprehensive safeguards
system as the universally accepted standard for States’
implementation of their nuclear non-proliferation
obligations. An unbiased approach to nuclear
verification based on objective indicators is the most
important element in supporting the legitimacy of
the IAEA comprehensive safeguards system and the
non-proliferation regime in general.
Russia is actively participating in the Agency’s
activities as a financial donor, including through its
voluntary contributions to the International Project on
Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles and the
Nuclear Security Fund. We wholeheartedly support
the efforts of the Agency in technical cooperation and
the provision of appropriate assistance to developing
States.
In the context of the large-scale development of
nuclear energy, the Russian Federation attaches priority
to establishing a new architecture for peaceful nuclear
cooperation based on multilateral approaches to the
nuclear fuel cycle; the guaranteed provision of services
for the nuclear fuel cycle; and resolving problems of
spent fuel and radioactive waste management. On the
basis of those priorities, Russia has launched an initiative
to develop a global nuclear energy infrastructure and

12-57291

create an international network of nuclear fuel cycle
centres.
We note with satisfaction that while our initiative
has been sorely needed, it is also truly capable
of resolving the tasks necessary to guarantee the
unhampered access of all NPT States parties to the
benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear energy, provided
that they faithfully comply with their non-proliferation
obligations.
In practice, however, it has afforded States the
ability to enjoy the advantages of nuclear energy and to
guarantee their nuclear fuel needs without introducing
elements to the nuclear fuel cycle that are expensive and
unsound from the standpoint of nuclear proliferation.
In the context of that initiative, together with
Kazakhstan, Ukraine and Armenia, we have launched
on Russian territory an international uranium
enrichment centre, to which we invite all States
working to develop nuclear power in compliance with
their non-proliferation obligations.
Another important step in establishing the global
nuclear energy infrastructure was the creation in
Russia of a shared supply of low-enriched uranium
administered by IAEA. It has already been fully
established, and States members of the Agency that are
in compliance with their non-proliferation obligations
are eligible to enjoy that resource.
We are convinced that lessons must be drawn
from the outcome of the accident at the Fukushima
Daiichi nuclear power plant in order to prevent such a
recurrence in future. The central role in that endeavour
must belong to the Agency as the only international
organization with the requisite expertise and authority.
One of the key lessons of the Fukushima accident is
that the international community needs to perfect the
international legal framework and the technological
and organizational aspects of nuclear safety.
Based on that understanding, Russia has proposed
important initiatives to fill the existing gaps in relevant
international legal documents and instruments. In that
context, we note additions to the Convention on Nuclear
Safety and the Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident. Moreover, Russia has made
proposals to improve the Agency’s safety standards
and anticipates that these initiatives will enjoy broad
support and come to fruition.

21

A/67/PV.30

An extremely important task remains to establish
a due level of protection of all nuclear facilities and
materials in order to prevent possible perpetration of acts
of nuclear terrorism by non-State actors. In the interest
of strengthening nuclear physical security, Russia was
a sponsor of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).
Together with the United States, in 2006 it introduced
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. The
Initiative is now supported by 85 States and serves as
an effective instrument of cooperation in the sharing of
extensive experience and practical measures aimed at
countering the threat of nuclear terrorism.
Russia has signed and ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism and the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities, as well as its
amendment. We call on the States that have not yet done
so to expedite completion of their domestic procedures
in order to accede to those most important international
instruments.
We are convinced that the Agency must play the
central role in coordinating States’ efforts to guarantee
nuclear security. We support the implementation of the
Agency’s programme on that issue for 2010-2013 and
its proposal to convene an international conference on
nuclear security issues in 2013.
Russia positively commends the practical
contribution of the Agency to the multilateral quest for
ways to resolve regional proliferation challenges. We
commend the endeavours of the Agency in using its
expert potential to ensure the sustainable functioning
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
We support draft resolution A/67/L.3 on the report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency. As a sponsor
of the draft resolution, Russia wholeheartedly endorses
the work of the Agency in the interest of strengthening
and ensuring the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
achieving reliable energy supplies.
Mr. Kellerman (South Africa): First of all,
my delegation thanks the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
his staff for the comprehensive overview of IAEA
activities contained in the Agency’s annual report (see
A/67/152). We appreciate the valuable contribution of
the Agency in supporting developing countries’ use
of nuclear science and technology to address national
development needs.

22

The Agency’s support in areas such as food and
agriculture, human health, water resource management
and the environment is essential to the attainment of
the Millennium Development Goals. Furthermore,
my delegation welcomes the publication of training
packages for medical physicists in the area of diagnostic
radiology and nuclear medicine. South Africa continues
to host fellows and scientific visitors to assist capacitybuilding in nuclear medicine.
My country also welcomes the Africa pilot project
of the Virtual University and Regional Training
Network for Cancer Control, which entered its second
year in 2011. The project is both a vehicle and a
facilitating mechanism to enhance cancer control,
e-learning, education and training in Africa, and South
Africa looks forward to participating in the initiative,
which will pave the way for subregional cancer control
workforce training hubs.
Global security of energy supply has become one
of the key focus areas worldwide, mainly because
of decreasing natural resources, global warming,
climate change, pollution and rapid global growth.
South Africa’s nuclear energy policy is driven by
the imperative of ensuring the security of its energy
supply and reducing its carbon footprint, and by the
beneficiation of our strategic mineral resources for the
economic development of our country.
In that regard, my Government approved the
Integrated Resource Plan 2010-2030, which incorporates
a significant expansion of nuclear power by the year
2030. The Cabinet has also established the National
Nuclear Energy Executive Coordination Committee,
an executive body comprised of ministers who have a
direct role to play in the nuclear energy programme.
In preparation for its nuclear build programme, South
Africa has adopted the IAEA milestones approach,
which addresses many critical elements necessary for
successful implementation.
South Africa is working closely with the Agency,
and has requested an Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure
Review Mission in the country. In that context, the
South African Minister of Energy recently announced
South Africa’s intention to invite the IAEA to conduct
an external assessment of its readiness and to identify
any possible risks that may need attention in order to
ensure a successful nuclear build programme.
Regarding nuclear safety, South Africa is pleased
to note that the level of nuclear safety among the

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

435 nuclear power plants in operation around the world
remains high. My delegation takes note of the activities
undertaken by the Agency to increase nuclear safety as
detailed in the Director General’s report on the IAEA
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety.
In conclusion, South Africa attaches great
importance to the Agency’s Technical Cooperation
Programme. We welcome the support rendered through
a range of regional and national projects to address
socioeconomic development needs of Member States,
especially African countries. In that regard, we also
value the continuous support of the Agency through
the activities of the African Regional Cooperative
Agreement for Research, Development and Training
related to Nuclear Science and Technology — in Africa
and in the region.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Nuclear
science is among the greatest achievements of
humankind and should therefore be used to serve its
well-being. Given the numerous peaceful applications of
nuclear technology as a cost-effective, environmentally
friendly and climatically benign source of energy, it
has gained a prominent position in the economic life
and advancement of nations. Without a doubt, demand
for the development and use of nuclear energy and
technology will continue to grow in future.
The Islamic Republic of Iran considers the
inalienable right to develop research, production and
uses of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination — including the right of every State
party to develop for peaceful purposes a full national
nuclear fuel cycle — to be the very foundation and
one of the most important pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). While
attaching great importance to the full, effective, balanced,
simultaneous, non-selective and non-discriminatory
implementation of all provisions of the NPT, we
strongly stress that the exercise of the inalienable right
to pursue nuclear science, energy and technology for
peaceful purposes, which is an inherent part of the
sovereignty of States parties, can never be suspended
or restricted by any organ, under any circumstances or
pretexts whatsoever.
According to article IV of the NPT, not only shall
nothing in the Treaty be interpreted as affecting that
inalienable right, but all parties have a firm legal
obligation

12-57291

“to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the
fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials
and scientific and technological information for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy”.
Furthermore, in that context, we underline the
importance of article III of the NPT, according to which
even the required safeguards
“shall be implemented in a manner designed
to comply with article IV of this Treaty, and to
avoid hampering the economic or technological
development of the Parties or international
cooperation in the field of peaceful nuclear
activities, including the international exchange of
nuclear material and equipment for the processing,
use or production of nuclear material for peaceful
purposes”.
My delegation also would like to emphasize that,
according to articles II and III of the IAEA statute,
“[t]he Agency shall seek to accelerate and enlarge the
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world...; [t]o encourage
and assist research on, and development and
practical application of, atomic energy for peaceful
uses throughout the world; and, if requested to
do so, to act as an intermediary for the purposes
of securing the performance of services or the
supplying of materials, equipment, or facilities by
one member of the Agency for another...; to perform
any operation or service useful in research on, or
development or practical application of, atomic
energy for peaceful purposes; [and t]o foster the
exchange of scientific and technical information on
peaceful uses of atomic energy”.
Accordingly, we underline the Agency’s primary
responsibility to assist member States and the
importance of its other statutory functions. In that
connection, we stress the need for strict observance
by the IAEA of the principles of impartiality and
professionalism; along with the States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement, “strongly reject attempts by
any State to politicize the work of the IAEA, including
its Technical Cooperation Programme”; and call for
an end to any interference in the Agency’s activities,
especially its verification process, as such acts could
jeopardize the authority, efficiency and credibility of
the IAEA and endanger the credibility of the NPT and
the inalienable right of its parties to develop research,

23

A/67/PV.30

production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination.
Unfortunately, the application of a discriminatory,
selective, highly restrictive and politically motivated
approach to nuclear cooperation by developed States
parties to the NPT, the main suppliers of nuclear high
technology, has given rise to the impression that being a
party to the NPT is not a privilege, because rather than
facilitating nuclear cooperation, it impedes it. In that
connection, it is a source of grave concern that those
who have chosen not to accede to the NPT not only
are not subject to any pressure to do so, but are also
encouraged and generously rewarded in different ways.
A living example is the well-documented
assistance and cooperation provided by certain Western
countries — in particular, the United States and the
two nuclear-weapon States members of the European
Union, the United Kingdom and France — to the Israeli
regime, which, in addition to having an unsafeguarded
nuclear programme, possesses one of the world’s
largest stockpiles of nuclear weapons. Such measures,
of course, run counter to the letter and spirit of the NPT
and, accordingly, are clear cases of non-compliance
with the explicit legal obligations under the Treaty.
Undoubtedly, those policies severely undermine the
universality, relevance, integrity and credibility of
the NPT. We did not see any reference to that point
by the Director General of the IAEA in his statement
distributed today.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, while being extremely
proud that it is exercising its inalienable right to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, is also fully committed
to its legal obligations, and its nuclear activities are and
have always been exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Despite all external political pressures on the IAEA,
it has repeatedly concluded that “declared nuclear
material in Iran remain[s] in peaceful activities”. In that
regard, it is worth noting that that is exactly the same
conclusion that the IAEA secretariat has come to for
51 States with additional protocols in force, as well as
for 61 States without additional protocols in force.
Finally, with regard to the so-called alleged studies
on Iran’s nuclear programme referred to in the IAEA
report, I would like to point out that they are forged
reports and include graphs that are not credible, which
is why the Agency is not allowed to make them available
to the Islamic Republic of Iran. As always, most of that
information has been provided by the Israeli regime

24

and its big ally. One may easily conclude that such
information is as credible as the childish cartoon that
was drawn here in this Hall in September by the Zionist
regime’s Prime Minister.
Mrs. Cizare (Ethiopia): First of all, I would like
to thank Ambassador Yukiya Amano, Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
for his annual report on the work of the Agency (see
A/67/152). I also wish to express our support for the
draft resolution before us (A/67/L.3).
Ethiopia firmly believes that the work of the IAEA
in general, and specifically its annual activities as
described in the report, are of paramount importance
to ensuring the maintenance of international peace and
security. We also acknowledge the Agency’s growing
role in ensuring that nuclear science and technology are
used only for peaceful purposes, as well as its technical
cooperation in bringing about tangible progress in
national efforts to reduce poverty and achieve the
Millennium Development Goals.
Ethiopia is one of the beneficiary States of the
IAEA’s activities under the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme. The Agency’s support
has been instrumental in helping us develop modest
capabilities in the control of tsetse flies, the treatment
of cancer, diagnostic nuclear medicine services, isotope
hydrological analysis and non-destructive quality
testing. Despite that encouraging cooperation, I would
like to underline that we are still far from the optimal
use of the transferred technologies or from sustaining
the services initiated through the various technical
cooperation projects that have been implemented in the
past several years.
Our major technical cooperation project with the
Agency is aimed at eradicating the tsetse fly from the
southern Rift Valley region of Ethiopia through an
integrated pest-management approach. The project is
currently being implemented, and, so far, remarkable
achievements have been registered and quite a
substantial number of communities have benefited
by regaining their farmland and seeing the return of
health to their livestock. The project has been and
will continue to be the top priority in our technical
cooperation with the IAEA. In that regard, we wish
to request that the Agency continue to accord high
priority to agricultural and livestock development in
Africa, including in Ethiopia. My country reaffirms
its strong commitment to peaceful nuclear applications
as an important component of the effort to tackle the
12-57291

A/67/PV.30

challenges of development. In that regard, the support
of the IAEA in ensuring food safety and security, as
well as energy, through nuclear technology should be
maintained and strengthened.
The other important area of partnership where
Ethiopia continues to benefit from the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Programme is the application of nuclear
technology and techniques in the area of human health.
In response to the rise in the number of cases of cancer in
developing countries, Ethiopia has come increasingly to
rely on the IAEA’s comprehensive Programme of Action
for Cancer Therapy. In that respect, while expressing
appreciation to the Agency for its technical assistance
and for the impact assessment made, Ethiopia hopes to
see a further strengthening of our partnership with the
Agency. The annual incidence of cancer is estimated
to be about 150,000 cases, of which 80 per cent will
require radiotherapy. It is for that compelling reason
that we call upon the Agency to further strengthen its
support to Ethiopia and other developing countries in
the fight against cancer through sustainable cancer
therapy programmes by carrying out more integrated
national and regional programmes.
In conclusion, as one of the founding States
members of the Agency, Ethiopia reiterates its strong
commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear technologies
and to respecting and implementing global and regional
instruments designed to control radioactive and other
nuclear materials. However, we are also fully aware
that the threats of nuclear weapons to international
peace and security are real and need to be confronted
with collective and concerted efforts. Ethiopia will
continue to support the IAEA’s activities to effectively
execute its global mandate of ensuring the peaceful
use of nuclear science and technology for the benefit
of humankind.
Mr. Hashmi (Pakistan): We thank Director
General Amano for presenting the annual report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
congratulate Fiji, San Marino and Trinidad and Tobago
on becoming the newest members of the Agency.
For over five decades, the IAEA has worked
successfully as a catalyst for promoting nuclear science
and related technologies. It has helped member States
advance their development priorities, while ensuring
that nuclear science and technology are used in a safe,
secure and sustainable manner. For that, the Agency
deserves the deep appreciation of us all.

12-57291

We share the Agency’s assessment that nuclear
energy should continue to be a preferred source of
viable, safe and sustainable alternative energy in the
future, despite the justifiable public anxiety that arose
in the wake of the Fukushima accident.
Pakistan recognizes the important role played by
IAEA verification regime. We have fully complied with
our obligations pursuant to our Safeguards Agreements
with the IAEA. The unanimous approval last year by the
IAEA Board of our C.3 and C.4 Safeguards Agreements
reflected the international community’s recognition of
Pakistan’s expertise in the safe and secure operation of
nuclear power plants.
Pakistan believes that all States should fully comply
with their safeguards obligations and international
commitments in order to maintain the credibility of
the safeguards regime. Maintaining a balance between
the regulatory, promotional and safety functions of the
Agency is essential. The Agency must be seen by all
member States as an impartial, efficient and professional
body. It is important to correct the public perception of
the IAEA as being only a watchdog. Its primary role in
the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear science and
technology needs to be re-emphasized.
Pakistan is a strong advocate of utilizing nuclear
technology for peace, progress and prosperity for all.
As Pakistan is the sixth most populous nation in the
world, socioeconomic development is a priority for
our Government. For over 55 years now, the Pakistan
Atomic Energy Commission has been actively engaged
in harnessing nuclear technology for our development
priorities. In the past five decades, Pakistan has sought
to enhance the application of nuclear technology for our
people in a variety of ways and in collaboration with
the Agency.
Even as we utilize nuclear technology for diverse
purposes, the harnessing of nuclear science for power
generation remains a priority. At present, the share of
nuclear power in Pakistan’s electricity mix is modest.
However, in view of our large population, the deficit
in fossil fuels and rising energy demand, we plan to
increase the current level of 750 megawatts of nuclear
power-generation capacity to at least 8,800 megawatts
by the year 2030. That is a challenging task, but we are
determined to pursue it as an important development
imperative.
Three nuclear power plants are already on line and
have been performing very well. The oldest of these

25

A/67/PV.30

was commissioned way back in 1972. Besides those
three, two more nuclear power plants, generating 340
megawatts each, are under construction and are expected
to be commissioned by 2016. All nuclear power plants
in Pakistan operate under IAEA safeguards.
Pakistan has also been actively engaged in
drawing lessons from the events at Fukushima. As a
result of stress tests and extensive studies, a response
action plan has been developed in collaboration with
the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority (PNRA).
The plan is at various stages of implementation
under PNRA oversight. Pakistan has always attached
great importance to ensuring that all its work in the
nuclear power domain is conducted within secure and
transparent institutional structures. At the national
level, the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority,
which is an independent regulatory and licensing body,
has been performing professionally and efficiently
for 11 years now. At the international level, we have
had a long-standing engagement with IAEA forums.
We have invited and supported World Association of
Nuclear Operators peer review missions. We have also
welcomed individual experts under the aegis of the
IAEA.
It is a matter of growing concern that even the
supply of safety-related equipment has fallen victim
to the restrictive and discriminatory export-control
policies of some States. That does not augur well for the
IAEA’s goal of encouraging worldwide enhancement of
safety standards.
Nuclear security is both a global challenge and a
national responsibility. Pakistan accords the highest
priority to ensuring the establishment of robust
security mechanisms. Over the years, we have put in
place extensive physical protection measures, robust
command-and-control
structures,
comprehensive
export controls and wide-ranging regulatory regimes. In
cooperation with the IAEA, Pakistan is implementing
a nuclear security action plan that has been called a
model for other States. We have gained considerable
experience in the field of nuclear security. A national
training academy runs multi-tier training modules for
comprehensive nuclear security solutions, and is being
opened for international training courses as well. A
nuclear emergency management system is being put
in place. Pakistan subscribes to the IAEA’s Code of
Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive
Sources, and to its Illicit Trafficking Database. Where
the security of radioactive sources is concerned,

26

Pakistan is implementing a cradle-to-grave concept,
in accordance with IAEA nuclear security series
documents.
Finally, the IAEA can make a significant
contribution to increasing the contribution of atomic
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout
the world. The Agency is uniquely placed to meet the
needs and challenges of the twenty-first century in a
balanced manner. Pakistan believes in an equitable,
non-discriminatory and criteria-based approach to
advance the universally shared goals of non-proliferation
and promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
We hope that safety and security considerations will
facilitate, not hinder, the pursuit of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy for promoting the development agenda
and offsetting environmental degradation.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for transmitting the IAEA’s
annual report for 2011 (see A/67/152) and for providing
additional information on the Agency’s more recent
developments and activities in his prepared statement
(see A/67/152/Add.1). We appreciate the competent and
professional manner in which the Director General
and the Secretariat have steered the Agency through
its extensive activities with a view to accelerating
and expanding the contribution of atomic energy to
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world.
We note with particular appreciation that, in carrying
out its mandate, the Agency has risen to meet an
array of challenges, ranging from the risks of nuclear
proliferation and nuclear terrorism, to nuclear safety in
the wake of the Fukushima accident last year.
In that context, my delegation would like to
commend the Agency for its achievements in the
field of nuclear safety. As outlined in the report, the
Agency has been successful in implementing the
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety adopted at the fiftyfifth session of the IAEA’s General Conference, held
last year. Through implementation of the Action Plan
with the full cooperation and participation of member
States, the Agency is successfully incorporating the
lessons learned from Fukushima, thereby enhancing
the effectiveness of both the regulatory framework and
the operating organizations in IAEA member States.
We also note with satisfaction that the Agency has
taken steps to upgrade its emergency preparedness and
response capabilities as a whole, which we anticipate

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

will result in tangible improvements to national
emergency preparedness and response arrangements.
The work of the IAEA in the field of nuclear
security, particularly its efforts to coordinate and
enhance cooperation among various initiatives and
activities, is also worthy of note. We welcome the
progress that the Agency has made in implementing
the goals and priorities set out in its Nuclear Security
Report 2011. We are also pleased to note the successful
establishment of the Nuclear Security Guidance
Committee as a standing body of experts on nuclear
security.
The Republic of Korea hosted the second Nuclear
Security Summit last March in Seoul. The Seoul
Summit resulted in comprehensive agreed measures
for action to prevent nuclear and radiological terrorism,
including eliminating and reducing nuclear materials;
encouraging wider adherence to international
instruments; and combating the illicit trafficking of
nuclear and radiological materials. In addition, the
Seoul Summit emphasized the central role that the
IAEA plays in strengthening the international nuclear
security framework. In that regard, we welcome and
support the IAEA International Conference on Nuclear
Security, to be held in Vienna in July 2013. My delegation
is convinced that the Conference will provide a timely
global forum to discuss future directions and priorities
for nuclear security, as well as generate valuable input
for the preparation of the 2014-2017 Nuclear Security
Plan.
In early September, the Director General released
an updated report on the application of safeguards in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. As the Director
General stated in his report, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme is a matter
of serious concern, and its statements about uranium
enrichment activities and the construction of a lightwater reactor continue to be deeply troubling. Sharing
as we do the Director General’s serious concern, my
delegation would like to point out that those activities
are a clear breach of Security Council resolutions 1718
(2006) and 1874 (2009). My delegation therefore urges
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
fully with its obligations under the relevant resolutions
of the Council.
Furthermore, we would like to recall the
resolution on the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) Safeguards

12-57291

Agreement between the Agency and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, adopted by consensus
at the fifty-sixth session of the General Conference,
held this year. We also reiterate the international
community’s call for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to come into full compliance with the NPT
and to cooperate promptly with the Agency in the
full and effective implementation of comprehensive
safeguards. The resolution voices the international
community’s serious concern about the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme,
including its construction of a light-water reactor and
its uranium enrichment activities. The resolution also
reaffirms the consensus that exists in the international
community that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea should not have nuclear-weapon-State status. It
also underlines concern about the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s statement in August announcing
its intention to totally re-examine its nuclear policy. As
the resolution clearly states, whatever that review may
consist of, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must reaffirm its commitment to denuclearization and
to the 2005 Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks.
With regard to the Agency’s activities in the field of
safeguards, we welcome the continuing increase in the
number of countries for which both a comprehensive
safeguards agreement and an additional protocol are in
force. With a total of 114 States now having additional
protocols in force — an increase of 10 since the last
report — the additional protocol is well on its way
to becoming the universal international safeguards
standard.
We strongly believe that the additional protocol
constitutes a crucial verification instrument that
not only enhances the Agency’s ability to verify the
peaceful nature of all nuclear material in a State but
also ensures international confidence in a State’s
nuclear programme. In that regard, we call for other
member States to conclude and bring into force the
comprehensive safeguards agreement and the additional
protocol if they have not yet done so.
In the light of the full support for the IAEA’s work to
achieve our common goal of harnessing nuclear energy
in the service of peace and development for humankind,
the Republic of Korea is pleased to co-sponsor draft
resolution A/67/L.3 on the report of the IAEA.
Mr. Tarbah (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
we would like to congratulate Mr. Yukiya Amano,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
27

A/67/PV.30

Agency (IAEA), for the valuable and comprehensive
report on the activities of the Agency (see A/67/152).
The report reflects the sincere efforts made to
achieve the international goals set by the international
community, foremost of which are non-proliferation,
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, the use
of nuclear energy for sustainable development and the
advancement of scientific knowledge for the good of
all humankind in all areas. We would like to stress the
following points.
First, we emphasize the importance and central role
of the IAEA in the areas of inspection and verification,
as well as in providing technical assistance to
developing countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Secondly, we stress the inalienable right of all
States to acquire and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, as well as the need to avoid a monopoly on
nuclear technology by some States while depriving
others from acquiring it. Thirdly, we underline the need
for all member States to commit without exception to
opening their nuclear facilities to IAEA inspection and
verification. Fourthly, the international community
should bring pressure to bear on Israel to accede to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and to open its nuclear facilities to the international
inspection and verification regime of the Agency.
In closing, we would like to stress that Libya is
eager to promote and support a cooperative partnership
with the IAEA in a transparent manner. We are willing
to provide all assistance necessary to IAEA inspectors
to fulfil their functions in Libya as appropriate.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/67/L.3. Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote or position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Regarding the report under discussion (see
A/67/152) and the related draft resolution (A/67/L.3),
my country’s delegation considers the report to be far
from correct or true and believes that it fails to cover the
fundamental reality of the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula. With regard to that matter, my country’s
delegation would like to clarify its position.

28

First of all, the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) is without justification and has no power to
intervene on the nuclear issue of the Korea peninsula.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is not a
State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons or a member of the IAEA. As far as
our relationship with the IAEA is concerned, already
in the early 1990s the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea cut off its official relations with the Agency
and severed all contacts of any kind with it. We made
that decision when the Agency lost the impartiality
expected of an international organization by adopting
the wrongful and biased attitude implicit in siding with
the politically motivated conspiracy of the United States
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
However, at a later stage, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States entered into
bilateral talks and the Six-Party Talks were opened,
at which point the United States requested that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea allow the
IAEA to offer technical consultation on the sidelines
of the Six-Party Talks. We reluctantly honoured that
request. The condition for that allowance was that the
consultation would take place only while the Six-Party
Talks were in progress.
Nevertheless, considering the current situation
and developments on the Korean peninsula, the United
States has not hesitated to escalate, aggravate and
ramp up its threats and attempts at blackmail through
increased hostilities towards the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The situation on the peninsula is on
the brink of explosion. Nobody knows when war may
break out.
In those circumstances, the Six-Party Talks
have come nearly to the point of being a dead letter.
In that state of affairs, the IAEA has no role to play.
Furthermore, the IAEA has sided with the hostile
United States against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, blindly following the United States policy
against my country. It has complicated the way towards
a peaceful resolution of the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula. We can therefore say that the IAEA has no
justifiable role to play.
Despite all of the foregoing, we now have this
year’s annual report before us. The IAEA has come
out and produced such language as “deeply troubling”
with regard to the new enrichment facilities and lightwater reactor construction, while also expressing the

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

Agency’s so-called readiness to resume its involvement
in verification activities.
All of that is absurd and makes no sense in the
context of what I have just said.
On this occasion, the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would like to draw the
attention of all participants here to the different
status of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as
everybody knows, has emerged as a full-fledged and
justifiable nuclear-weapon State. It is clear that the
IAEA cannot and should not use the same standard
it was using when the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s nuclear activities were limited to peaceful
purposes. The function of the IAEA is to deal mainly
with non-nuclear-weapon States and the case of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is different, as
clearly observed in the IAEA’s previous approach. The
Agency has never raised an issue or expressed concern
about the nuclear activities of the other nuclear-weapon
States; it has done so only with regard to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. That does not make sense;
it is absurd and yet another instance of the Agency’s
diminishing impartiality in its activities.
Secondly, the IAEA cannot and is not in a position
to offer a helping hand in the settlement of the nuclear
issue of the Korean peninsula. The resolution of all such
issues should be based on an objective analysis of the
fundamental current reality behind those issues. With
regard to the fundamental essence of the nuclear issue
of the Korean peninsula, it is absolutely the product
of the hostile, deeply rooted and long-standing policy
of the United States against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Moreover, the United States did
not hesitate to list the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea as part of the axis of evil and as a first nuclear
pre-emptive strike target by the United States.
Furthermore, when one considers the United States
military activities in South Korea this year, its holding
of one large-scale exercise after another, involving
up to 500,000 troops, is unprecedented. The United
States is more than ready to attack the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea at any time. Another joint
military exercise is now under way, involving over
200,000 troops of the United States and South Korea.
As representatives can imagine, they are using live
ammunition. In an exercise this summer, they used
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s flag as a

12-57291

target on the ground for an air strike exercise involving
live ammunition. It is clear that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is a target to be eliminated by the
United States.
In the face of that threat and in response to such
blackmail from the largest nuclear-weapon State, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had no option
but to go nuclear to defend itself, to safeguard its
security and sovereignty and to safeguard the right to
existence of the entire Korean nation. Therefore, the
nuclear deterrent of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea represents the deterrence of war and it is an
almighty and most treasured sword that can guarantee
peace, stability and security on the Korean peninsula
and in the region. It is therefore in the interests of the
regional countries to move towards peace, development,
détente and stability.
Concerning the withdrawal of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea from the NPT and the IAEA,
our objective is to make the United States abandon its
strong-arm policy and move towards reconciliation and
coexistence with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. As long as that hostile policy continues, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will increase,
strengthen and expand its nuclear capability and its
arsenal of nuclear weapons. Therefore, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would like to kindly
recommend that the International Atomic Energy
Agency not repeat its issuance of this kind of annual
report, with its absurd content and language. It will
result only in tarnishing and destroying its own image.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/67/L.3, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”. I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.3, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cameroon, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,

29

A/67/PV.30

Ireland, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Montenegro, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Spain,
Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay and Zambia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.3. May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the draft
resolution?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 67/3).

A/67/L.3

was

adopted

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. May I remind members that statements
in the exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10
minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second intervention, and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Concerning the remarks made by the
representatives of Japan and South Korea, the delegation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would
like to exercise its right of reply.
First, concerning the statement made by the
representative of Japan that the nuclear weapons of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are a threat
to East Asia, we totally reject this allegation, as it
makes no sense at all in the context of the fundamental
reality of the Korean peninsula for the reasons I have
just elaborated upon. But one thing is clear. When we
consider who is the source of the threat in the region, it
is none other than Japan. Japan has nuclear capabilities.
It has over 40 tons of plutonium. It is a plutonium world
champion. It is acknowledged that Japan can assemble
nuclear weapons at short notice, even within only a few
hours’ time.
Japan has a secret nuclear agreement with the
United States, adopted in 1960, under which it allows
nuclear-weapon-capable American warships to enter
its territorial waters at any time. Japan continues to
tell the world that it has three non-nuclear principles,
which are not legalized but are only oral. In reality, it
is doing something quite different; it is moving towards

30

militarism without expressing any apology for its past
crimes, including crimes against humanity, of which
we are all aware.
Concerning the remarks made by the representative
of South Korea, again, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea cannot have the status of nuclearweapon State. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has never requested such status. It is up to us
whether we do so or not; it is our right in response to the
threat. And South Korea has allowed American nuclear
weapons into South Korea since 1957, blackmailing the
entire Korean nation. They cannot hide or cast aside
this fact. Moreover, South Korea is still under the
nuclear umbrella of the United States.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to exercise my
right of reply in response to the statement just made by
the representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
First, the Government of Japan’s adherence to
the three non-nuclear principles — not possessing,
manufacturing or permitting the introduction of nuclear
weapons into our territory — remains unchanged, and
Japan’s determination in pursuit of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons with a view to achieving a world
without nuclear weapons is unshakable.
Secondly, Japan maintains an exclusively
defence-oriented policy, and therefore exercises
conducted by the Self-Defence Forces of Japan do not
target any particular country or area. Moreover, the
ballistic missile defence system that Japan has decided
to introduce is purely defensive and does not threaten
any country or area surrounding Japan.
Thirdly, it is not a fact that the Government of Japan
has ever allowed the introduction of nuclear weapons
by the United States onto Japanese territory. Based
on the United States nuclear policy expressed to date,
including the 1991 announcement, it is the judgement
of the Japanese Government that there is currently no
introduction of nuclear weapons by the United States,
including via vessels and/or aircraft calling at port in,
landing on or transiting Japanese territories. I reiterate
that the Japan continues to maintain the policy of
adhering to the three non-nuclear principles.
Lastly, Japan has acted in strict compliance with
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and its International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards obligations as an NPT State party. Japan’s

12-57291

A/67/PV.30

peaceful uses of nuclear energy have been confirmed
by the IAEA in its annual conclusions that all nuclear
materials remain in peaceful activities. Moreover,
beyond legal obligations, as a measure of international
transparency Japan has regularly reported the amount
of its plutonium holdings in accordance with the
guidelines for the management of plutonium, most
recently on 17 September.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Concerning the remarks made by the
representative of Japan, once again the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea totally rejects this allegation.
All that has been said is simply political cover-up. It
is a fact that in 1960 Japan concluded a secret nuclear
agreement with the United States that goes against the
three non-nuclear principles, which are themselves
contained in no legal or legitimate document. If Japan is
serious about its non-nuclear position, then why should
it hesitate to adopt a legitimate document?

disputes with all neighbouring countries, including
on the Korean peninsula, China and Russia. Japan is
making territorial claims that are utterly unfounded
and aimed purely at promoting the expansionist and
militaristic interests of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I have no intention of
repeating the statement I made earlier to refute
the allegations made by the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. With respect
to other groundless allegations made by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea delegation against Japan, I
would rather my delegation reserve its right of reply
until an appropriate opportunity arrives in due course.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 85?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

Lastly, Japan is pursuing militarization, seeking
to become a military Power. It is creating territorial

12-57291

31
