General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Seasion

108

particular the dispatch of visiting missions to those
Territories, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3158 (XXVIII). Question of the Seychelles
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Jpecial Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 57
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,,
Recalling also its resolutions 2985 (XXVII) of
14 December 1972 concerning the question,
. Reaffirming that the Seychelles should accede to
~ndep:ndence without any prejudice to their territorial
mtegnty,
Deploring that it has not been possible to send a
special. mission of the United Nations to the Territory,
as envisaged under General Assembly resolution 2866
(XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
!he Seychel_Ies 1£? self-determination and independence
m conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as
the administering Power, to take all necessary meas~res
to enable the people to exercise that right without
further delay;
. 2. Request~· .the administering Power, in accordance
with the prov1s1ons of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of
the United Nations envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI) and to make the necessary arrangements in
consultation with the special mission, for the holding as
soon as practicable of a referendum on the future
status of the Territory;
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
~nd P~ople~ to co~tinue its examination of the question,
mcludmg m particular the dispatch of the special
mission referred to above, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3159 (XXVIII). Question of Brunei
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brune~,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
n Ibid .. chaps. III, V and X.

to the Implernen,tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 58
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its resolution 2978 (XXVII) of
14 December 1972, whereby it reaffirmed inter alia
that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has
attained a full measure of self-government in terms of
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the
administering Power concerned should continue, to
transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
with respect to that Territory,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Brunei to self-determination in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Brunei;59
3. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the recommendation of the Special Committee,
to furnish such information as may be required by the
Special Committee and, in partirular, to participate, in
conformity with the provisions of related resolutions of
the General Assembly, in the relevant proceedings of the
Special Committee, as well as to receive in the Territory
a United Nations visiting mission composed of members
drawn from the Special Committee;
.4. Req_uests the Special Committee to report on
this question to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3160 (XXVIII). Question of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas)
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland
Islands ( Malvin as),
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 2065 (XX) of 16 December 1965, in which it invited the Governments of
Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Nort~e~n Ireland to proceed without delay with
the negotiat10ns recommended by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with a
view to finding a peaceful solution to the problem of
the ~~lkland Isla~ds (Malvinas), bearing in mind the
prov1s1ons and obJectives of the Charter of the United
Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV) and the interests
of the population of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
58 Ibid., chaps. III and XXI.
11 9 lbid., chap. XXI.
