UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/57
27 November 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3597th meeting of the Security Council, held on 27 November 1995 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the Secretary-General's report of
21 November on the situation in Sierra Leone (S/1995/975). It is deeply
concerned at the conflict in that country, and at the suffering resulting
from it, in particular that of the nearly two million internally displaced
Sierra Leoneans. It calls for an immediate end to the fighting.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his offer of good offices in Sierra Leone and urges the
Revolutionary United Front to take advantage of that offer, thus enabling
both parties to enter into negotiations. It thanks the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for his efforts to that end, in close coordination
with the Organization of African Unity, the Commonwealth, the Economic
Community of West African States, and other organizations and neighbouring
States supporting the negotiations and the process of democratization in
Sierra Leone, and welcomes the Secretary-General's decision that his
Special Envoy's mission should continue for the time being.
"The Security Council stresses the importance it attaches to a
coordinated international effort to alleviate the humanitarian situation in
Sierra Leone. It welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts in this regard
and his initiative in preparing, in collaboration with the Government of
Sierra Leone, an action plan for the demobilization and reintegration of
combatants.
"The Security Council underlines the need for generous humanitarian
assistance in a situation in which nearly half the population of the
country have been internally displaced, and calls upon Member States to
provide such assistance. The Council commends those humanitarian agencies
active in Sierra Leone. The Council deeply deplores attacks on
humanitarian convoys and demands that those responsible cease such actions
immediately.

95-37267 (E)

271195

/...

S/PRST/1995/57
English
Page 2

"The Security Council welcomes the programme of transition to
democratic constitutional rule set by the Government of Sierra Leone, which
is crucial to the restoration of peace and stability in that country. It
expresses its strong support for the work of the Interim National Electoral
Commission (INEC) in preparing for the elections to be held on
26 February 1996. It welcomes the assistance being given by the United
Nations to the INEC at the request of the Government of Sierra Leone, and
calls upon Member States to provide the fullest possible material and
financial support to the INEC in order to ensure the success of the
elections, with the broadest possible participation.
"The Security Council urges the Secretary-General to continue to
monitor closely the situation in Sierra Leone."

-----
