S/2017/95/Rev.1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 February 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of
UNMIK and developments relating thereto from 16 October 2016 to 15 January
2017.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo in
line with the presidential statement of the Security Council of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Political and security developments
3.
During the reporting period, tensions between Pristina and Belgrade reached
worrying levels, exhibited through heated rhetorical exchanges and accusations
surrounding disputed issues and events. As previously reported, the adoption, on
8 October 2016, by the Assembly of Kosovo of a new law on the Trepča industrial
complex fuelled tensions among political stakeholders and generated strong protests
from both Belgrade and the Serb community in Kosovo. As a result, Kosovo Serb
representatives and officials have suspended their participation in governing
institutions.
4.
On 2 December, the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Isa Mustafa and other
government officials, including the Minister for the Kosovo Security Force, Haki
Demoli, attended the opening ceremony of the Bistrica bridge in Zvečan/Zveçan

17-01779 (E)

060217

*1701779*

S/2017/95/Rev.1

municipality at the invitation of KFOR, which had implemented the bridge
refurbishment project. This provoked an immediate strong reaction by local Kosovo
Serb activists, who set up a roadblock on the main route to the event. Kosovo
officials were able to reach the ceremony using an alternate route. Kosovo Serb
representatives then boycotted the ceremony, and three of the four mayors of the
northern Serb-majority municipalities issued a communiqué accusing KFOR of
acting in a non-neutral, political role and announced a suspension of o fficial
cooperation between the municipalities and KFOR.
5.
As part of civil works to turn King Petar street in North Mitrovica into a
pedestrian zone, the subject of European Union-facilitated discussions in Brussels, a
retaining wall has been constructed at the southern end of the street, immediately
facing the bridge. This drew fierce condemnation from Pristina, with escalating
rhetoric calling for destruction of the wall. A compromise brokered by the European
Union between the mayors of North and South Mitrovica to reduce the height of the
wall has not been accepted by Pristina. Nonetheless, work has commenced to reduce
the height of the wall. On 29 December, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted a
non-binding resolution to remove the wall. The resolution const itutes a political
statement rather than an executive decision, giving no instruction on how the wall
should be removed. Despite obvious tensions at political level, there is no apparent
tension within the North Mitrovica community.
6.
On 4 January 2017, the leader of the opposition party Alliance for the Future
of Kosovo and former Prime Minister, Ramush Haradinaj, was detained by the
French authorities on the basis of an INTERPOL red notice issued at the request of
Serbia for his alleged involvement in war crimes committed in Kosovo in the period
1998-1999. The arrest provoked angry responses both from Kosovo -Albanian
political leaders and segments of the public in Kosovo. On 10 January, Serbia
formally requested Mr. Haradinaj’s extradition from France. On 12 January, the
French courts provisionally released Mr. Haradinaj, but retained his passport
pending a final decision on the matter.
7.
Internationally, the tension between Pristina and Belgrade escalated further
when Serbia instituted a new train service connecting Belgrade with North
Mitrovica, with a train decorated conspicuously with the colours of the Serbian flag
and the phrase “Kosovo is Serbia” translated into multiple languages. On
14 January, in advance of its first scheduled run, reportedly no t coordinated with the
Kosovo central authorities, Kosovo police deployed special units, including an
estimated 60 officers and 17 armoured vehicles, to stop and check the train once it
crossed the administrative boundary line. Under instruction from Belgr ade, the train
stopped before crossing the boundary and eventually returned to Belgrade.
Accusations were levelled by politicians in both Belgrade and Pristina, with each
accusing the other of intentionally provoking unrest and possibly violence. The
insinuations and bellicose language inflamed public opinion among both Kosovo
Serbs and Kosovo Albanians.
8.
Within Kosovo, strained relations between governing and opposition parties
and between parties within the governing coalition precluded progress on man y
government objectives. Legislative action within the Assembly of Kosovo was slow
or at a standstill on many issues, including several pressing strategic issues, such as
the ratification of the agreement on territorial delineation with Montenegro. As a

2/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

consequence, together with insufficient progress on corruption and organized crime,
the European Union was unable to advance the case of Kosovo for inclusion in the
Schengen area visa-free travel regime.
9.
The death in custody on 5 November 2016 of a member of the Vetëvendosje
(“Self-determination”) opposition party, Astrit Dehari, led to political and civil
tensions. Mr. Dehari had been held in pretrial detention in Prizren for 68 days on
charges of terrorism in connection with the rocket-propelled grenade attack of
4 August on the Assembly of Kosovo building. Vetëvendosje claimed that Dehari
was murdered, and peaceful protests were held in Pristina and Prizren demanding an
impartial and transparent investigation to determine the causes of death. Following
the autopsy results, the Office of the Chief State Prosecutor announced that the
cause of death was self-inflicted mechanical asphyxia. The family’s legal
representative, however, challenged the validity of the autopsy. On 22 November,
the Ministry of Justice inspectorate suspended four officials at the Prizren detention
centre for “procedural negligence” in relation to Mr. Dehari’s death. In a related
development on 29 December, the Special Prosecutor filed an indictment on
terrorism charges against four Vetëvendosje activists for allegedly firing a rocketpropelled grenade at the Assembly of Kosovo building on 4 August.
10. Tensions among Kosovo Serb political representatives were the subject of a
public dispute between the Socialist Movement and Serbian Pr ogressive Party
branches of the Gradjanska Inicijativa Srpska Lista, with the Socialist Movement
branch threatening to pursue an independent policy line, including by resuming their
participation in government activities. On 26 December, Kosovo Serb politi cal
representatives met with the Prime Minister of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, in
Belgrade, following which they confirmed unity within the Gradjanska Inicijativa
Srpska Lista party. This included continuation of the boycott of official activities of
Kosovo institutions.
11. Violent extremism, radicalization and terrorism continued to pose a threat to
security in Kosovo and the region. In November, the authorities apprehended 19
persons suspected of planning terrorist attacks in Kosovo and the region, under the
direction of Kosovo militants fighting with the Islamic State. A range of weapons
and explosives were confiscated in the course of the arrests. On 30 November, the
Court of Appeals confirmed the conviction of nine imams accused of recruiting 70
persons to support the Islamic State in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Sentences ranged from 4 to 18 years. In December, two individuals from Kosovo
were arrested by the Belgian authorities for suspected participation in terrorist
activities linked to the Islamic State.
12. Mixed migration continued to present challenges throughout the region. The
effective closure of the Balkan route through the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Croatia, announced by European leaders in early March,
resulted in a large number of people on the move being stranded in Serbia.
Correspondingly, the reporting period saw an increase in the number of persons
transiting through Kosovo. In total, 307 people were intercepted in Kosovo during
2016, of whom 76 arrived in December. The trend shows that most migrants entered
Kosovo from Albania with the intention of proceed further. Asylum seekers were
treated in accordance with international humanitarian law, including with respect to

17-01779

3/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

registration, medical examination and the provision of accommodation. To date,
processing capacity has been sufficient to meet requirements.
13. On 23 December, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted the Law on the Budget for
2017, which amounts to over €2 billion. The budget has increased by more than 15
per cent as compared with 2016. This is underpinned by a sharp increase in capital
expenditure to around €750 million. It is unlikely that the 20 16 capital budget will
be executed in full, with spending up to early November amounting to
approximately 60 per cent of allocation. The 2017 budget includes an allocation of
€50 million for the war veteran and war invalid pension schemes.

III. Northern Kosovo
14. On 29 October, in the presence of Kosovo police, the last remaining citizens’
barricade was voluntarily removed from the ethnically mixed neighbourhood of
Bosniak Mahala in North Mitrovica. On the same day, a concrete obstacle known as
“Adem Jashari Square” was removed from the same neighbourhood.
15. Civil Registry Offices, staffed by former personnel of the Ministry of Interior
of Serbia now integrated into the Kosovo system, are being opened in all four
northern municipalities. Once fully functional, these offices are expected to issue
public documents, such as personal identity documents.
16. On 10 January 2017, a hand grenade exploded at the new Kosovo Government
office in North Mitrovica, causing material damage to the premises. This inc ident
followed an earlier one on 28 December 2016, when an unexploded hand grenade
was found near the same building, following an unannounced visit by the Kosovo
minister in charge of the technical dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, Edita
Tahiri.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
17. During the reporting period, some progress was made in the implementation of
agreements reached within the framework of the European Union -facilitated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, specifically in the areas of integration of
the judiciary, freedom of movement and telecommunications.
18. On 30 November, Belgrade and Pristina agreed on the final steps in the
implementation of the agreement on the integration of the judiciary. It was agreed
that the decisions previously rendered by Serbian-run courts in Kosovo would be
recognized unless rendered in absentia, and that the North Mitrovica division of the
Court of Appeals would have jurisdiction over all 10 municipalities with a Kosovo
Serb majority. On 13 November, further agreement was reached on
telecommunications. Following a request submitted by Austria, the International
Telecommunication Union confirmed the allocation of dialling code +383 to
Kosovo. The arrangement also confirmed the transfer of property and assets of the
Serbian State-owned company, Telekom Srbija, to the newly established subsidiary
company MTS, registered in Pristina, without any customs, taxes or charges. This
transfer of assets will be completed and registered in the Kosovo cadastral system.

4/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

MTS will operate fully licensed fixed telephone services in Kosovo and obtain
temporary authorization for mobile services.
19. No apparent progress was made on the establishment of the
Association/Community of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo, which is a key
aspect of the agreements reached within the framework of the European Union facilitated dialogue. In addition, there continued to be delays in the implementation
of the agreement on freedom of vehicular movement, including the provision
regarding the reciprocal coverage of insignia on licence plates, which was initially
planned to become effective on 15 November. Significantly, no high -level meetings
had been held within the framework of the European Union -facilitated dialogue
since January 2016.

V. Returns, reconciliation, community relations and
cultural heritage
20. In 2016, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) recorded a total of 582 voluntary returns to Kosovo by members of
non-majority communities. The total number of voluntary returns since 2000 stood
at 27,286. UNHCR estimates that, at the end of December 2016, the total number of
internally displaced persons living in Kosovo stood at 16,557. Of those, 423 resided
in 29 collective shelters. In 2016, UNHCR assisted 480 individuals to obtain civil
documentation.
21. In a regrettable attempt to obstruct returns, the Municipal Assembly in
Suharekë/Suva Reka municipality issued a declaration on 31 October “conditioning
the return of Kosovo Serb internally displaced persons to Mushtishtë/Mušutište
village on resolving the issue of missing persons, an apology from Serbia and from
the local Kosovo Serb community members for the crimes committed during the
conflict in 1999”. In a separate incident, on 1 December, Kosovo police physically
evacuated 10 Serbian and Montenegrin displaced persons who were participating in
a municipality-facilitated “Go and see visit” in Deçan/Dečani municipality, after the
event was aggressively disrupted by protesters, including some municipal
employees. It should be noted that, prior to the event, the Kosovo police had
verified that no participants in the visit had criminal records or outstanding charges.
Central in both cases are the unresolved issues of missing persons and the illegal
occupation of property belonging to displaced persons, together with the
manipulation of emotions in the receiving community. Kosovo police reported cases
of serious physical assaults in Mitrovica and Viti/Vitina, and a number of cases of
returnee houses being physically damaged. Primary responsibility for upholding the
rule of law and ensuring the right of return sits with the Kosovo authorities, who
must ensure that these incidents do not establish a precedent for the systematic
obstruction of returns. In both the Suharekë/Suva Reka and Deçan/Dečani cases, the
absence of a public institutional response has been disappointing.
22. On 28 November 2016, on the occasion of Albanian Independence Day,
celebrated in Kosovo as Albanian Flag Day, the Turkish consulate in Prizren was
slightly damaged by a Molotov cocktail attack. Five persons who were arrested in
connection with the attack claimed that they were motivated by offence caused by

17-01779

5/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

the display of a Turkish flag on Albanian Flag Day, and stated that they were
unaware that the building was the Turkish consulate.
23. The Mission continued to monitor developments related to the promotion and
protection of religious and cultural heritage. An issue of concern is the persistent
rejection by the Kosovo authorities of the request for a building permit to
reconstruct the Serbian Orthodox Church of St. Nicholas, located within the Holy
Archangels Monastery complex in Prizren. Separately, unknown individuals
changed the padlocks securing the unfinished church of Christ the Saviour, in
Pristina, preventing access by church officials. In another incident, on 1 January
2017, unknown persons set fire to the Gazimestan memorial, north of Pristina,
damaging the main door and the fabric covering two coffins. St. Nicholas Church in
Pristina has also complained that the Kosovo Anti-Corruption Agency, which rents
office premises from the Church, has not paid rent since June 2014 and has not
responded to any of its requests for payment.
24. Some positive developments were also recorded, most notably the renovation
of three cultural sites renovated in Kamenicë/Kamenica municipality under the
“Confidence building through cultural protection in Kosovo” project funded by the
European Union and implemented by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP).

VI. Human rights and rule of law
25. The number of unresolved cases of missing persons remained at 1,660. On
10 November 2016, President Thaçi, together with the head of the Kosovo
Government Commission on Missing Persons, met with the representatives of the
families of missing Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs. This was the first time
since the end of the conflict in 1999 that the families of missing persons from both
communities had met jointly in the presence of Kosovo institutions to discuss
finding a solution to the issue. Following the meeting, the Kosovo Serb families
nominated representatives to join the Commission.
26. On 16 November, excavation of a suspected mass grave site in northern
Mitrovica was temporarily suspended owing to security concerns for the staff
involved. In a separate development on 30 December, representatives of
associations of Kosovo Albanian families gathered outside the Assembly of Kosovo,
to draw the attention of the political leadership to the issue of missing persons. After
Kosovo political leaders declined to join the gathering, the representatives forced
their way into the Assembly building. The situation was defused when the Speaker
of the Assembly, Kadri Veseli, met with the representatives to hear their grievances
and concerns.
27. The Host State Agreement between the Netherlands and Kosovo, providing the
legal basis for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers to conduct proceedings in the
Netherlands into alleged crimes committed in Kosovo between 1 January 1998 and
31 December 2000, entered into force on 1 January 2017. On 14 December 2016,
the Head of the EULEX Mission in Kosovo formally appointed Ekaterina
Trendafilova as the first President of the Specialist Chambers for a term of four
years.

6/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

28. On 28 October, the EULEX Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an
indictment for war crimes against the leader of the opposition party Initiative for
Kosovo, Fatmir Limaj. On 15 November, the Court of Appeals in Pristina
announced its verdicts in two separate war crimes cases, known as “Drenica 1” and
“Drenica 2”. The Court of Appeals, in its decision, reduced the sentence of the
former mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica and former KLA Commander Sami Lushtaku
from 12 to 7 years’ imprisonment. Former KLA Commander-in-Chief Sylejman
Selimi was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment, while a third defendant, Jahir
Demaku, was sentenced to 7 years’ imprisonment. For the other defendants in these
cases, the Court of Appeals upheld the judgment of the Basic Court of Mitrovica.
29. A number of investigations and prosecutions of officials accused of abuse of
position or authority were undertaken during the reporting period. On 17 November,
the EULEX Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an indictment against 24
persons, including the former mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica, Sami Lushtaku, as well as
senior officials of the Ministry of Justice, Kosovo Correctional Service personnel
and medical staff at the Central Clinic in Pristina. The indictment alleges that the
suspects treated a number of defendants preferentially while in custody during the
“Drenica” trial and falsified medical diagnoses in order to allow the defendants to
be detained at a hospital, which enabled them to escape. On 21 December in
Vushtrri/Vučitrn, following a four-month long investigation, 59 Kosovo police
officers were charged with corruption and abuse of power. Of those, 20 officers
have been remanded in custody for 30 days, while another 16 have been placed
under house arrest. The remaining 23 officers remained under investigation.
30. On 27 October, 7 persons were arrested on charges of smuggling of migrants
during a Kosovo police operation supported by EUROPOL. On 9 November, 10
persons were arrested in an anti-smuggling operation conducted by Kosovo police
in Pristina, Gjilan/Gnjilane, Ferizaj/Uroševac and Prizren municipalities. The
EULEX mission expressed disappointment at the decision of the Kosovo Supreme
Court of January 2017 to order a retrial of three men convicted of involvement in
organ trafficking in the 2013 “Medicus” case. In March 2016, the Appeals Court had
upheld the original convictions.

VII. Partnerships and cooperation
31. During the reporting period, my Special Representative continu ed to engage
constructively with the political leadership in Pristina and in Belgrade.
32. UNMIK continued to facilitate liaison between the Kosovo authorities and
INTERPOL in order to provide important international law enforcement functions.
This functionality is dependent on cooperation from the Kosovo authorities and
their compliance with INTERPOL operating rules and procedures. The reporting
period saw the adoption of new procedures by the Ministry of Justice and Kosovo
police, which may impact negatively on that cooperation. UNMIK continued to
engage with the Kosovo authorities and other stakeholders, as appropriate, to
address the issue.
33. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services. A total of 541
documents were processed between 16 October and 15 December, comprising

17-01779

7/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

120 civil status documents, 328 pension documents, 80 school attendance
documents and 13 high school diplomas.
34. In collaboration with OSCE, the Council of Europe and the European Union
Office in Kosovo, UNMIK held the event “Stand up for someone’s rights today” on
7 December, to celebrate International Human Rights Day. My Special
Representative, alongside the leadership of the partner organizations, engaged with
participants and highlighted the strength and importance of their messages in the
struggle to defend human rights.

VIII. Observations
35. It is regrettable that the commitment of both Belgrade and Pristina to advance
the dialogue appears to be waning, owing in part to a preoccupation with domestic
political concerns. Loss of momentum raises the risk that the process of
normalization, which is in the interest of both parties, will stall and potentially
regress.
36. I am concerned at the rising tensions and escalating mutual recrimination
which characterized relations between Pristina and Belgrade during the last quarter,
particularly since this occurred amidst intensifying ethnic strains and heightened
political rhetoric in the broader region. I call upon leaders on both sides to exercise
greater prudence and restraint in their public positions, to avoid inflammatory
language and to advance their positions by exclusively peaceful means and through
responsible dialogue. In particular, the tendency to amplify lesser issues into full blown disputes in the pursuit of tactical advantage or parochial gain has contributed
to a deterioration of relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
37. From some leaders, I see examples of sincere commitment, courage and the
vision of a better future, free of the zero-sum approach that undermines the real
interests of the people that they serve. I find positive examples of leadership at all
levels of governance, and hope that these will be replicated and become more
frequent during the coming year.
38. I invite both parties to honour the agreements already achieved in the
European Union-facilitated dialogue process in good faith and without undue delay.
I remind leaders that no progress is irreversible, and if processes do not move
forward, or if they do not deliver the tangible improvements fully expected by the
people, there is a risk of regression, which may be dangerous.
39. While post-conflict emotions should always be acknowledged and effective
forums for addressing conflict-related losses and grievances must be ensured, the
right of safe and dignified return is fundamental and inviolable. The United Nations
remains ready to support returns, reconciliation and the resolution of the difficult
legacies of the conflict in Kosovo.
40. It is essential that Kosovo institutions comply with the operational
requirements of INTERPOL and hence renew their full cooperation with UNMIK
and its INTERPOL Liaison Office, in order to ensure effective engagement in
international law enforcement efforts. Compliance with INTERPOL operating rule s
and procedures is crucial to the administration of justice.

8/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

41. UNMIK continues to shift towards a more focused approach to mandate
implementation, in order to have a positive impact on the delicate situation in
Kosovo, in particular through good offices, facilitation and community support. I
take this opportunity to reiterate the importance of ensuring that UNMIK is
appropriately resourced to address current and emerging challenges, including the
fragile reconciliation and the evolving threat of violent extremism. The Mission, in
its current configuration, is well suited to respond to challenges on the ground. I
will continue to ensure that these resources are applied in the most effective and
optimal manner.
42. I am encouraged by the continuing constructive engagement of the parties with
my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin. His good offices remain at their disposal, to
assist the peaceful resolution of disputes and misunderstandings.
43. I conclude by extending my gratitude to the long -standing partners of the
United Nations in Kosovo, including KFOR, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
the European Union and OSCE, and to the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes for their support for and cooperation with UNMIK.

17-01779

9/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo from 16 October 2016 to 15 January 2017
1.

Summary
A number of verdicts were pronounced concerning war crimes, organized
crime, corruption and other serious crimes. The Court of Appeals passed the
verdicts in the “Drenica I” and “Drenica II” war crimes cases, modifying the first instance judgments against some defendants and confir ming the sentences against
others. The Court of Appeals also passed a judgment in a case relating to the
Ministry of Health against seven defendants by returning the case to the Pristina
Basic Court for retrial. The Prizren Basic Court sentenced six defend ants for fraud,
legalization of false content and unlawful occupation of property in a case
pertaining to unlawful usurpation of property in a historic part of Pristina. The
Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court convicted a former Kosovo police officer of abuse of
official position, accepting bribes, trading in influence, providing assistance to
perpetrators and failure to report criminal offences. The Kosovo Special Prosecution
Office filed a ruling at the Pristina Basic Court to terminate the investigation into
alleged corruption within EULEX. In addition, several indictments were filed,
including in the “Hospital escape” case as well as in a case concerning
appropriation of socially owned properties (the “Azem Syla et al.” case).
Following the integration of the first group of 32 former Serbian Ministry of
Interior administrative staff, the Kosovo civil registry offices opened and officially
started to provide services to people living in the four northern municipalities.
Following the death of the Vetëvendosje activist Astrit Dehari in custody,
EULEX monitored the investigation by the Kosovo Correctional Service and
initiated a basic medical training programme for the staff of the High Security
Prison and Pristina Detention Centre. This training will also be giv en to the staff in
other Kosovo Correctional Service facilities. EULEX also held training on
negotiation, including critical incident management, for the Kosovo Correctional
Service directors, to enhance their techniques and capabilities in this area.
On 7 December, the Joint Rule of Law Coordination Board met to assess
progress on the rule of law and released a compact progress report covering the
period from August 2015 to June 2016. The new Compact, reflecting the increased
responsibility of Kosovo institutions, was signed between EULEX, the Kosovo
Ministry of Justice, the Kosovo Judicial Council, the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council
and the European Union Special Representative/European Union Office.

10/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

2.

EULEX activities

2.1

Executive
War crimes
In October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges started the
appeals sessions in the case in which the Mitrovica Basic Court had found Ivanović
guilty of war crimes against the civilian population and sentenced him to nine years’
imprisonment (“Oliver Ivanović et al.” case).
On 24 October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges announced
the verdict regarding the appeals of the defence and the prosecutor against the
judgment in the “Drenica II” case. The Court of Appeals reduced the sentence for
one defendant from eight to seven years, for another defendant from seven to six
years and six months, and for two other defendants from seven to six years’
imprisonment. The sentences of six other defendants, of three years’ imprisonment,
were confirmed.
On 7 November, the Ministry of Justice of Montenegro granted the request of
the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office to extradite to Kosovo a citizen who had
been wanted for war crimes there against the civilian population under the Criminal
Code of the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The person is under detention
on remand until 27 January 2017.
On 15 November, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges decided
on the appeals of the defence against the judgment rendered by the Mitr ovica Basic
Court in the “Drenica I” case. The Court of Appeals modified the judgment
regarding one defendant by reducing his sentence from 12 to 7 years in prison. One
other defendant was sentenced to five years, one was acquitted and the remaining
verdicts were upheld.
On 9 December, a suspect in a case related to war crimes against the civilian
population during March 1999 in Fushë Kosovë/Kosovo Polje, was extradited from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, on the basis of an international wanted notice issued on
behalf of a EULEX prosecutor. The defendant was placed under detention on
remand.
Organized crime and corruption
In October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court convicted a former Kosovo police officer of abuse of
official position, accepting bribes, trading in influence, providing assistance to
perpetrators after the commission of an offence and failure to report criminal
offences. The defendant received an aggregate sentence of seven years’
imprisonment with a ban on holding any official position for a period of five years
after release.
On 21 October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Prizren Basic Court rendered the judgment in a criminal case involving nine
defendants and pertaining to unlawful usurpation of property in a historic part of
Pristina where a modern building was erected without a construction permit. The
panel found six of the defendants guilty of fraud, legalization of false content and

17-01779

11/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

unlawful occupation of property, and sentenced two defendants to an aggregate
punishment of 2 years and four others to 1 year and 10 months’ imprisonment.
Execution of the prison sentences was suspended for a period of two years. The
panel rejected the charges of issuing unlawful judicial decisions, abuse of official
authority and fraud against three other defendants as the charges exceeded the
statutory limitations. All defendants were acquitted of the charges of organized
crime.
On 25 October, a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
filed two indictments in the “Azem Syla et al.” case. In the first indictment, 22
defendants were indicted under 46 counts for criminal offences, including organized
crime, money-laundering, accepting bribes, aggravated fraud, fraud in office,
issuing unlawful judicial decisions, abuse of official position, legalization of false
content and tax evasion. In the second indictment, 17 defendants were indicted on
money-laundering charges.
On 7 November, the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office filed the ruling at the
Pristina Basic Court to terminate the investigation into alleged corruption within
EULEX (the “Hermes” case). The charges of accepting bribes against one defendant
and the charges of giving bribes against three other defendants we re dismissed. The
evidentiary materials proved that former EULEX judge Francesco Florit did not
solicit or accept any form of bribe, nor did he accept a promise of a bribe. The
evidence also proved that the other three defendants did not commit the crimina l
offence of giving bribes.
On 17 November, a EULEX prosecutor filed an indictment in a case
pertaining, inter alia, to the abuse of official position or authority, facilitation of the
escape of persons deprived of liberty, intimidation during criminal pr oceedings,
participation in or organization of an organized criminal group (the “Hospital
escape” case) against 24 defendants, including three persons formerly convicted for
war crimes and 11 members of the Kosovo Correctional Service.
On 9 December, a EULEX prosecutor filed an indictment against a defendant
for money-laundering. This indictment is connected to the indictment filed on
3 March 2016 against 23 other defendants in the “Land 4 case”, concerning 36.45
hectares of socially owned land which were acquired through an unlawful judicial
decision.
On 13 December, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Court of Appeals passed a judgment in a case relating to the Ministry of Health
against seven defendants. They were charged with abuse o f official position or
authority, mistreatment in exercising official duties, accepting bribes, tax evasion
and obstruction of evidence. The panel partially granted the appeal filed by the
Kosovo Special Prosecution Office by annulling the first instance j udgment for
specific counts and returning the case to the Pristina Basic Court for retrial.
On 30 December, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at the
Supreme Court pronounced its verdict, annulling the previous judgments by the
Pristina Basic Court and the Court of Appeals, which had found three defendants
guilty of trafficking in human beings and organized crime in the “Medicus” case,
which relates to the removal of kidneys at the Medicus Clinic for transplantation in
2008. The Supreme Court returned the case to the Pristina Basic Court for retrial on

12/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

the basis of two procedural violations. The EULEX judge submitted a dissenting
opinion arguing that there was no reason to annul the judgments of the Pristina
Basic Court and the Court of Appeals and to order a retrial.
Other serious crimes
In October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Court of
Appeals partially granted the appeal of the defence against the judgment of the
Mitrovica Basic Court of 23 October 2015 in a case involving one defendant and
pertaining to the attack on a EULEX convoy near Zubin Potok on 3 April 2012. The
charge of damage to movable property was rejected owing to the bar of the statutory
limitation. The Court of Appeals convicted the defendant of the offences of
endangering personnel, obstructing official persons in performing official duties and
attacking official persons performing official duties, committed in concurrence and
in continuity. The Court of Appeals confirmed the sentence of 1 year and 10 months’
imprisonment, suspended for a period of 4 years.
On 21 November, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court
announced the verdict against two defendants in the criminal case related to the
events that led to the murder of the Kosovo police officer Enver Zymberi in 2011.
The defendants were convicted of the criminal offence of participation in a group
obstructing official persons in performing official duties. One defendant was
sentenced to 18 months’ imprisonment, suspended for a period of 3 years, while the
other defendant was sentenced to 2 years’ imprisonment, suspended for a period of 4
years.
On 25 November, a EULEX prosecutor filed an indictment against one suspect
charged with aggravated murder and attempted aggravated murd er in the case
relating to the murder of one victim and the attempted aggravated murder of one
Kosovo police officer at the City Club in Pejë/Peć in 2010 (the “City Club case”).
On 19 December, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Court of Appeals passed a judgment in the criminal case against one defendant,
charged with violation of the secrecy of proceedings and attempted obstruction of
evidence or official proceedings. The panel found the defendant not guilty and
affirmed the acquittal by the Mitrovica Basic Court.
Institute of Forensic Medicine
EULEX forensic experts at the Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine handed
over seven sets of remains, conducted one exhumation and identified the remains of
six individuals, two of whom were missing persons. They also carried out site
assessments in Gllogoc/Glogovac, Kaçanik/Kačanik and Leposavić/Leposaviq and
continued the site assessment at Kiževak in the Rudnica mining complex in Serbia,
which was suspended on 2 December for the winter period until spring 2017.
EULEX forensic experts continued work on the autopsy and clinical examinations
backlog. Preparations were made for the launch of online training in forensic
anthropology for two local doctors, to be conducted as from early 2017.

17-01779

13/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

Property rights
The Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel received three new appeals and
adjudicated 22 appeals, while 342 appeals were pending a decision of the panel.
The Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for privatization matters rendered
296 decisions in first-instance trial panel cases and finalized 67 cases at the
appellate panel level.
Integration of the judiciary
Following the agreement reached in the framework of the European Union facilitated dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia on the final steps for the
implementation of the Justice Agreement, the integration of judges, prosecutors and
judicial staff into the Kosovo judiciary was set to become fully effective in January
2017.
Executive police
On 26 and 27 October, EULEX held training for the International Law
Enforcement Coordination Unit of the Kosovo police on international police
cooperation in the fight against the trafficking in illicit goods. The training focused
on the Unit’s involvement, ways in which it can become the focal point for
exchanging information among law enforcement authorities in Kosovo and the
implementation of integration approaches with EUROPOL and INTERPOL.
From 21 to 24 November, EULEX conducted a training workshop on
international police cooperation to enhance the performance of the International
Law Enforcement Coordination Unit of the Kosovo police and to raise the
awareness of specialized Kosovo police investigative units on how to benefit from
various international police cooperation instruments and channels.
From 21 to 26 November, EULEX participated in a joint Silver Sabre 2016 -2
exercise of KFOR, pertaining to tactics and operations in the planning and execution
of both civil disturbance and natural disaster simulations. The exercise was aimed at
further improving the ability of pillar security providers in Kosovo for collaboration
and coordination.
2.2

Strengthening
With the integration of the first group of 32 former Serbian Ministry of
Interior administrative staff, the Kosovo civil registry offices, based on the Brussels
Agreement of 2013, have officially opened and started providing services to people
living in the four northern municipalities.
The Joint Rule of Law Coordination Board met on 7 December to assess
progress in the rule of law area, releasing a Compact Progress Report covering the
period from August 2015 to June 2016. This marks an important step as it provided
an opportunity for the future. A new Compact between EULEX, the Kosovo
Ministry of Justice, the Kosovo Judicial Council, the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council
and the European Union Office/European Union Special Representative was signed,
representing increased responsibility for Kosovo institutions.

14/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

EULEX assessed that the Kosovo police Division of Specialized Units
provided excellent response, up to European Union standards, in all manner of
interventions, ranging from VIP security, complex crowd and riot control operations
to high-level arrests and improvised explosive device operations. Regarding the
Religious and Cultural Heritage Unit, it was operating at a satisfactory level. While
there were no indicators of direct threats against religious sites, there was still a
permanent need to secure sensitive religious sites. EULEX provided a final draft on
the location of closed circuit television installation at religious and cultural heritage
sites, as part of the European Union-sponsored UNDP project on confidencebuilding through cultural protection.
On 5 November, Vetëvendosje activist Astrit Dehari died in custody. He had
been in detention since August, after he was arrested on suspicion of terrorism for
allegedly launching an explosive device at the Assembly of Kosovo building. On
18 November, the Prizren chief prosecutor presented the forensic report and
confirmed that Dehari had committed suicide, without any involvement by third
parties. The Inspectorate of the Ministry of Justice found some procedural
negligence by the Kosovo Correctional Service staff. An internal investigation has
been conducted by the Kosovo Correctional Service. One Kosovo Correctional
Service officer, two supervisors and the Acting Director of the Prizren detention
centre were suspended as a precautionary measure. EULEX monitored the Kosovo
Correctional Service from the initial phase of the investigation as well as the
inspection conducted by the Inspectorate.
EULEX began to provide basic medical training for 54 staff of the High
Security Prison and Pristina Detention Centre, to be continued in all other Kosovo
Correctional Service facilities for staff that are in direct contact with prisoners and
act as first responders in case of emergency. Negotiation training was held with
Kosovo Correctional Service directors on critical incident management with the
purpose of enhancing negotiation techniques to successfully tackle incidents such as
blocking cells, climbing on high objects, hunger strikes, suicide threats, hostage
taking, collective resistance, demonstrations and riots.
EULEX conducted workshops on the identification, recording, investigation
and potential prosecution of hate crime and a workshop on the effective use of
forensic capacities related to investigating sexual and gender -based violence. While
both workshops had a thematic focus, both dealt with issues relating to the
interoperability of relevant Kosovo institutions including the police, prosecutors,
courts and civil society.
The Mission continued its monitoring activities relating to cases that are being
handed over to local authorities.
The Kosovo Judicial Council adopted the amendments to the Regulation on
Procedures of election, Appointment, Evaluation, Suspension and Dismissal of
Court Presidents and Supervising Judges. The Council followed the advice of
EULEX that the initial evaluation of candidates for court presiden ts be made by an
evaluation committee, excluding Kosovo Judicial Council members serving as
judges in the court concerned. EULEX was in regular discussions with the chair of
the Council and the Normative Committee about the draft laws on the Kosovo
Judicial Council and on disciplinary responsibility of judges and prosecutors, and

17-01779

15/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

the Decision on the Regulation on Transfer and Assignment of Judges was adopted
by the Council, with the comments of EULEX incorporated.
The Kosovo police published its second serious and organized crime threat
assessment. EULEX considers this to be a solid basic document for the
identification of current and future serious organized crime trends within Kosovo.
The community policing strategy and action plan for Kosovo police 2017 -2021 was
finalized, with participants from the Kosovo police, OSCE, the International
Criminal Investigative Training Assistance Program, UNDP, EULEX and members
of the Islamic community. While the Kosovo police is increasingly trusted by the
population, there is still a lack of education and material shortages in relation to
putting the strategy into practice.

16/19

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
On 21 November 2016, the Kingdom of the Netherlands ratified the
Agreement between the Netherlands and Kosovo. The Agreement entered into force
on 1 January 2017, giving the legal basis for conducting judicial activity in the
Netherlands.
On 14 December 2016, following the recommendation of an independent
selection panel, Judge Ekaterina Trendafilova was appointed President of the
Specialist Chambers by the EULEX Head of Mission. The President took up her
duties on 12 January 2017.
The Specialist Prosecutor’s Office continued seamlessly the work of the
European Union Special Investigative Task Force, and continues to engage with
individuals, injured parties and victim advocacy groups in order to gather evidence
and information relevant to the investigation. While the Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office received satisfactory assistance from judicial and law enforcement authorities
in Pristina and Belgrade and beyond during the reporting period, the Specialist
Prosecutor looks forward to greater assistance as the pace and intensity of the work
of the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office increase.
The Specialist Prosecutor has stepped up outreach efforts aimed at explaining
the role and responsibilities of the newly established Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
The Specialist Prosecutor visited Pristina and Belgrade during the reporting period.
During the trip, the Specialist Prosecutor reiterated his commitment to pursuing an
independent and impartial investigation, guided only by the law, and to achieve
outcomes that are legitimate and perceived as legitimate by those they affect.

17-01779

17/19

S/2017/95/Rev.1

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2017)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Estonia

1

Germany

2a

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Russian Federation

1

Total
a

8

One police officer under United Nations contract.

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2017)
Country

Number

Czechia

2

Poland

2a

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

9

a

18/19

One military officer under United Nations contract.

17-01779

S/2017/95/Rev.1

17-01779

19/19
