S/PV.8909

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8909th meeting

Monday, 22 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Casaubón/Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco. . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Bhattacharyya
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Laouani
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Small arms
The impact of the diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security
Letter dated 22 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/892)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/966) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-34955 (E)
*2134955*

Small arms

S/PV.8909

Mr. Geiss (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for
me to address the Council, and I would like to express
my sincere gratitude to Mexico for having invited the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
(UNIDIR) to speak.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small arms

(spoke in English)

The impact of the diversion and trafficking of
arms on peace and security
Letter dated 22 October 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Mexico
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/892)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Malta, Morocco, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Robin
Geiss, Director of the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research; and Ms. María Pía Devoto,
member of the Control Arms Governance Board.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Silvio
Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Ms. Laetitia Courtois,
Permanent Observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/892, which contains a letter dated
22 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of Mexico to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Geiss.
2/34

22/11/2021

The diversion of and trafficking in arms, including
small arms and light weapons and ammunition, is a
defining factor in undermining peace and security.
Throughout the life cycle of arms and
ammunition — from production through to final
use or destruction — there are contexts, conditions
and moments that facilitate their diversion and
trafficking to non-State armed groups, criminals and
terrorist actors. The use of these weapons by those
entities and individuals destabilizes communities
and exacerbates situations of insecurity, including
through the commission of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as violence against women and children in
various contexts.
The negative, gendered and age-related impacts of
the misuse of illicit arms and ammunition range from
direct effects — including deaths, injuries, displacement
and psychological harm — to long-term socioeconomic
effects on, inter alia, access to health care and education,
the delivery of humanitarian services, the protection of
civilians and sustainable development.
The illicit arms trade is dynamic, multifaceted and
often context specific. When loopholes and gaps are
closed in one domain, vulnerabilities are exploited in
another. States affected by patterns of recurring armed
violence therefore face many challenges in preventing
the diversion and misuse of arms.
Research into what facilitates diversion, how
and where it occurs and who is involved reveals the
importance of putting in place systemic and practical
national measures at key stages in the life cycle to
prevent, detect and address diversion and trafficking
in arms. A UNIDIR review of 200 documented diversion
cases highlighted the importance of taking action to
prevent and detect diversion not only from national
stockpiles, but also from the country of manufacture
and export. UNIDIR’s diversion analysis framework
shows the importance for all United Nations Member
States to remain vigilant in addressing the diversion or
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

S/PV. 8909

trafficking of arms and ammunition at key stages in
their life cycle.

and thirdly, regarding the use of appropriate safeguards
for incremental lifting of arms embargoes.

In that regard, it is encouraging that Member States
are already taking important steps and have started
discussing and addressing diversion in a comprehensive
manner, as we have seen, for example, in the recent
report produced by the Group of Governmental Experts
established pursuant to resolution 61/72 and the annual
General Assembly resolution on problems arising
from the accumulation of conventional ammunition
stockpiles in surplus.

Our research in support of action 21 of the
Secretary-General’s
Agenda
for
Disarmament
found that peace operations often gather and have
access to critical information for supporting arms
embargo implementation and enforcement, as well as
conventional arms control efforts more broadly. They
do not, however, systematically integrate conventional
arms control measures into their conflict prevention
and management toolbox. UNIDIR is developing
arms-related risk analysis tools that can help peace
operations to better integrate conventional arms control
measures into their conflict prevention, management
and peacebuilding efforts.

National ownership is fundamental to effectively
tackling diversion and arms trafficking; however,
we will not achieve success without international
cooperation and assistance. Many States need and seek
support in identifying priority areas and in sequencing
steps to establish and maintain national systems to
address the drivers of demand and supply-side dynamics
of illicit arms and ammunition proliferation.
UNIDIR develops and provides tools to strengthen
national ownership of weapons and ammunition
management throughout their entire life cycle. Between
2015 and 2020, the Institute supported 11 States in
conducting weapons and ammunition management
baseline assessments. Such assessments enable States
to comprehensively and systematically evaluate their
relevant institutions, policies and operational processes
in order to determine where and how to address gaps
and build capacity.
Today, weapons and ammunition management is
increasingly recognized as a fundamental component
of conflict prevention and actions to tackle armed
violence. The Secretary-General’s small arms reports
to the Security Council now regularly feature a section
on weapons and ammunition management. The concept
of weapons and ammunition management is also
increasingly reflected in resolutions adopted by the
Council on arms embargoes and peace operations.
In a recent study, we highlighted several ways in
which weapons and ammunition management plays a
role in United Nations arms embargo regimes, including,
first, for the development and tailoring of benchmarks
for modifying arms embargoes and for the conduct
of national assessments of arms and ammunition
control capabilities; secondly, for the promotion of
cooperative approaches and dialogue to strengthen the
implementation and enforcement of arms embargoes;

An increasing number of stakeholders — both within
and outside the United Nations system — are starting to
utilize more comprehensive, integrated approaches to
weapons and ammunition management. This provides
an opportune moment for an inclusive, participatory
and gender-sensitive international dialogue towards a
more coherent and strategic approach to strengthening
multilateral, regional and national policies and practices
on weapons and ammunition management. Advancing
a United Nations strategic approach to weapons and
ammunition management could further enhance
multilateral efforts to deliver peace, security, stability
and development around the world.
Please allow me, in conclusion, to underline that
UNIDIR stands ready to continue to provide applied and
forward-looking research, innovative ideas, advisory
services and fora for inclusive dialogue to tackle the
diversion and trafficking of arms and ammunition.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Geiss
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Devoto.
Ms. Devoto (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Control Arms Governance Board, I want to express
my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, Marcelo
Ebrard Casaubón, Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico, and to your colleagues for leading this debate
on a fundamental issue for international peace and
security. I would also like to highlight Mexico’s strong
support for and alliance with civil society.
Control Arms, which today has 150 civil society
member organizations, was created to influence the
implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). The

21-349553/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

ATT is the first global treaty to regulate the international
arms trade and to incorporate international human
rights law and international humanitarian law as
standards to restrict its use. The Treaty plays a leading
role in preventing the illicit trade in and diversion
of conventional arms, including small arms and
light weapons.
The devastating impact of the illicit trafficking and
misuse of small arms by State and non-State actors is felt
most acutely among communities in conflict-affected
regions, where those weapons perpetuate a vicious
cycle of violence and insecurity and fuel violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
intracommunity tensions, gender-based violence and
forced displacement.
In other contexts, the illicit trafficking and
diversion of small arms and the retransfer of those
weapons to unauthorized end users generate high
levels of armed violence and fuel crime and terrorism.
For these reasons, it is in the interest of all States that
seek to promote human security, as well as national,
regional and international security and stability, to do
everything possible to address the problem of illicit
trafficking and the diversion of small arms.
States have various instruments, agreements and
mechanisms at their disposal to detect, combat and
prevent illicit trafficking and diversion of small arms
and light weapons. Among them are the Arms Trade
Treaty, the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects; the
International Tracing Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; the Firearms
Protocol to the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime; the Modular Smallarms-control Implementation Compendium; and the
International Ammunition Technical Guidelines.
Regional instruments and initiatives that support small
arms regulation, such as the African Union Silencing
Guns by 2020 initiative, are also vital to that effort.
According to Security Council resolution 2220 (2015),
recognizing the synergies among those instruments
and taking measures for their implementation would
have a positive impact on reducing illicit traffic and the
diversion of small arms and light weapons.
The Arms Trade Treaty, for example, requires
States parties to develop national control systems
4/34

22/11/2021

to address diversion, among other measures. Recent
work under the Treaty includes a specific focus on the
diversion of conventional arms, including stockpile
management, with mechanisms that are explicitly
tasked with addressing diversion — for example, the
Diversion Information Exchange Forum — to share
information and consult on real cases of diversion.
The ATT also specifically enforces Security Council
arms embargoes.
It is encouraging that, with the recent accession
of China, three of the five permanent members of the
Security Council and six of the current elected members
are States parties to the ATT. Control Arms calls on all
United Nations Member States to join the Treaty as a
matter of urgency.
Mandatory Security Council arms embargoes are
undermined by violations by Members of the United
Nations and non-State actors. The United Nations
panels or groups of experts in charge of monitoring
compliance with arms embargoes have systematically
highlighted problems associated with their application
and made recommendations to address them. The
most egregious recent example is the Libyan embargo,
which in March this year was described by the Panel
of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1973
(2011) as “totally ineffective”. Control Arms calls on
the Security Council to do more to support the work
of panels of experts and to take action against those
known to be actively undermining Security Council
embargoes, including through the more regular
application of secondary sanctions.
To continue tackling the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, Control Arms urges the Security
Council to prioritize the effective implementation of
the established global framework and mechanisms
regulating the international trade in conventional arms
and to encourage others to do likewise; to promote and
seek synergies between international and regional efforts
to detect, combat and prevent the illicit trafficking and
diversion of arms; and to review, revitalize and develop
its commitment to resolution 2220 (2015).
The Council has at its disposal the tools, knowledge
and experience to combat illicit trafficking and
diversion of small arms and light weapons — it is a
matter of finding the political will to do so. Control
Arms is hopeful that Mexico’s efforts to lead in this
area of the Security Council’s work will be rewarded by
meaningful action.
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Devoto for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico.
It is, of course, my honour to lead this Security
Council debate. I am grateful for the presence of the
many delegations that have come together to discuss
the important issue of the impact of the diversion and
illicit trafficking of arms on peace and security.
The illicit trafficking and diversion of small arms
and light weapons, as well as their accumulation and
proliferation in various parts of the world, constitute
a threat to international peace and security. Arms
trafficking is a global phenomenon that severely
affects the civilian population in multiple dimensions,
destroying the social fabric and fuelling violence,
especially against vulnerable groups. It generates
displacement and irregular flows of people wishing to
escape from contexts of insecurity.
Many efforts have been undertaken by the United
Nations to strengthen cooperation and joint action to
prevent and counteract illegal practices in the small
arms and light weapons market, as well as the terrible
consequences of such weapons. However, it is necessary
to acknowledge that our efforts have been insufficient.
The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects; the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons; the Protocol against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime; the Arms
Trade Treaty; efforts on behalf of the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms; and the specific work
of the Security Council through the establishment and
monitoring of arms embargoes are clear examples
whereby the international community has shown its
willingness to comprehensively address that challenge
through specific mandates, recommendations and
common lines of action.
We must, however, do more. We must do more
to reduce the diversion and trafficking of arms and
their negative consequences, particularly in countries
struggling with high levels of criminal violence.

S/PV. 8909

In Mexico, we believe that Governments and
the private sector must work together to curb arms
trafficking and its harmful effects on populations.
Private actors must contribute, through decisive actions
in favour of self-regulation and monitoring of their
supply chains, to preventing the diversion and illicit
trafficking of the weapons they produce and market,
as well as ensuring that the weapons they manufacture
legally do not fall into the hands of criminals.
The figures on civilian deaths in armed conflict
caused by small arms and light weapons, as well as
the number of fatalities due to armed violence in
non-conflict situations, are alarming. Various sources
estimate that, every day, around 500 people lose their
lives and another 2,000 are wounded by firearms across
the world. In our region, Latin America, the annual
figures for gun violence and deaths are even higher
than those observed in many of the areas recognized as
being in a state of armed conflict. Approximately 75 per
cent of homicides and femicides involve a weapon of
that nature.
I cannot neglect to mention the disproportionate
impact of the trafficking and diversion of small arms
and light weapons on women and children. According
to figures provided by the United Nations, more
than 8,000 children have been killed or maimed in
21 situations of armed conflict. While the availability of
weapons affects both women and men, it is imperative
to acknowledge the gendered impact of the trafficking
and diversion of such weapons as facilitators of all
forms of violence, including sexual violence in conflict,
and many other dynamics that affect the integrity and
lives of women and children.
The diagnosis of the issue of the uncontrolled
global flow of arms is clear and compelling. The
Arria Formula meeting convened by my country in
September, the flagship event chaired by Kenya last
month (see S/PV.8874) and the briefings we have just
heard all confirm the magnitude of the problem.
The common thread during Mexico’s presidency of
the Security Council has been prevention, in particular
the need to address the various catalysts of violence.
What better way to prevent the escalation of armed
conflict than through actions that truly address the
trafficking and diversion of arms and ammunition? It
is a phenomenon that is present in all armed conflicts,
severely affecting the civilian population in multiple
dimensions, destroying the social fabric and fuelling

21-349555/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

violence, particularly against the most vulnerable
groups. In contrast, the companies that produce and
distribute those weapons, through irresponsible
practices, maintain abundant and growing revenues.
To put it plainly and simply, if there were no almost
unlimited availability of arms, most armed conflict
situations on the Council’s agenda would have a better
chance of reaching a peaceful solution. As long as
actors in conflict situations, especially non-State actors
and mercenary and criminal groups, maintain their
military and material might, they will choose force
over dialogue, politics and diplomacy. The situations
in Myanmar, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia or Yemen, to name but a few, would be very
different if there were better control over cross-border
arms trafficking.
Our actions, as an international community,
must recognize that combating trafficking and
diversion at both the source and destination is our
shared responsibility and that those actions must be
complementary at all levels.
At the bilateral level, for example, in early August
the Mexican Government filed a lawsuit against private
companies in the United States for intentional and
negligent practices in the production and marketing
of weapons that encourage illegal trafficking and,
consequently, affect our population and increase levels
of violence. The lawsuit is not about questioning the
right of countries and individuals to trade arms legally,
but rather denouncing negligent practices that have
serious consequences for other populations. Mexico’s
claim asserts that certain negligent practices in that
trade generate serious harm to our societies. We consider
that litigation to be a matter of principle and a moral
obligation so as to avoid further pain and suffering.
Thousands of families have already been affected by
the use of illegally trafficked weapons, even if they are
classified as small and light.
At the regional level, we have a rich array of
treaties and initiatives in various geographical areas.
The African Union’s Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative, the Western Balkans road map
and the Inter-American Convention Against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials
clearly demonstrate the development of visions and
strategies that respond to the particularities and needs
of each region.
6/34

22/11/2021

In the multilateral context, the primacy of the
United Nations and such instruments as the Arms
Trade Treaty, the Programme of Action on Small Arms,
the International Tracing Instrument, and the Firearms
Protocol to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, are clear examples
of the resolve that the international community has
shown to comprehensively address this challenge, by
generating specific mandates, recommendations and
common lines of action.
It is precisely in the context of the Security Council
that my country believes that serious discussions
must be held on the tangible impacts of diversion and
trafficking, as well as on the decisions that this organ
could promote to strengthen cooperation and better
implement international commitments. The aim is not to
replace, but to strengthen the efforts already undertaken
in other forums of the United Nations system.
Mexico firmly believes that it is not enough for
the Council to promote and strengthen weapons and
ammunition systems; rather, it is imperative to address
the entire life cycle of arms, including brokering,
transfer and end users. We must adopt a preventive
approach to our work, as discussed here just last week
(see S/PV.8906), in order to improve the identification
of risks and prevent weapons from falling into the
wrong hands.
The mandates of peacekeeping missions and the
renewal of sanctions regimes are strengthened by
components aimed at preventing and countering the
trafficking and diversion of arms and their weapons.
As an example, we believe that progress has been
made in the resolutions on the renewal of the mandates
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, as they contain elements
that reinforce this perspective.
It is equally important to strengthen effective
and comprehensive border controls and to promote
coordination among the authorities of the different
countries through which these weapons transit. That is
one recommendation in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/839), which seems to us to be very relevant for
future Council action.
These and other considerations should be based
on timely information generated in the field to ensure
that all decisions are taken in accordance with reality
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

and in response to the continually changing dynamics.
We therefore encourage the generation of rigorous
statistical databases and accurate diagnostics on the
dynamics, routes and trends in arms trafficking and
diversion in situations of armed conflict and on their
humanitarian consequences.
Mexico is convinced that, by fully complying with
the Council’s mandates and avoiding any duplication
of effort with other multilateral bodies, forums
or processes, we can contribute to establishing an
international regime that allows for better control of arms
and ammunition transfers and a more responsible trade
that prevents diversion and cross-border trafficking.
Ensuring security in our countries and societies
will be possible only with the commitment and action
of all relevant actors: Governments, organizations and
businesses. We have an opportunity to demonstrate
to our societies that we are capable of redoubling our
efforts towards sustainable peace and development as
the only priorities for States, by effectively preventing
the diversion and trafficking of arms and contributing
to the achievement of Target 16.4 of the Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Mexico calls emphatically for the establishment
and improvement of mechanisms to monitor and
prevent international illicit arms transfers, the diversion
of the arms trade and cross-border trafficking. At
the same time, it draws the attention of Governments
to encourage our respective private sectors to come
together to establish self-regulatory measures, in
accordance with national legislation, to prevent their
business practices from actively encouraging the illicit
trafficking of their products.
Before concluding, I would like to thank and
acknowledge the large number of delegations present at
this open debate. That in itself attests to the priority of
this issue at a global level.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. Bhattacharyya (India): I thank you,
Mr. President, Your Excellency Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of Mexico. I also thank the Director of United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, Mr. Robin
Geiss, and the member of the Control Arms Governance
Board, Ms. María Pía Devoto, for their briefings.

S/PV. 8909

The threat posed by the illicit transfer and illegal
diversion of small arms to international peace and
security is a matter of concern to the entire international
community. It has a cross-cutting negative impact on
development, security, humanitarian and socioeconomic
aspects. The fact that the Security Council members
have discussed this complex and multidimensional
problem for three consecutive months, formally and
informally, reflects the critical nature of the issue and
the need for a sense of urgency in addressing it.
India’s views on the issue of illicit transfer of small
arms are well known. We consider that the primary
responsibility for addressing the problem lies with
the Member States. In that regard, India supports the
redoubling of efforts at the national and global levels
to strengthen the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects and the International Tracing
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, including through effective national
legislative measures and enforcement, export controls,
information-sharing and capacity-building.
I will highlight three key aspects today.
The first aspect concerns the impact of the continued
flow of small arms and light weapons to terrorists and
terrorist groups. These weapons become more sinister
and lethal in the hands of terrorists, who deliberately and
indiscriminately use them to target innocent civilians,
including women and children. The increase in the
volume and the quality of the small arms acquired by
terrorist organizations reminds us time and again that
they cannot exist without the sponsorship or support of
States. It is also well known that some States are using
advanced technologies, such as drones, for cross-border
supply of illicit weapons to terrorist groups, in violation
of the sovereignty of other Member States. This aspect
needs to be unequivocally condemned.
We also call for greater focus on the terror-crime
nexus, in particular the thriving illicit network for
the procurement and transfer of small arms and the
financing for such procurement and logistical activities.
The Security Council and the international community
should do more to prevent and disrupt such networks.
Secondly, there is a need for effective
implementation of Council-mandated arms embargoes.
It is an established fact that the flow of illicit arms

21-349557/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

and weapons to non-State actors and terrorist groups
drives and sustains conflicts. In that regard, the arms
embargo remains an important tool that the Council
has at its disposal to curb the flow of such weapons to
situations of armed conflict. It is a matter of concern
that embargoes continue to be blatantly violated, as
repeatedly reported by the various panels of experts
supporting the subsidiary bodies of the Council. It is
important that all Member States respect and strictly
enforce existing arms embargoes and strengthen
measures against the illicit transfer of arms.
Thirdly, with regard to the impact of illicit flows on
the safety of United Nations peacekeepers, the steady
and illicit supply of small arms to warring parties in
situations of armed conflict seriously impairs the safety
of United Nations peacekeepers deployed in these
areas. The Council is aware of numerous incidents
in the past, which are recorded in the reports of the
Secretary-General, where attacks on peacekeepers,
many of them fatal, have been perpetrated using such
illegal arms. It is therefore important for the Council
to address the danger posed by such illicit transfers
to the safety and security of peacekeepers by giving
due attention to this issue during the consideration of
peacekeeping mandates.
The role of United Nations peacekeeping missions
in addressing this issue must also be clearly laid out in
their respective mandates. While peacekeeping missions
could support host countries through strengthening the
capacities of law enforcement and security agencies in
the safe handling, upkeep and stockpile management
of arms and weapons recovered from non-State actors,
they must be equipped with adequate resources and
expertise to fulfil this responsibility. In this regard,
we welcome the proposal in the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/839) to establish a dedicated
component or a unit within peacekeeping missions to
handle such assistance, wherever required.
India has actively contributed to the multilateral
framework to address the problem of the illicit transfer
of small arms. In 2002-2003, we were privileged to
chair the Group of Governmental Experts, whose
recommendations led to the Open-ended Working
Group to negotiate the International Tracing Instrument
(ITI). India believes that the full implementation of the
ITI is necessary for tackling the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.
8/34

22/11/2021

At the national level, India has a robust legislative
and administrative mechanism to combat and eradicate
the menace of illicit small arms, the details of which
can be found in our national reports regularly submitted
to the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.
Further, India has been regularly submitting its national
reports to the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms. India also maintains strict export controls over
all munitions and related items, including small arms.
India is also a member of the Wassenaar Arrangement.
India believes that international cooperation and
assistance, including capacity-building, should be
pursued in parallel for the full implementation of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in all Its Aspects and the ITI.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that India remains
fully committed to implementing its international
obligations pertaining to the prevention, combating and
eradication of the illicit trade in small arms.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank your country,
Mexico, for having chosen to organize today’s debate
on such an important and timely topic as the problem of
the diversion of and trafficking in small arms and light
weapons in connection with insecurity. As indicated in
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
subject (S/2021/839), the problem of small arms and light
weapons (SALW) remains a matter of great concern
in the world, given its impact on the maintenance of
peace and the stability of several States. I would like
to thank the Director of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research and Ms. Devoto for their
excellent briefings.
Most of the atrocities committed in conflict and
post-conflict zones are due to the use of small arms
and light weapons by non-State armed actors, who
obtain them with great ease, with a view to creating a
climate of insecurity and widespread terror. The illicit
diversion and transfer of small arms and light weapons
contributes to sending regions in crisis into situations
of vulnerability and keeping them there, undermining
their development efforts and, consequently, their ability
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals as set
forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In countries hosting United Nations peace
operations, the uncontrolled flow of small arms and
light weapons fuels intercommunal conflicts, especially
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

in the context of international terrorism, where even
peacekeepers are directly targeted by frequent lethal
attacks. These illicit weapons fuel conflicts between
communities that once lived in symbiosis through the
years. The battle for access to natural resources that
have become scarce owing to the impact of climate
change, such as water and grazing land, is being waged
through the use of firearms in regions like the Sahel.
The Secretary-General’s 2021 report on small arms
rightly reminds us that small arms are still the primary
cause of human suffering, especially among women and
children, who are usually the prime targets of non-State
armed actors and organized crime.
We welcome and support the efforts of the United
Nations in the framework of the Secretary-General’s
“Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for
Disarmament”, an agenda initiated in May 2018 that has
greatly contributed to saving human lives by supporting
national, subregional, and regional efforts to control
illicit arms. In Africa, the continent most affected by
insecurity, Member States have taken initiatives to
alleviate the scourge of arms trafficking that fuels the
suffering of populations affected by growing insecurity.
These include the African Union’s “Silencing the Guns
by 2030” initiative, the Convention on Small Arms and
Light Weapons of the Economic Community of West
African States, and the Central African Convention for
the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, all of
which deserve to be supported and encouraged.
For its part, Niger, having taken the measure of the
threat posed by the uncontrolled circulation of light
weapons in the context of the fight against terrorism,
created the National Commission for the Collection and
Control of Illicit Weapons in 1994. Despite the porous
nature of borders, this structure has made a significant
contribution to the control of illicit weapons, thanks
to the support of bilateral and multilateral partners,
including the United Nations, especially in the area
of humanitarian demining and capacity-building in
the tracing, marking and storage of these weapons.
We remain convinced that all solutions to the issue of
illicit transfers and accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons require a stronger political
commitment from States, given the transnational nature
of the circulation of illicit arms and all its geopolitical
and economic implications.
That is why the Niger calls on the Council to further
strengthen measures to curb the illicit trade of SALW,
which are conflict multiplier; to place greater emphasis

S/PV. 8909

on conflict prevention in order to minimize the risk
of diversion and illicit sale of small arms and light
weapons to unauthorized persons, so as to limit the risk
of conflict in the world; to ensure full compliance with
all binding legal instruments on the arms trade in order
to avoid the diversion and illicit transfer of small arms;
to strengthen the capacities of States to fight terrorism
and give more support to national initiatives to control
the illicit flow of small arms; to ensure the involvement
of women and young people, who are the main victims
of the diversion and illicit trafficking of small arms,
in the search for solutions to this scourge; and finally,
to encourage and support States to improve stockpile
management and the taking into account of international
SALW tracing instruments, in particular in cases where
sanctions regimes impose this obligation.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
search for and consolidation of peace remain dependent
on controlling access of armed non-State actors to
weapons. The United Nations must be more vigilant
on this issue, in particular by re-examining its arms
embargo regime, which, while it regulates the flow
of arms to States, struggles to be effective for armed
groups that easily acquire equipment on a market made
easily accessible by crises and porous borders. It is also
high time that vigorous measures be taken to break
the vicious circle of conflict fuelled by arms acquired
through illicit trafficking in minerals. The situations
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of Congo are eloquent examples in this regard.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We welcome you,
Mr. President, as well as Minister Bhattacharya, to the
Security Council today. It is good to see you. As you
said in your statement, the diversion and misuse of small
arms and light weapons costs hundreds of thousands of
lives each year. And as the latest Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/839) once again makes clear, illicit small
arms undermine security and sustainable development,
drive conflict and fuel crime and terrorism — all of
which falls squarely within the Council’s remit.
I want to turn first to the important role the
Security Council can play in supporting efforts to
address illicit flows of small arms and light weapons.
Mexico has rightly brought particular attention to our
arms embargoes. In order to be effective, it is vital that
embargoes are properly implemented and enforced.
Ms. Devoto spelled out very clearly the advantages
of properly implementing them and the costs of not
doing so.

21-349559/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

We thank the various panels of experts for the
important oversight and implementation support
that they provide. Additionally, weapons and
ammunition management support is being provided in
a range of settings also on the Council’s agenda. That
assistance should draw on recognized sources of best
practices, such as the Modular Small-arms-control
Implementation Compendium and the International
Ammunition Technical Guidelines.
By restricting illicit weapon flows, arms embargoes
can also present space and opportunity to strengthen
State security institutions more widely, which is why
the Council should think very carefully before lifting
them. Where appropriate, the Council should support
this opportunity through mandating missions to provide
security reform assistance and should lift embargoes
only when States are fully ready to take responsibility
for preventing small arms diversion and misuse.
As in all areas, sustainable peace requires the
full and active participation of women. That applies
equally to responses to small arms trafficking. The
Secretary-General’s report makes clear the horrific
impact of the misuse of such weapons, particularly
on women and girls, and we fully support the report’s
recommendations to the Council in that regard.
The Council should mandate the United Nations
to do more in these areas, as well as to identify and
transfer best practices and to better gather, pool and
share disaggregated data on small and illicit arms
and their effects in conflicts on the Council’s agenda.
However, activity mandated by the Council should
recognize the specificities of each situation and the fine
political balances within peace operations rather than
being too directive.
Effective control of small arms and light weapons
must play an important part in our wider approach to
conflict prevention. The United Kingdom is pleased to
support the United Nations Institute for Disarmament
Research in a project to integrate conventional arms
control into the Organization’s conflict-prevention
work, as we heard today. We completed a new riskanalysis tool kit that will strengthen understanding
of the risks and impact of arms and how conventional
arms control can contribute to United Nations conflict
prevention, management and resolution.
But States must also recognize their responsibilities
in this area, as other speakers have said. Small arms
trafficking networks operate internationally, and
10/34

22/11/2021

all States can support conflict-affected regions by
implementing their own robust export control and
customs systems. The Arms Trade Treaty is a key
multilateral tool to ensure a well-regulated, legal trade
in conventional arms and to address illicit transfers. We
continue to encourage all States to ratify and accede to
the Treaty.
For our part, the United Kingdom will continue to
support other policy initiatives in this area such as the
Group of Governmental Experts on problems arising
from the accumulation of conventional ammunition
stockpiles in surplus, as they seek to establish better
standards for the safe storing of ammunition. We will
also continue to partner with other States to strengthen
arms control frameworks through national legislation
in order to implement better stockpile management
procedures and to tackle the grave challenges
recognized by our briefers today.
The United Kingdom peacekeepers on patrol in
Mali have seen how a limited number of small arms
can be used to terrorize and abuse communities. Where
they can, they have confiscated and destroyed such
weapons, but it would be much more effective to work
together in order to prevent them from falling into the
wrong hands in the first place. The Council should
do everything in its power to work to ensure that. As
Ms. Devoto said — the tools, knowledge and experience
are all there; what we require is political will.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I too thank Mexico for
convening this meeting and today’s briefers for their
informative and insightful contributions.
The illicit flow, widespread availability and
trafficking of small arms and light weapons (SALW) and
their ammunition remain a highly worrisome problem
and a major challenge for the international community.
The fact that since 2007, with the adoption of its first
presidential statement on this matter (S/PRST/2007/24),
the Security Council has repeatedly expressed concern
over the impact of the illicit transfer and misuse of
small arms to peace and security, demonstrates well the
complexity and size of this challenge. It is a challenge
that requires concerted efforts and strong political will
at the national, regional and global levels.
Governments that control or transfer weapons have
a key role to play in ensuring that the trade, use and
storage of the arms take place in a responsible and
accountable manner. In order to detect and disrupt
illicit flows of small arms, national legislations
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

need to include adequate arms control frameworks,
including relevant stockpile management procedures,
law enforcement and criminal justice responses. We
support the Security Council-mandated role in peace
operations to assist Government efforts to manage
small arms management and enhance their capacities
to track and trace the origins of illicit small arms and
ammunition in conflict situations.
Regional efforts remain critical. In 2018, the
European Union adopted its strategy against illicit
SALW and their Ammunition, entitled “Securing
arms, protecting citizens”. We support and commend
other regional initiatives in this area. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Caribbean Community have all adopted
road maps and frameworks tailored to specific regional
needs and circumstances.
While national and regional controls are important,
the increasing globalization of arms transfers calls
for international measures. We emphasize the value
of arms embargoes imposed by the Council and their
full implementation.
Estonia continues to champion the universalization
and implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty. We
believe that when the Treaty is effectively and widely
implemented, it has great potential to contribute to
more responsible and more transparent international
arms transfers.
We also call on all States to implement the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. The seventh Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Programme of Action, held this year under the
leadership of Kenya, brought positive developments.
We strongly support the International Tracing
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace,
in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms
and Light Weapons. Marking, tracing and systematic
and appropriate record-keeping is essential in order to
effectively combat diversion and illicit trafficking of
small arms.
Small arms — within and beyond conflict — impact
children, women and men differently. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his latest report (S/2021/839), conflicts
fuelled by the availability of small arms have grave
implications for children and often deny them their basic

S/PV. 8909

rights. Armed violence, including sexual- and genderbased violence, is often abetted by armed intimidation.
Therefore, it remains essential to fully integrate gender
considerations into all efforts to prevent and combat
the risk of the misuse, diversion and illicit circulation
of small arms so that the gendered aspects of armed
violence are adequately addressed. The full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in decision-making
processes in that area is essential.
Estonia is committed to preventing and curbing
the diversion and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition. We urge all countries to
join in strengthening the implementation of the existing
commitments and obligations in the field.
Mr. Laouani (Tunisia): We thank Mexico for
scheduling this open debate focusing on the impact of
the diversion and trafficking of small arms on peace
and security. We would also like to welcome your
participation, Mr. Minister, at today’s meeting. I would
also like to thank Mr. Robin Geiss, Director of the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research,
and Ms. María Pía Devoto, member of the Control
Arms Governance Board, for their briefings.
As underlined on many occasions, the illicit transfer,
diversion and use of small arms and light weapons
continue to represent a major threat to international
peace and security by fuelling armed conflicts in
many countries and regions, aggravating humanitarian
crises, enabling terrorist and transnational criminal
organizations and undermining respect for human
rights, in addition to hindering peacebuilding and
socioeconomic development efforts.
We reiterate the view that issues related to the
illicit transfer, diversion and use of small arms and light
weapons should be addressed by the Security Council in
a more effective and holistic manner. In that regard, we
welcome the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his successive reports to the Council, and we
would like to stress the following points.
First, the Security Council should ensure the
implementation of the arms embargoes upon which
it decides. It is indeed deeply concerning that arms
embargoes, which can play an important role in
countering the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons, continue in many cases to be violated,
sometimes openly. The timely exchange of information
among Member States, panels of experts, peace missions
and other United Nations entities on such violations

21-3495511/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

should be encouraged to facilitate the identification and
the dismantling of the illicit sources of transfer.
Secondly, United Nations peace operations should
be well resourced and trained not only to be able to
properly control their own weapons and ammunition,
but also to be in a position to contribute to the
reinforcement of the capacities of host Governments in
fields such as the treatment of recovered illicit weapons
and ammunition, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform. The mandates
of United Nations missions could also be strengthened
to include, where relevant, the identification of the
sources of illicit arms flows, measures to disrupt those
flows and the monitoring of arms embargoes.
Thirdly, the Security Council should continue to
support regional efforts for conflict prevention and
arms control, as it did in 2019 when it adopted resolution
2457 (2019), upholding the African Union’s Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiative. In that regard, we welcome
the continued contributions of the United Nations
and international partners to the implementation of
that initiative.
Fourthly, the Security Council should further
consider and incorporate a gender dimension when
addressing the issues related to small arms and
light weapons,
Last but not least, the Security Council should
continue to support the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects and the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, as well
as relevant disarmament and arms control instruments.
In conclusion, for its part, Tunisia, which does
not produce or export weapons of any kind, remains
committed to supporting all efforts and initiatives
aimed at finding effective solutions to the issues related
to the proliferation of conventional weapons, including
small arms and light weapons.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Robin Geiss, Director of the United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research, and Ms. María
Pía Devoto for their important insights. I also thank
Mexico for convening this very important open debate
and appreciate your presence, Mr. President, here
among us today.
12/34

22/11/2021

For Norway, it is paramount to contribute to
reducing the human suffering linked to the trafficking
and diversion of small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition. Every year, more than 200,000 lives are
lost to small arms and light weapons (SALW) and their
ammunition. Those weapons have serious humanitarian
impacts and contribute to exacerbating conflict and
pervasive crime globally.
Norway is particularly concerned over the
disproportionate impact that such arms have on women
and children. We must take steps to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in processes
aimed at preventing the diversion and trafficking of
SALW and recognize the gendered impacts of the illicit
flows of those weapons. In addition, we must ensure
that children are better protected from the harmful
effects of such weapons.
That is also relevant to the Security Council’s
work on children and armed conflict, as children are
particularly vulnerable to violence from small arms
in situations of armed conflict, since they can be
more exposed to recruitment and use by armed forces
and groups.
Norway contributes to the better regulation of the
global arms trade, leading to fewer weapons at large
and less abuse from SALW and their ammunition. We
are a State party to the Arms Trade Treaty and work
with partners to involve more States in that vital global
effort. Norway is also a major supporter of efforts to
build capacity in States with weak national exportcontrol systems and has contributed financially to the
Treaty’s voluntary trust fund.
An emphasis on weapons and ammunition
management and physical security and stockpile
management can help to prevent the flow of arms
from the licit to the illicit realm. Furthermore, it is
important to take an evidence-based approach to
developing strategies through an analysis of ongoing
diversion trends, which must be tailored to regional and
national contexts. Norway applauds initiatives such as
the African Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020, the
Regional Centre on Small Arms and various regional
road maps in Latin America, the Caribbean and the
Western Balkans for doing just that. We also support
the recommendations contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s seventh biennial report on small arms and
light weapons (S/2021/839).
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

The Security Council has the ability to specifically
impact diversion and trafficking during active force
and deployment operations. But we must not forget
that the diversion of international transfers of arms and
related items can happen at all stages in the transfer
chain and life cycle of the arms. For that reason, it is
also necessary to be vigilant outside conflict settings in
order to prevent diversion. We must all work together
to ensure that we mitigate the negative impact of the
diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to begin by
thanking Mexico for convening today’s important
meeting and to thank you, Mr. Minister, for personally
being here with us today. I also welcome Minister
Bhattacharyya from India, my neighbour here at the
table. I would also like to thank Director Geiss and
Ms. María Pía Devoto for their insightful briefings to
us this morning. Their tireless advocacy and valuable
research on these important issues is really critical and
deeply appreciated by us.
We all know that the illicit transfer and misuse
of small arms and light weapons poses a significant
threat to international peace and security right across
the Council’s agenda and so is rightly the focus of our
discussions here today. Those arms fuel and prolong
conflict; they cause the majority of violent deaths in
conflict and non-conflict settings; they facilitate more
human rights abuses than any other weapon; and they
perpetuate insecurity while impeding humanitarian
and economic development. It is crystal clear that it
is the responsibility of those of us around this table to
address that complex threat.
It is for that reason that we support the ongoing work
here in the Council, led by the Mexican presidency,
to prevent and reduce illicit flows of those weapons,
including through more efficient implementation of
United Nations embargoes. The truth is, we need to
do more. That will be a valuable contribution to the
Council’s work in addressing the problem. I would like
to commend you, Sir, and the Mexican team for the
important initiative that you have taken here.
I would like to make three important points on the
issue of small arms and light weapons.
First, understanding the problem is essential to
treating it. That holds true for illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. As the SecretaryGeneral sets out in his Agenda for Disarmament,
addressing the availability, accumulation and

S/PV. 8909

management of arms should be at the core of conflict
prevention and management, crisis response and
peacebuilding services.
The Council must deal consistently with the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons as a driver of
conflict. It is important to identify and eliminate illicit
trafficking routes and points of diversion. By doing so,
we can hope to prevent illicit transfers and better protect
our civilians. Equally, we should apply lessons learned
from the various United Nations arms embargoes, as
appropriate, to ensure they effectively reduce illicit
flows and diversion of small arms. Implementing
the recommendations from the Secretary-General’s
report, as well as those of the expert panels supporting
sanctions committees, is an important step to deliver
on that.
My second point may seem obvious, but it is critical:
we simply have to work together. We share a collective
responsibility to stem illicit conventional arms and to
enforce United Nations arms embargoes. International
cooperation, capacity-building and information-sharing
are critical, including to ensure effective weapons
tracing. Coordination of efforts at the United Nations
level and in working with relevant international and
regional partners is essential. We need to look at how
to ensure that our work on those issues at the United
Nations, in the Council, in the General Assembly and
under the Arms Trade Treaty is mutually supportive in
pursuit of common goals while, of course, respecting
the different mandates.
United Nations peace operations mandated by
the Council can play a crucial role. However, those
mandates require clear objectives and, importantly,
specialized resources to implement them. Regional
approaches also play an instrumental role, including the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
and regional road maps such as those implemented in
the Caribbean, East Africa and the Western Balkans.
My third and final point is in relation to gender.
We simply must ensure that women are fully involved
in the design and implementation of efforts to stop the
illicit transfer and misuse of small arms. As you said
yourself, Sir, all evidence points to the fact that genderand youth-sensitive responses are the most sustainable
and effective responses for all. They allow a better
understanding of the factors driving the demand for
and misuse of small arms and light weapons, as well

21-3495513/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

as their impact on the human rights, development and
security interests of all.
We believe that involving women upstream
encourages responses that address the welfare,
security, education and economic opportunity of the
communities impacted by the misuse of small arms
and light weapons. Importantly, it will strengthen
the political legitimacy of peacebuilding processes to
involve women at every stage. In other words, it is the
smart thing to do.
Now is the time for action. The Council must step
up its efforts to address that threat and to prevent its
terrible impact on civilians, including women and
children, refugees and other vulnerable groups. Ireland
will work with you, Sir, and continue to champion the
issue with all of our partners here at the Council and
across the General Assembly to accomplish that.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): We would
also like to take this opportunity to welcome your
presence among us today, Sir, and commend Mexico for
making a priority the prevention of trafficking in small
arms and light weapons, which indeed fuels armed
conflicts and undermines peacebuilding efforts.
The Security Council has played its part in
combating that scourge, notably through resolution
2220 (2015). However, the Council could certainly
do more. There are four avenues to explore that are in
line with many of the proposals highlighted prior to
my intervention.
First, where necessary, the Security Council
must put arms embargoes in place and enforce them.
Violations of embargoes, such as in the Central African
Republic, are a threat to civilian populations. It is
therefore essential that the Security Council has the
means to detect and sanction such violations. That would
involve the appointment of a competent panel of experts
that is able to carry out its task without interruption.
Secondly, the Security Council must ensure that
peacekeeping and special political operations, when
mandated, can count on the means to effectively combat
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
to implement useful disarmament and reintegration
measures. Here I refer in particular to Mali, where
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali plays a decisive role. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is seizing,
14/34

22/11/2021

registering and destroying illicit weapons destined for
armed groups in that country. In Haiti, too, the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti is continuing its
community violence reduction programmes.
Thirdly, the Security Council must call on States
to accede to the relevant multilateral instruments, such
as the Arms Trade Treaty and the Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition. The
commitments made in the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects should also be fully implemented.
Fourthly, the Council could encourage States to do
more to mark and trace weapons and ammunition. The
tracing of weapons is essential to combat trafficking,
detect violations of embargoes and ensure the security
of stockpiles. That is why France has been promoting
the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small
Arms and Light Weapons for two decades now. Today,
we call for the new challenges posed by developments
in weapons design to be taken into account.
The role of international organizations, such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as well as
regional organizations, is essential. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Caribbean Community are all taking
useful measures that are adapted to the realities on
the ground, whether in terms of customs cooperation,
strengthening export control systems or border security.
That is also the objective of the Franco-German road
map to combat illicit trafficking in small arms in the
Western Balkans. We hope that partnership can be
replicated in other regions.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would like
to start by thanking our briefers.
We appreciate Mexico’s efforts to call attention to
the detrimental effects that the diversion of and illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons can have
on international peace and security. The United States
remains deeply committed to the issue and believes
that improving the management of small arms and light
weapons and conventional ammunition stockpiles is a
key tool in preventing diversion.
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

The United States is the single largest provider
of assistance to such efforts. For example, we have
been working closely with the Niger since 2015. This
partnership has constructed or rehabilitated 30 storage
facilities, trained personnel in physical, security and
stockpile management, and destroyed 15 metric tons
of excess ordinance. In Ecuador in 2020 alone, United
States assistance provided ammunition management
training to Ecuador’s armed forces and supported
the destruction of over 220,000 obsolete small
weapons ammunition.
Beyond our own efforts, the current framework
of instruments at the global and regional levels offers
a range of measures that, if fully and effectively
implemented, would make significant contributions
to international efforts to combat illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons. The challenge
remains, however, improving this implementation. To
help reduce the armed violence facilitated by illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, all States
should comprehensively implement the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and its International Tracing Instrument
to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons,
as others today have mentioned. The United States
remains committed to implementing these instruments
and assisting others in doing so.
At the seventh Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in July, numerous Member States and
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
underscored the uneven implementation of these
measures. That is discouraging, given the amount
of time that has transpired since the Programme of
Action was adopted in 2001 and the resources that the
international community has devoted to this issue.
Accordingly, the Security Council should continue to
encourage Member States to implement these important
tools to combat the diversion of and illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons.
Resolution 2220 (2015) specifically addresses the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons, including with respect
to Council-mandated arms embargoes. The crosscutting nature of this work is illustrated in resolution

S/PV. 8909

2370 (2017), which addresses the need to prevent
terrorist access to weapons. As is the case with the
existing international instruments, the Council’s body
of work is sufficient, in our view. The shortfall is in
States’ national efforts to implement the terms of the
relevant resolutions.
Like many of these international instruments, arms
embargoes are effective only when implemented by
Member States. We encourage all Member States to
ensure that they are fully implementing their obligations,
pursuant to Security Council arms embargoes.
United Nations reporting on the implementation
of Council arms embargoes is another important tool
to help identify areas in which the diversion of and
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons fuel
conflict. For that reason, the United States strongly
supports the work of the expert panels of the Security
Council’s panels of experts. Regular reporting by these
panels is a critical component of the Security Council’s
efforts to promote the implementation of United
Nations arms embargoes. We encourage all Members to
cooperate with these panels as they conduct their work.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I wish to join in extending a special welcome to you,
Mr. President, and Minister Bhattacharya to the
Security Council. I also wish to thank the briefers
for their timely interventions and commend you, Sir,
for Mexico’s efforts to further the discussion on this
important issue.
Twenty years after the adoption of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, and six years following
resolution 2220 (2015), the most vulnerable among us
continue to suffer the grave consequences of inaction to
curb the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
The illicit trade and misuse of small arms and light
weapons continue to contribute to instability and fuel
conflicts across the globe. On the African continent,
in the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin, the Central African
region, the Horn of Africa, the Sudan, South Sudan and
Libya, illicit weapons flows have enabled terrorism
and violent extremism and intensified intercommunal
tensions. Unfortunately, we see a further example in
Haiti, in our own Caribbean and Latin American Zone
of Peace.
Undoubtedly, illicit weapons flows have also
contributed to humanitarian and refugee crises and

21-3495515/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

internal displacement and have undermined the rule of
law and fragile democratic institutions. We therefore
underscore the necessity of strengthening the mandates
of the Security Council, recognizing the destabilizing
role of the illicit transfer, accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons as drivers of conflict
and instability.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as a State party
to the Arms Trade Treaty, appreciates the fact that
Member States have the sovereign right to determine
their internal affairs, including in the area of arms
control. However, that right is not absolute when the
negative implications of domestic policies, such as
permissive gun laws, transcend national borders. In the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), we continue to be
severely impacted by irresponsible and illicit weapons
flows, despite the fact that we do not manufacture small
arms and light weapons and we do not import them on
a large scale.
As such, to effectively combat the destructive
impact of small arms and light weapons globally, there
ought to be greater national responsibility assumed
by manufacturing States, as well as coordinated
and strengthened partnerships between organs
and agencies of the United Nations, and regional,
subregional and interregional organizations, in line
with resolution 2457 (2019).
There exist numerous treaties, legislative
frameworks and instruments aimed at managing
and mitigating the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons. However, these mechanisms must be
mobilized by States and organizations to concretize
efforts to protect societies and promote sustainable
development, especially in countries that continue
to experience fluctuating periods of insecurity and
instability. We therefore remain fully supportive of
important arrangements such as the African Union’s
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, the regional
road map for the Western Balkans and CARICOM’s
Roadmap for Implementing the Caribbean Priority
Actions on the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and
Ammunition across the Caribbean in a Sustainable
Manner by 2030, which we have accelerated.
It is imperative that the international community
fully support collaborative mechanisms and institutions
for the tracing, management and secure storage of
weapons and ammunition, as well as efforts aimed at
sensitization and the collection and destruction of illicit
16/34

22/11/2021

small arms and light weapons. Post-conflict settings
in particular require State institutions to bolster
confidence and stability through ownership of security,
development and security sector reform.
Further, we emphasize the importance of the full
and effective participation of civil society, women
and youth in all efforts to build national capacity and
institutional and policy frameworks to effectively
support disarmament, demobilization, security sector
reform and reintegration programmes.
Illicit
arms
flows
create
cross-cutting
multidimensional challenges that hinder our
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Furthermore, the disproportionate threat posed to
women and children is alarming. No State is exempt
and collective action to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
all its aspects and at all levels is urgently required to
ensure international peace and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you, Mr. Secretary,
presiding over the Security Council. We thank Mr. Robin
Geiss and Ms. María Pía Devoto for their briefings.
The illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons (SALW) generates many threats and
challenges. That is particularly acute in developing
States, which often find themselves inundated with
such weapons. The uncontrolled proliferation of such
weapons results in their falling into the hands of
organized criminal networks, illegal armed groups,
extremists and terrorists. Those who suffer the most as
a result of this situation are ordinary civilians.
The fight against the illicit transfer of SALW
must remain the focus of the attention of all States.
Accordingly, such work should take place first and
foremost at the General Assembly, where every country
has the right to a vote and the opportunity to participate
in the adoption of relevant decisions. We welcome the
recent successful conclusion of the seventh Biennial
Meeting of Member States on the implementation of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We applaud the
efforts of the Kenyan chairmanship at that meeting.
The outcome of the comprehensive discussion
at the General Assembly was an extensive list of
recommendations, the implementation of which will
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

result in meaningful progress in the practical fight
against illicit flows of SALW. We call on all Member
States to and implement the Meeting’s outcome
document at the national, regional and global levels.
The Security Council is also seized of the issue of
illicit transfers of SALW. In 2015, the Council adopted
thematic resolution 2220 (2015), which comprehensively
outlines the Council’s views on combating this scourge.
Further, we note the presidential statements adopted on
specific aspects of combating the illicit trafficking in
SALW. At the same time, the Security Council should
clearly not duplicate the functions of the General
Assembly, especially on such a universal issue as
countering the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons. The main role of the Security Council is to
facilitate conflict resolution in specific countries and
regions by tapping into an array of measures applicable
to a given situation, each of which is designed to help
meet a specific objective.
In this regard, it is important to remember that
illicit trafficking in SALW is a global problem that has
a negative impact, including on the implementation of
relevant measures through the Security Council. This
problem cannot be solved by imposing restrictions
against a specific State or strengthening any given
peacekeeping mission. The Security Council duly
shoulders its responsibility in these matters. However,
at the same time, any efforts to take up issues that
are within the purview the General Assembly would
be misguided.
The main reasons for the uncontrolled spread of
SALW around the world are well known. Illicit trafficking
in this type of weaponry is a direct consequence of
excessively permissive national legislation or persistent
loopholes in national export-control regimes, which
affects the neighbouring countries in particular. Nor do
we see sufficiently responsible conduct by the multitude
of arms broker organizations active on the arms market.
Further, States with excessive stockpiles of SALW do
not always act responsibly; instead of trying to dispose
of these weapons, they often try to sell their surpluses,
paying too little attention to the problem of illicit crossborder transfers.
There is a major threat emanating from the production
of SALW under expired licenses or without licenses
of the countries that own the relevant technologies.
Clearly, shipments of weapons manufactured in this
way are concealed in every possible manner, which

S/PV. 8909

means that the end users are in most cases part of
criminal networks. The main problem is that in the
pursuit of profit or to advance short-sighted political
agendas, the suppliers fail to consider whose hands the
exported SALW fall into, where they are used and for
what purposes.
The Russian Federation has highly advanced
national legislation to combat the illicit transfer
of SALW. We stand ready to share our experience
and the array of tried and tested best practices with
interested States. We call upon all Member States,
through the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action, and taking into account the
recommendations of the seventh Meeting of Member
States on this process at the General Assembly, to
prioritize the implementation at the national level of the
following measures: introducing a blanket prohibition
on transfers of all types of SALW to entities not
authorized by the Governments of recipient States;
ensuring stringent regulation and direct control by
States of arms-export brokering activities within their
jurisdiction and limiting the number of these brokers
to the extent possible; prohibiting the re-export or
subsequent transfers of imported SALW without
the written consent of the initial exporter State; and
preventing the production of SALW under expired
licences or without licences from the State possessing
the technology for their production, including curbing
the practice whereby weapons previously produced
under licence are slightly modernized without the
consent of the original manufacturer and then exported
as a new product.
In conclusion, I should like once again to
emphasize that the fight against the illicit diversion
of SALW, ensuring the safe storage of stockpiles and
the destruction of surpluses constitute the prerogative
of States themselves and are an integral part of their
sovereignty. That is why the joint work of all States at the
General Assembly and the subsequent implementation
of measures developed under the United Nations
Programme of Action, first and foremost at the national
level, are of paramount importance in this regard. Only
in this way will we be able to achieve a shared goal and
practical success in combating the illicit trafficking of
SALW throughout the world.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I welcome the President
to New York. I commend his country’s presidency of
the Security Council this month for convening today’s
open debate on curbing the diversion of and illicit

21-3495517/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

22/11/2021

trafficking in arms — a challenge that Kenya considers
requiring enhanced action by the Security Council. I
thank Mr. Robin Geiss of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research and Ms. María Pía Devoto
for their briefings.

While we may not be able to immediately address
every aspect of the challenge, we believe there are
actions that are ready to be undertaken now.

During our presidency in October, the Security
Council had the opportunity to deliberate on ways of
addressing the threat posed by illicit flows of small arms
and light weapons, particularly in the context of peace
operations (S/PV.8874). There was wide support from
members for a continuation of these deliberations; we
therefore hope that today’s pertinent debate continues
to benefit the Council’s actions in this important arena.

First, there is need for stronger collaboration
and coordination among the relevant United Nations
organs and agencies and regional and subregional
organizations. That was underscored during the seventh
Biennial Meeting of States of the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which Kenya was privileged to chair.

The continued proliferation of illicit small arms and
light weapons is key to generating and worsening the
conflicts to which the Security Council is responding.
It offers non-State actors with militant political and
ideological aims the means to turn their opposition
into criminal violence against the State and civilians.
It frustrates conflict resolution efforts by enabling the
protraction of war. Humanitarian crises are worsened,
and their period extended. It leads to growing attacks
on peacekeeping forces dispatched under the Security
Council’s mandate.

Secondly, regional and subregional organizations
should be enabled financially and technologically
to advance information sharing, sensitization and
inter-agency coordination in order to tackle the diversion
and trafficking in arms. Since so much of the Council’s
efforts focus on African files, mechanisms such as the
Regional Centre on Small Arms in our region should
be strengthened and their capabilities extended to their
counterparts across the continent.

The fuelling role of illicit arms in almost all
conflict situations before the Council is undeniable, as
has been mentioned by several delegations. The latest
biennial report by the Secretary-General on small arms
and light weapons (S/2021/839) touches on several of
the matters before the Council.
Given the importance of illicit small arms and
light weapons in escalating and prolonging destructive
conflicts, it continues to be puzzling to us why the
Council remains reluctant to undertake every effort to
address this problem. We welcome fresh efforts to do
the utmost, while recognizing and responding to the
relevant perspectives of members that have historically
sought for the subject to be approached with caution.
We agree that caution is important, and we look forward
to finding and reaching those points in common so
that we can take further action. After having chaired
the seventh Biennial Meeting of Member States at the
General Assembly, we are profoundly aware of the need
not to mirror or undermine the mandate of the Meeting,
but we believe that there is more that the Security
Council can do beyond that mandate within its own
specific area of work.
18/34

Allow me to highlight four recommendations for
the Council’s consideration.

Thirdly, and most critically, we need to see
this challenge as part of an ecosystem of interacting
destructive threats. Much more needs to be done to
attack the criminal networks and ecosystems that are
fuelling conflict, particularly those profiting from
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. From the
Sahel to the Horn of Africa, criminal economies are
worsening and prolonging the impact of insurgents
and terrorist groups. If those criminal economies are
not tackled with every tool available in the Council’s
arsenal, multiple State failure may be the result. We
call for a more aggressive use of sanctions regimes
in order to lower the perverse incentives of war and
terrorist economies.
When Kenya has pushed for the listing of terrorist
groups under the appropriate sanctions regimes, the
negative response by some members has pointed to the
threat of such action on humanitarian work. What is
not considered with sufficient gravity is the escalation
of the humanitarian need due to the increasingly
protracted nature of terrorist and insurgent group
operations. There is profit to be made in terrorism and
insurgency, and there will be no end to war and waves
of suffering if the Security Council does not escalate
its action against the criminal economies that continue
to advance a profit motive, as reflected in criminal
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

economies, not least in regard to the diversion and trade
in illicit small arms and light weapons.
Fourthly, there is a need for the Council, in mission
mandates, to include responding to the needs of host
countries through technical support in security sector
reforms, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and monitoring capabilities. Activities
under such support can be reflected in the relevant
Secretary-General’s reports to monitor progress and
address any challenges as a preventive measure.
I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to all efforts to
comprehensively address this challenge of diversion
and trafficking in small arms and welcome Mexico’s
efforts to seek and pass a resolution in that regard.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Foreign Secretary Ebrard Casaubón for
presiding over today’s meeting. I also thank Mr. Geiss
and Ms. Devoto for their briefings.
In his Agenda for Disarmament, SecretaryGeneral Guterres describes conventional arms control
as disarmament that saves lives. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development includes reducing the
illegal flow of small arms and light weapons (SALW)
as an important target. That shows that the issue of
small arms and light weapons has a bearing on peace,
security and development. It also shows that combating
illegal trafficking in SALWs is critical to safeguarding
the economic development and social progress of all
countries and that strengthening conventional arms
control under a multilateral framework is a matter
of urgency.
Over the years, the Security Council has made
unremitting efforts to tackle the issue of small arms and
light weapons. It adopted resolutions 2117 (2013) and
2220 (2015). It has also taken under consideration the
impact of SALWs when deliberating on regional hotspot
issues. The illegal trafficking in SALWs remains a
serious phenomenon that is intertwined with armed
conflict, terrorism, transnational organized crime
and other problems, thus aggravating the suffering of
people in conflict areas and posing a great danger to
international peace and security.
In order to address this problem, the international
community should continue to focus its efforts on
several areas.
First, we must strengthen the capacities of the
countries concerned and achieve the full-cycle

S/PV. 8909

management of small arms and light weapons. Those
countries should assume the primary responsibility
for cracking down on such weapons by establishing
and improving laws and regulations and strengthening
control. The Security Council should lend those
countries political support for peace and reconciliation
efforts and post-war reconstruction in order to help
them effectively address the risk of proliferation of
SALW during the ensuing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes and security sector
reform. Peace operations deployed in various mission
areas should perform their duties in strict accordance
with their mandates and respect the sovereignty of
the countries concerned. They must also actively
support capacity-building and provide assistance to
those countries.
Secondly, the international community must
help the countries of the region to recover from the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
eliminate the root causes of conflict and violence. The
root causes of the issue of SALWs lie largely in poverty
and underdevelopment. Special attention should be
given to economic development and people’s livelihoods
in war-torn areas and post-conflict countries affected
by the COVID-19 pandemic in order to help eliminate
long-standing poverty and address underdevelopment.
It is imperative to help developing countries bolster
infrastructure development, accelerate the process
of industrialization and modernization, achieve
sustainable economic and social development and
maintain lasting regional peace.
The global development initiative proposed
by China is aimed at forging global synergy for
development and meeting the development needs of all
countries, particularly those of developing countries.
China invites all parties to join that initiative in order
to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and achieve shared
development in all countries.
Thirdly, we must strictly implement the Security
Council’s arms embargoes and stop the illegal flow
of SALWs. All countries must strictly implement
the resolutions on arms embargoes and the relevant
provisions of the sanctions committees of arms
embargoes by refraining from the transfer or sale of
arms to countries subject to Security Council arms
embargoes. In addition, the relevant resolutions should
be correctly interpreted and accurately implemented,
and the enforcement of such embargoes should not be

21-3495519/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

used as an excuse to interfere in the internal affairs of the
countries concerned or infringe upon their sovereignty.
China has always maintained that sanctions are
only a means, not an end. The original intent of Council
arms embargoes is to help the countries concerned
restore national stability and social order. They should
not hinder those countries efforts to strengthen their
own security capabilities. In light of the development
and actual needs of the countries concerned, the
Security Council should adjust arms embargo measures
accordingly in order to help the Governments effectively
uplift their own security capabilities.
Fourthly, the international community must
strengthen multilateral and bilateral pragmatic
cooperation and fully leverage the role of the United
Nations as the main channel. Countries of the regional
and subregion should actively exchange information and
share experiences, as well as tighten border and export
control and improve monitoring and law enforcement.
We should support the United Nations in continuing
its leading role in combating illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and promote the full
and effective implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects; the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; the
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
and the Arms Trade Treaty, among others, in order
to support the development of thorough and robust
international cooperation and assistance.
Under the framework of the United Nations, the
conventional arms control mechanism should step
up interaction and coordination and complement
and promote the efforts of all parties in an effort to
enhance synergies.
The Chinese Government has always opposed
the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons
and has adopted a cautious and responsible approach
towards the export of such weapons. Since joining the
Arms Trade Treaty in July 2020, China has actively
participated in global arms trade governance. In
addition, in the context of the United Nations, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the China20/34

22/11/2021

United Nations Peace and Development Fund, China
engages in international cooperation with developing
countries to combat the illicit flow of SALW. China
also established the China-Africa Peace and Security
Cooperation Fund to support the Silencing the Guns in
Africa initiative, as well as China-Africa cooperation in
the areas of peace, security, peacekeeping and stability.
Combating the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons cannot be achieved in an instant. Building a
world free from gun violence is a long-term, arduous
task. China stands ready to work with the international
community in making unstinting efforts to jointly crack
down on the illicit traffic small arms and light weapons
and safeguard international peace and security.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Mexican
presidency for organizing this very important open
debate, and I welcome you, Your Excellency, to preside
over it. I also thank Mr. Geiss and Ms. Devoto for their
informative briefings.
My delegation registers its concern over the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons in both conflict
and post-conflict settings, particularly on women,
children, law enforcement personnel, humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers. Illicit small arms continue
to further fuel, sustain and exacerbate armed conflicts.
The risks of insecurity and disorder to societies
increase when illicit small arms and light weapons fall
into the wrong hands, including terrorist and organized
criminal groups. Illicit weapons can therefore negate
peace efforts, hamper post-conflict recovery and
socioeconomic development and undermine the
effectiveness and efficiency of the Security Council’s
work in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
My delegation commends the efforts and
achievements of Member States and the Security
Council in adopting and implementing frameworks
and measures to tackle the issue of illicit weapons. Yet
the threat to civilians posed by such weapons remains
considerable. According to this year’s report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/839), 27 per cent of civilian
deaths in armed conflict were caused by small arms and
light weapons and 24 per cent by heavy weapons and
explosive munitions; alarmingly, the death toll of armed
violence occurring outside conflict is even higher. In
that context, I would like to stress the following points.
First, it is imperative to uphold international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, including
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

international humanitarian law, international treaties
and Security Council resolutions. By doing that,
conflicts can be prevented, the use of force can be
refrained from and civilian casualties can be prevented
or minimized.
Secondly, the Security Council should continue
to consider applying the necessary measures and
review them against developments on the ground and
the particularities of given situations in order to best
address the threat posed by illicit weapons to sustainable
peace in conflict and post-conflict situations without
negatively affecting the ability of States to ensure
security and order in post-conflict settings. An adequate
emphasis should be put on State capacity-building,
including regarding disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform and the control
and management of small arms and light weapons, as
well as combating illicit weapons.
Thirdly, a holistic approach is required to effectively
address the issue of illicit weapons. At the national level,
States bear the primary responsibility for ensuring the
effective control of weapons and the fight against crime
and the illicit trade in weapons. Those efforts should
be complemented by bilateral, multilateral, regional
and global international cooperation and assistance
frameworks. The United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
and the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons provide strategic
avenues for Member States to devise appropriate
national and regional actions. Regional initiatives,
such as Silencing the Guns in Africa, can prove to be
effective, as they can address regional particularities.
Resolutions 2117 (2013) and 2220 (2015) and several
presidential statements remain relevant in helping to
address the scourge of illicit arms in conflicts. We call
for strengthened cooperation on all those frameworks.
Finally, we would like to reiterate the importance
of ensuring the right of States to acquire, manufacture,
transfer and retain licit weapons for their defence and
security needs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Morocco.

S/PV. 8909

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking Mexico for organizing this open
debate on the impact of the diversion and trafficking of
arms on peace and security. The fact that His Excellency
Minister Marcelo Ebrard Casaubón, Secretary for
Foreign Affairs, is presiding over the debate is a clear
and powerful sign of the importance that Mexico, like
the international community, accords to this issue. I
would also like to thank the briefers for their detailed
presentations and reflections.
The discussion of the various impacts of the
diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security
is an important and urgent debate, as illicit small arms
and light weapons (SALW) are conventional weapons
that are easy to access, conceal and use. Those weapons
strike randomly and indiscriminately, particularly
targeting children, women and young people. They
make conflicts more deadly by bringing them into
populated areas. Their potential for destabilization
is enormous, particularly in Africa, where they fuel
conflicts, violent extremism and even terrorism.
The diversion and trafficking of arms have both
immediate and long-term impacts. In addition to
the human costs, such trafficking generate and have
devastating cross-cutting consequences, in particular
for the socioeconomic fabric and peacebuilding and
peacekeeping settings, as well as efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals at the national,
regional and international levels.
Morocco is further concerned about the increasing
interconnections between illicit SALW and the rise in
banditry and piracy networks, as well as the proliferation
of non-State actors and separatist and terrorist armed
groups. Those linkages regrettably go hand in hand
with other related phenomena, such as population
displacement, food insecurity and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.
Such devastating effects require comprehensive
and integrated responses from the international
community. In that context, the United Nations has
an important role to play in curbing the impact of the
diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security
and in finding collectively developed and agreed
solutions. In that respect, Morocco welcomes the fact
that, thanks to the adoption by consensus of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects in 2001, combating the illicit

21-3495521/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

trade in SALW became a priority for the international
community. Now more than ever, the Programme of
Action is just as relevant, robust and effective given
the multidimensional impact of the diversion and
trafficking of such weapons.
Morocco, which is chairing the First Committee
of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session,
welcomes the attention given by the international
community to the effects of illicit SALW, their
diversion and trafficking, particularly in the current
context of marking the Programme of Action’s
twentieth anniversary and the successful work of the
seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme, as well as the active
mobilization of the members of the Security Council.
Given the alarming effects of the diversion and
trafficking of SALW on international and regional
peace and security, the Security Council has a
particularly critical role to play, especially in the
areas of prevention, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform, the protection of
civilians and security in peacekeeping operations.
The Kingdom of Morocco takes the opportunity of
this open debate to stress the importance of ensuring
that full national ownership and leadership must
continue to be the guiding principle with regard to
issues concerning small arms and light weapons.
As part of its commitment to the full relevance of
the Programme of Action, as well as the International
Tracing Instrument, Morocco recently modernized its
legal arsenal by adopting, in August 2020, a law on
defence and security materials and equipment, arms
and ammunition, in which particular attention has
been paid to the tracing of arms and ammunition. It
should be noted that marking procedures have been
developed in the light of the standards recommended
by the United Nations Modular Small-arms-control
Implementation Compendium.
The Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms the imperative
need for international cooperation to counter illicit
SALW. In that regard, Morocco will spare no effort in
contributing to an effective fight against the scourge
of illicit SALW, whether at the bilateral, triangular,
South-South, multilateral or international levels. The
cooperation programmes implemented by Morocco,
particularly with its brotherly African countries, are
aimed in particular at strengthening the capacities of
the most affected countries through training, qualified
22/34

22/11/2021

human resources and equipment adapted to monitoring
SALW from their entry and throughout their life cycle.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Balázs (Hungary): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, and your country, Mexico, as President of the
Security Council for November, for convening this open
debate on the impact of the diversion and trafficking of
arms on peace and security. I would also like to thank
Mr. Geiss and Ms. Devoto for their useful briefings.
This issue is extremely important and,
unfortunately, remains relevant for the foreseeable
future. Illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons (SALW) and their diversion represents a very
serious threat to international peace and security, as
well as to sustainable development. Today’s modern
wars are fought to a large extent by small arms and light
weapons that kill or injure more people than any other
kind of weapons and play a central role in initiating,
aggravating and sustaining armed conflicts. SALW is
a global challenge, highly relevant to each and every
State across all continents, and thereby requires our
concerted efforts.
Let me also draw attention to the clear nexus
between the spread of SALW and the heinous terrorist
attacks committed all around the world, including
in Europe. Hungary is convinced that one of our top
priorities should be preventing the acquisition of SALW
by terrorists. Needless to say, the illegal possession
and smuggling of these weapons is also facilitated by
illegal migration.
The international community has a significant
role to play in finding a viable solution to the illegal
possession, misuse and smuggling of such weapons and
their ammunition, as well as to stockpile management.
This year, when we mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, is a moment for a recommitment to ensuring
its relevance and effectiveness in the years to come in
order to strengthen its far-reaching positive impact on
global, regional and human security.
We believe that the Programme of Action is one
of the most important and universal tools in our global
efforts to combat the threats mentioned earlier. In that
respect, I would like to emphasize that we consider
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

bringing ammunition into the scope of the Programme
of Action as highly relevant, because just as a pen
cannot write without ink, weapons cannot kill without
ammunition. That is why United Nations embargoes
on SALW usually entail prohibitions on ammunition
as well.
The Programme of Action is not the only tool in
the area of SALW. Synergies with other international
instruments, such as the Arms Trade Treaty; the
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
and regional organizations like the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are vital
as well. Hungary also attaches great importance to
ensuring effective export control procedures that meet
all existing international requirements.
Given our vicinity to the region, Hungary has
joined the initiative of France and Germany to create
an action group on illicit firearms trafficking in the
Western Balkans. We have also been active in our
national capacity in enhancing stockpile security in the
region. Within the framework of the OSCE, we have
provided financial support of €250,000 to two projects
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro to help
their efforts in mitigating the challenges of stockpiling
those weapons and ammunitions.
Based on the above, we are of the view that the
Security Council should have this issue on its agenda
from time to time, as well as examining how it can
contribute to further advancing the pertinent conclusions
and recommendations contained in the latest report of
the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons
that was issued at the end of September (S/2021/839).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
We share the concerns about the humanitarian,
socioeconomic and security consequences of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and their
diversion to unauthorized recipients.
The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is the
only universal framework to address those multifaceted

S/PV. 8909

challenges. That non-legally binding voluntary
instrument, which emerged from a consensus-based
process within the United Nations and has greatly
contributed to mobilizing international efforts against
the illicit trade in small arms, remains valid and relevant.
As a victim of foreign-backed terrorists and faced
with the threat of organized crime and trafficking in
drugs linked to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, the Islamic Republic of Iran highly values
the Programme of Action and calls for ensuring its
balanced, effective and full implementation, including
through identifying and addressing its implementation
challenges. As has clearly been articulated by the
Programme of Action, Governments bear the primary
responsibility for preventing, combating and eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
all its aspects and, accordingly, they must define the
problems associated with such trade and find ways of
resolving them.
To ensure the Programme of Action’s full
implementation, the capacities and priorities of States
and regions must be taken into account. In that context,
priority must be accorded to providing the developing
countries with sufficient financial resources, required
technological means and technical knowledge,
including the transfer of related technology, which
must be sustained, sufficient, non-discriminatory,
non-selective and unconditional and upon the request of
the States concerned. It must also take into account their
policies and priorities, as the Programme of Action has
recognized that the regulation of trade in small arms is
primarily a national responsibility.
In all efforts to combat the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, the right of each State to
manufacture, export, import and retain such weapons
must be fully respected. That, of course, is among the
requirements of exercising the inherent right to selfdefence reaffirmed in Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations. According to the Programme of Action,
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects sustains conflicts, exacerbates violence,
contributes to the displacement of civilians, undermines
respect for international humanitarian law, impedes
the provision of humanitarian assistance to victims of
armed conflict and fuels crime and terrorism.
In that respect, the Security Council may deem it
appropriate, in certain cases, to consider and address
the impact of the illicit trade in small arms and

21-3495523/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

light weapons and their diversion to unauthorized
recipients in conflict situations. That, of course,
must be conducted without undermining licit trade in
such arms. Additionally, the scope of such efforts by
the Council must be limited to those aspects that are
related to the serious adverse impacts of the diversion
of and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons on
the conflict concerned.
The adoption of a comprehensive approach is
essential to finding a viable and long-term solution to
this multifaceted challenge. This must be duly taken
into account by the General Assembly and the United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express
my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting and to the briefers for their
thoughtful insights.
Small arms and light weapons reportedly take at
least half a million lives annually and pose a serious
threat to the freedom from fear that all people are entitled
to. To ensure human security, which places people at
the centre of our security paradigm, the diversion and
illicit trade in small arms and lights weapons must be
addressed with priority.
The successful conclusion of the seventh Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects in July was a testament to the strong
desire among Member States to advance discussions
on this important issue. In this context, Japan
welcomes, as one of the main sponsors, the adoption
of resolution A/C.1/76/L.43, entitled “The illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects”, in
the First Committee, which set the date for the next
Biennial Meeting of States and renews our collective
commitment to this important issue.
I would like to highlight three perspectives relating
to the Security Council’s role in tackling the issue of
small arms and light weapons.
First, Council members must take into consideration,
as highlighted at the seventh Biennial Meeting of States,
24/34

22/11/2021

the new developments since the adoption of resolution
2220 (2015), the most recent Security Council resolution
exclusively on this issue, was adopted in 2015. Indeed,
new dual-use technologies pose additional complexities
in addressing the illicit flow of small arms and light
weapons. In June, my mission organized a workshop on
small arms and light weapons, focusing on the impacts
of fast-developing technologies. I would like to reiterate
the importance of in-depth discussion of the challenges
posed by new technologies to this issue.
Secondly, it is evident that swift sweeps of
remaining arms and weapons after conflicts are vital
to ensuring human security in war-torn communities
and helping to prevent the recurrence of conflict. Japan
would like to underscore the critical role of the Security
Council in effectively realizing the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in
post-conflict zones. Security Council arms embargoes
are also critical to preventing the diversion of arms
and weapons to unlawful actors. All Member States
are obliged to strictly observe their obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, Japan, as a candidate for a non-permanent
seat on the Council for 2023-2024, actively contributes
to addressing the issue of small arms and light weapons.
In fact, Japan’s commitment to tackling this issue dates
back to the mid-1990s, when it took the initiative to
establish the United Nations Panel of Experts and the
United Nations Group of Governmental Experts, which
paved the way for the adoption of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
2001. More recently, Japan has contributed $2 million
to the United Nations-led Saving Lives Entity fund,
launched in 2019 and based on the Secretary-General’s
Agenda for Disarmament. Japan has also supported
regional initiatives, including the Silencing the Guns in
Africa initiative.
In conclusion, Japan remains fully committed to
this important agenda and will continue to support the
relevant work of the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks the delegation of Mexico, in its
capacity as President of the Security Council for
the month of November, for convening this open
debate on the impact of the diversion and trafficking
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

of arms on peace and security. We are grateful for
the participation of Ambassador Marcelo Ebrard
Casaubón, Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Mexico;
the Director of the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research; as well as the panellists.
The consequences of the proliferation of firearms
for peacebuilding are important and affect countries
both in conflict and in post-conflict situations, as
well as other countries with significant levels of
insecurity and violence. The global production of
such weapons and their respective ammunition is not
decreasing and their diversion to the illicit market
remains an ongoing problem. Moreover, the diversion
of small arms and light weapons contributes to other
security challenges, such as the facilitation of drugrelated activities and the existence of organized crime,
undermining the protection of people and hindering the
creation of an environment conducive to the promotion
of human, economic and social health.
It is undeniable that in order to comprehensively
address the firearms issue, we must include the issue
of ammunition, which, owing to its characteristics,
is proliferated and diverted as much or more than
firearms. We must not delay in addressing this.
States must comprehensively regulate this issue,
as well as continue to work in a harmonized
manner in order to establish unanimous criteria and
and effective control mechanisms, such as marking, in
order to allow for effective tracing.
Hence, the importance of undertaking broad
international efforts to comprehensively address
this issue, including the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects, the Arms Trade Treaty and
the initiatives undertaken at the regional level.
It is important to mention that cooperation and
assistance to strengthen our countries’ capacities
remain relevant. Without that valuable support for
many of our countries, the effective implementation
of the various international instruments is impossible
to achieve.
When talking about the issue of arms and
ammunition, we believe it necessary to include in the
discussion the issue of stockpile management and the
establishment of measures to prevent illegal diversions
through the continuous destruction of surplus stocks and
weapons linked to illicit activities. Having databases on

S/PV. 8909

arms and ammunition and their owners not only allows
those who use and trade arms to exercise their rights,
but also establishes permanent controls. Moreover,
as expressed in other forums, Guatemala considers it
important to have disaggregated data on the impact of
firearms, as that allows us to take stock of the problem
in order to take preventive and protective measures.
An awareness of the effect of firearms on the lives
of men, women, children and vulnerable populations
is crucial. I would be remiss if I did not mention the
important role that women play as peacebuilders. It is
important to encourage their participation in the tasks
of prevention, reconstruction and the search for peace,
as established in resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.
Guatemala is convinced that the illicit manufacture,
transfer and circulation of small arms and light
weapons have humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences that pose a serious threat to the peace,
reconciliation, security, stability and sustainable
development of our societies. It is important to
emphasize that it is not possible to address the
realities of illicit acts without strengthening the legal
framework. To counteract that scourge, it is necessary
to strengthen subregional, regional and global
cooperation and tools and mechanisms that are
applicable to specific situations and circumstances.
My delegation recognizes that the magnitude
and nature of the peacekeeping challenge require
close
strategic
and
operational
partnerships
with national Governments and other key stakeholders,
so that we can achieve sustainable peace together.
Therefore, and by way of conclusion, we deem it
necessary for States to address the issue of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons comprehensively,
while bearing in mind the importance of not dissociating
arms from ammunition. While the challenges for each
country differ at the national level, we are confident
that the results in achieving better living conditions for
our people can continue to progressively make progress.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): Malta thanks Mexico for
organizing this open debate, focusing on the impact of
the diversion and trafficking of arms, which continue
to represent a major concern for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

21-3495525/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

The illicit flow and diversion of small arms and
light weapons (SALW) continue to fuel both conflict
and post-conflict situations and have clear destabilizing
effects on entire societies. They also have direct impacts
on our fight against terrorism, the protection of human
rights and humanitarian access.
The multifaceted nature of this challenge has been
reflected in the work of the Security Council, with
the issue of small arms and light weapons permeating
many country-specific and thematic areas. Malta
continues to support the integration of this important
topic in the work of the Security Council, in line with
the recommendation by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report on small arms and light weapons
(S/2021/839).
States Members of the United Nations have a
responsibility to prevent and combat the diversion
and illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons.
International legal instruments, such as the Arms Trade
Treaty, the Programme of Action on small arms and
light weapons and the International Tracing Instrument
remain indispensable tools that establish a rules-based
international framework for small-arms control.
Linked to these efforts is also an acknowledgement
that new technologies relating to the production,
distribution, marking and tracing need to be taken
into account in our deliberations. Developments in
this field, such as 3D printing, modular and polymer
weapons, necessitate that we develop best practices and
norms, so we are not left vulnerable to increased illicit
trade and diversion.
Malta also welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to enhance the role of peacekeeping
missions when dealing with illicit weapons and
ammunition. We believe that peacekeeping missions
would be well placed to increasingly contribute to
monitoring, tracing and seizing illicit weapons in line
with international instruments and standards.
Furthermore, it is important to underline that we
find continued scope in mainstreaming issues related
to weapons and ammunition in the Security Council’s
work on sanctions regimes and arms embargoes. The
illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons in the
context of arms embargoes remains a serious concern,
and, in this context, we welcome the Security Council’s
role in investigating and combating transnational
criminal networks and armed groups in violating these
embargoes. Malta commends the work of sanctions
26/34

22/11/2021

committee panels of experts and their detailed reporting
on sanctions implementation.
Malta also underscores the importance of a gendersensitive approach to the control of small arms and
light weapons, in view of the disproportionate impact
of armed violence on women and children. We support
continued streamlining of SALW-control efforts with
those related to women, peace and security.
In closing, Malta believes that the Security Council
is strategically placed to oversee substantive discussions
and take appropriate cross-cutting action when dealing
with the illicit transfer and diversion of arms. Taking
into account the need for increased synergies across
the United Nations system, the Security Council can be
a driver for the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action and for regional mechanisms that
enhance the control of small arms and light weapons
and combat illegal diversion.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland
thanks
Mexico
for
organizing
today’s debate.
The diversion and illicit proliferation of arms and
ammunition fuel conflicts around the world. To ensure
the protection of civilians, humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers, as well as a lasting peace, we must
all contribute to preventing illicit flows and reducing
the demand for arms and ammunition. The Security
Council can play an important role by paying particular
attention to three elements.
First, I would cite the analytical capacity of
United Nations missions. The quantity and diversity
of weapons and ammunition in circulation are good
indicators of a threat to international peace and security.
It is important that missions take these indicators more
into account in their risk analysis. For this reason,
Switzerland supports the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research in the development of an armsspecific risk-analysis tool. Switzerland therefore calls
on the Security Council to strengthen the risk-analysis
capacities of United Nations missions in this area.
Secondly, we must promote innovation in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
processes. For example, the United Nations has
developed the community-violence-reduction tool.
This innovative tool reduces the flow of and demand
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

for illicit weapons and addresses the drivers of conflict
in contexts where a traditional DDR programme is
not yet possible. Within this framework, it is essential
to address the specific protection needs of women
and children and include them as agents of change in
community-violence-reduction measures. The Security
Council should more systematically consider these
measures when mandating missions. For its part,
Switzerland will continue to provide DDR experts to
support the Secretariat and missions.
Thirdly, sustainable national capacities are key to
preventing the diversion of arms and ammunition and
to better implementing arms embargoes. This requires
the United Nations and its States Members to help
States hosting United Nations presences to strengthen
their technical expertise, as well as their organizational
structures, processes and capacities. Such support will
help institutionalize this expertise.
The United Nations International Ammunition
Technical Guidelines, recognized in resolution 2220
(2015), provides a robust approach to the safe and secure
management of ammunition. When mandating missions,
the Security Council should pay particular attention to
building sustainable national capacities. Switzerland
will continue to support the further development of
the Guidelines as well as their implementation in the
States concerned.
Combating the illicit flow and abuse of arms
and ammunition is essential for peace, security and
sustainable development. The Security Council should
therefore consider these challenges across its entire
agenda. As a candidate to the Council, Switzerland
will continue to advocate an integrated approach to this
issue in the spirit of the Secretary-General’s Agenda for
Disarmament, in which he emphasized that we need a
new focus on disarmament that saves lives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Just 11 days ago, more than 60 inmates died
in one of Ecuador’s main prisons as a result of violence
linked to transnational organized crime. A few days
earlier, 119 more inmates lost their lives during the
most lethal clashes in the history of my country’s prison
system. Small arms and light weapons are at the heart of
this tragic situation, which is a consequence of the worst
risk to peace and security in the Western Hemisphere:

S/PV. 8909

namely, the confluence of drug trafficking, organized
crime and arms trafficking and diversion.
Dozens of pistols and rifles of different calibres
and degrees of sophistication, as well as thousands of
rounds of ammunition, in addition to other firearms,
have been seized, and the security forces of my country
are making great efforts to stop and prevent the violence
caused by transnational organized crime and drug
gangs inside prisons. This is just one more example of
the dramatic impact that illicit arms trafficking has on
peace and security.
This is not a theoretical discussion, nor are we
addressing a future threat. Today’s debate addresses the
cause of one of the greatest tragedies for the Western
Hemisphere and for all humankind: the proliferation,
trafficking and diversion of arms, which is directly
related to the global drug problem. I therefore thank
Mexico for organizing today’s meeting, which is also
closely linked to the 16 November debate on preventive
diplomacy (see S/PV.8906). In the area of security
and the fight against violence and crime, what better
prevention effort could there be than to stop arms
trafficking? Moreover, combating the diversion of arms
is a fundamental part of preventive diplomacy.
I also thank the Director of the United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research and the
representative of civil society for their briefings. Global
solutions are needed for this global problem.
To meet indicator 16.4 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we must be effective
in combating arms trafficking. The destabilizing
accumulation of firearms and their unrestricted
flow does not contribute to the promotion of
peaceful societies.
This scourge is also directly related to drug
trafficking, money-laundering and human trafficking.
Small arms are a main tool of “coyotes” and exacerbate
migratory crises with crowds in border areas, exposing
migrants to extremely high-risk situations, which in
turn considerably increases the vulnerability of the
entire region.
Ecuador supports the ongoing use by the United
Nations in Haiti of the integrated management of
weapons and ammunition as a central support for the
reduction of violence, disarmament and peace. This is
relevant because of the link between violence as one of
the main factors that trigger irregular migration.

21-3495527/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

Finally, I would like to share four
recommendations to address this challenge.

main

First, the Security Council must revitalize its
efforts to implement resolution 2020 (2015) and take
into account all multisectoral axes, as well as the
need for synergies within and outside the United
Nations system.
Secondly, simultaneous efforts are required at
the local, regional and global levels, including the
strengthening of and support for border, port and airport
control, due to the emerging challenges resulting from
rapid technological changes.
Thirdly, it is essential that the Council encourage
States
to
expand
international
cooperation,
commensurate with different situations and capacities,
to combat diversion and to support countries that
require it. In that regard, I note yesterday’s visit by
the President of Colombia to Ecuador, during which
he announced important cooperation agreements on
this issue. I would also highlight, as mentioned by the
representative of the United States this morning, the
cooperation Ecuador has received.
Fourthly, the Security Council must implement the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/839), while the United Nations must
strengthen alliances to integrate efforts not only with
the normative and policy frameworks, but also through
of more concrete actions on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs Theofili (Greece): First, allow me to
congratulate Mexico on convening this timely meeting.
Greece is especially sensitive to the destabilizing
impact that the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons can have on our wider region. At a national
level ,we apply cohesive European Union regulations
when it comes to the legal trade in defence-related
items, and abide by the obligations that emanate from
international treaties. While the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons is a global problem, it can best
be addressed through national or regional efforts.
Such an effort is the regional road map for a
sustainable solution to the illegal possession, misuse and
trafficking of small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition in the Western Balkans by 2024, adopted
during the Western Balkans Summit, held in London
28/34

22/11/2021

in 2018. This initiative is indicative of the necessity for
collective and coordinated regional cooperation, which
can mitigate illegal trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, thereby reducing human pain and suffering.
Regional synergies feed into global solutions,
and the Security Council plays a pivotal role in that
task. Peacekeeping operations, mandated to uphold
the peace, should also address cross-cutting issues,
including ways to mitigate the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. The Security Council should
continue taking the necessary measures so that, when
reviewing the mandate of a peacekeeping operation,
consideration is given to the inclusion of small units
that would focus on mitigating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.
The tools are there. The United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Arms Trade
Treaty constitute a strong foundation for peacekeepers
to draw guidance from.
Only through achieving peace and security can
the 2030 Sustainable Developments Goals be realized.
We are confident that by maintaining the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons high on the United
Nations agenda and by continuing to seek institutional
synergies at the regional and global levels, the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons will be mitigated
and socioeconomic development achieved.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
Let me start by thanking you, Sir, and Mexico for
convening this important meeting, and the briefers for
their valuable insights.
The illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons (SALW) and
their ammunitions are key drivers of conflict and armed
violence at the national, regional and global levels.
They facilitate organized crime, impede humanitarian
assistance and endanger civilians, including women
and children. Therefore, we must intensify our efforts
to combat all irresponsible and illegal trade in or use
of SALW. As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

seventh biennial report on SALW (S/2021/839), our
efforts must pay special attention to the serious effects
of uncontrolled arms flows on children and youths.
The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
its International Tracing Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons are important
tools for reducing the threats posed by uncontrolled
SALW. The Nordic countries are also firm supporters
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which provides
fundamental norms for responsible trade in conventional
arms. Innovative approaches and the promotion of
synergies among the relevant instruments, as well as
regional initiatives, will be vital in advancing our joint
efforts on SALW control.
Advancing the integration of gender perspectives
across the entire spectrum of disarmament and arms
control is a key priority for the Nordic countries. The
serious effects of weapons on sexual and genderbased violence cannot be stressed enough. To
address the gendered impacts of SALW, we should
strive to streamline SALW control efforts with the
women and peace and security agenda, including by
ensuring the full and equal participation of women in
disarmament dialogues.

S/PV. 8909

It is important to remember that every single day,
small arms and light weapons are used to kill, maim,
wound and threaten millions of women, men, girls and
boys in conflicts in all regions of the world. In 2020,
27 per cent of civilian deaths in armed conflict were
linked to those weapons, making them the primary
cause of such deaths. With that sombre reminder,
Canada continues to be steadfast in its support for
multilateral frameworks and policies that address the
illicit trade, diversion and trafficking of such weapons.
In our view, that is an essential part of promoting
peaceful and inclusive societies. That applies to us at
home, as well as around the world.
(spoke in French)
The illicit trade, diversion and trafficking of
small arms and light weapons represent a widespread
and ongoing phenomenon, fuelling deadly violence,
organized crime, corruption and security problems
across the world. Small arms and light weapons remain
the main weapons used in the majority of conflicts
throughout the world. Given that situation, Canada
supports the instruments adopted by the United Nations,
such as the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. In 2019,
we became a State party to the Arms Trade Treaty.

The consequences of uncontrolled or illicit flows
of SALW go far beyond the immediate human impact
of armed violence; they seriously hamper attempts
for economic and social development. As highlighted
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Secretary-General’s Agenda for Disarmament,
uncontrolled flows of arms and ammunitions are
a global development issue that must be addressed
in a comprehensive manner. The Nordic countries
are long-time supporters of work in SALW control
in several countries and regions, and we support
several programmes of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, such as the United Nations Trust
Facility Supporting Cooperation on Arms Regulation,
research institutions, the ATT Voluntary Trust Fund,
the Saving Lives Entity, civil society actors and bilateral
cooperation projects to that end.

(spoke in English)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.

We are also a champion of the full and equal
participation of women in decision-making processes.
That is reflected in our work on both peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

Mr. Rae (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for giving us
the opportunity to meet with you today.

As my colleague from Sweden just said, we must
also recognize the differentiated impacts of such
weapons on women, girls, men and boys. We welcome
the progress made in the international community and
within United Nations bodies in recognizing the gender
dimension of small arms and light weapons through
both legal and normative frameworks. We echo the call
in resolution 2122 (2013) to ensure
“women’s full and meaningful participation in
efforts to combat and eradicate the illicit transfer
and misuse of small arms and light weapons”
( para. 14)
and for “information and analysis on the impact of
armed conflict on women and girls” ( para. 1).

21-3495529/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

In that context, we recognize that frameworks
and policy must be aligned with action, mutually
supporting each other. To give just one example. the
Small Arms Survey’s handbook Gender-responsive
Small Arms Control: A practical guide was created as
an easy-to-use resource for policymakers to increase
their knowledge of gender and arms control and adopt
gender-responsive approaches to policy development.
We are pleased to support both the gender and
disarmament programme of the United Nations and the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean
and to develop and deliver gender-sensitive training
activities to prevent and combat trafficking in firearms.
In conclusion, the spread of small weapons is a
significant cause of global insecurity, death and injury.
We must maintain our focus on that issue and keep
working together, both to protect life and to advance
the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks Mexico for having convened this open debate. We
also thank the briefers. Their interventions underlined
the devastating consequences of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons (SALW) for peace and
security and the need to improve the Security Council’s
approach to effectively combating such proliferation.
To that end, I will mention three courses of action
that the Security Council could consider and that my
country believes to be key. Those three avenues are based
on the basic observation that if we want to effectively
prevent flows of illicit weapons, we must have a clear
picture of the diversion routes and the weaknesses in
control throughout the life cycle of the weapons.
First, in conflict areas, law enforcement agencies
often lack the capacity to conduct investigations.
United Nations peace missions could be involved if
they had a mandate and the technical capacity to record
and support efforts to trace all weapons recovered or
seized during their operations. My country believes that
creating arms embargo units within missions is also an
effective tool for collecting relevant information on
arms flows through a joint civilian and military effort.
Moreover, peace missions are particularly well placed
to provide assistance to the host country in safe and
30/34

22/11/2021

secure stockpile management and the collection and
destruction of surplus weapons and ammunition.
Secondly, Belgium believes that expert groups
have a complementary role in that scenario, since they
monitor compliance with arms embargoes and their
reports provide valuable information on traffickers,
methods and trafficking routes. The development of
an easily accessible institutional repository should
be encouraged and cross-referenced information
among expert groups should be facilitated. Expert
groups and United Nations peacekeeping operations
should work closely together in their efforts to map
arms flows and trace the origins of illicit small arms
and light weapons. That requires dedicated resources
and trained personnel. Tracing requests from expert
panels regarding diverted weapons are sometimes
not sufficiently detailed, which can hamper efforts to
properly trace their origin. Technological developments
will further hinder such efforts, as polymer and
modular weapons pose particular challenges for tracing
operations. My country therefore actively encourages
adapting the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons to accommodate
new technologies in order to increase its effectiveness.
Experts’ findings should also be followed up, including
through contacts with countries of the region, as the
latter are often the final stage before possible diversion.
Countries with major port or airport hubs also have a
role to play in monitoring transit and transhipment in
order to fully implement United Nations embargoes.
Thirdly, Security Council action must go hand in
hand with measures taken elsewhere. For example, the
Arms Trade Treaty recently established the Diversion
Information Exchange Forum, which provides a
dedicated platform for States parties to exchange
information in a confidential setting, allowing for
increased mutual trust, while sharing sensitive
information. The Forum should help to identify
diversion routes and methods, thereby strengthening
arms-export assessment procedures. The Arms Trade
Treaty may not be a universal instrument, but it can
nevertheless reinforce the implementation of other
instruments, such as the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, as well as arms embargoes, which remain a
key tool of the Security Council.
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Mexico’s presidency of the Security Council for
November. I wish to thank you for the initiative to
dedicate this meeting to discussing the impact of the
diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security.
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
this afternoon by the representative of Qatar on behalf
of the Group of Arab States. I also wish to thank
Mr. Geiss and Ms. Devoto for their briefings.
Iraq is well aware of the importance of combating
the diversion of, and illicit trade in, small arms and
light weapons, as well as their harmful effects, which
pose a threat to the security of States and societies.
We have seen an increase in armed violence. Such
weapons fuel and sustain conflict, and they have a
negative impact on economic growth and development
in our countries. The main victims of that scourge
are civilians, in particular the elderly, women and
children. Today the international community is at a
critical and delicate juncture. Terrorism and organized
crime are exacerbating a number of regional and
international crises.
For all the reasons I just mentioned, a number of
initiatives, resolutions and international conventions
have been drafted with the aim of countering and
eradicating terrorism and organized crime. For that
reason, Iraq believes that there is a need to shoulder
our responsibility collectively, as well as to redouble
our efforts to demonstrate the political will required to
stamp out that scourge.
We have therefore supported all instruments,
resolutions and international initiatives, specifically
those under the umbrella of the United Nations, that
are aimed at curbing the uncontrolled flow of small
arms and light weapons, in addition to preventing
their illicit trade. We have adopted tangible measures
at the executive level in order to prevent the illicit
entry of those weapons onto our territory, to confiscate
unlicensed weapons and to establish a database
dedicated to their inventories. Furthermore, we have
strengthened our legislation in that regard, including
through a law on weapons adopted in 2017, updating
our legal instruments and supplementing mechanisms
related to the carrying of such weapons.

S/PV. 8909

Two decades have elapsed since the adoption of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Nevertheless, the
flow of those weapons continues unabated. Their illicit
trade, stockpiling and nefarious use in many parts of the
world, specifically in the Middle East, are destabilizing
factors. Peace and security are jeopardized and
lamentable human casualties are heavy.
For that reason, Iraq welcomes the adoption of the
outcome document of the seventh Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action (A/CONF.192/BMS/2021/1) and
calls for its full implementation. Likewise, we welcome
the recommendations of the Group of Governmental
Experts on problems arising from the accumulation
of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus on
combating those issues.
We wish to call on international partners to
redouble their efforts in capacity-building assistance,
specifically to developing countries, on the basis of
requests from those States themselves. We wish to
emphasize the importance of mechanisms to address the
needs of countries by providing them with the necessary
resources. We would also like to underscore the need to
promote information-sharing and the exchange of best
practices on small arms and light weapons in order to
build capacity and shore up expertise in developing
countries as part of international efforts to implement
Sustainable Development Goal 16.
To conclude, we wish to reaffirm our commitment to
United Nations-led and international efforts to achieve
our noble goal of strengthening international peace and
security and maintaining it throughout the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): I would like to thank
the Mexican presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important open debate and to thank
the briefers for their very informative and thoughtprovoking presentations.
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on small arms and light weapons (S/2021/839),
in 2020, 27 per cent of civilian deaths in conflictaffected areas were caused by small arms and light

21-3495531/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

weapons and over 50 per cent of all victims of homicide
globally were killed with firearms. Those are gruesome
statistics and the coronavirus disease pandemic has
further exacerbated that trend. Decisive actions by
the international community are urgently needed to
prevent the diversion of and illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition, as they
fuel international and regional instability and sponsor
terrorism and organized crime.
The Security Council has been addressing the direct
impact of illicit flows of small arms and light weapons
on peace and security since 1999. Its most prominent
product in that regard — resolution 2220 (2015), which
Bulgaria is happy to have co-sponsored — focuses on a
wide range of areas in which international cooperation
in illicit small arms and light weapons prevention
could be bolstered, such as well-targeted sanctions
regimes, appropriate United Nations peacekeeping
mandates and effective disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes.
Yet, more needs to and can be done by the
Security Council. In particular, Bulgaria believes that
the Security Council should pay special attention to
the following.
First, the Council should consider increasing
capacities in monitoring and enforcing arms embargoes.
Arms embargoes have proven to be an effective tool
against the illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons in conflict and post-conflict areas. However,
not all Member States possess sophisticated systems
for controlling arms transfers, or their law enforcement
authorities may be poorly equipped to pursue arms
embargo violations. It is therefore crucial to strengthen
those capacities, as well as to equip United Nations
peacekeeping missions with the necessary mandates to
monitor arms embargo implementation and to assist in
national and regional capacity-building.
Secondly, the Council should encourage the
implementation of and improving synergies between
the various instruments at our disposal, such as the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects; the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; the
Arms Trade Treaty and the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing
32/34

22/11/2021

the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
The Arms Trade Treaty, in particular, is an excellent
example of how the application of common standards
for regulation of the international trade in conventional
arms can contribute to security and stability on a
global scale.
Thirdly, the Council should encourage the
establishment and maintenance of robust national export
control systems as indispensable tools in preventing
illicit flows and the diversion of small arms and light
weapons and ammunition flows. In that context, the
need for regional and international cooperation and
information exchange on cases of weapons tracing
and diversion is essential to identify and eliminate
trafficking routes and illicit supply chains.
Fourthly, the Council should urge States to
establish a marking and record-keeping system for
small arms and light weapons that provides for the
adequate tracing of illicit small arms and light weapons
and ammunition transfers.
Fifthly, the Council should encourage the effective
life cycle management of small arms and light weapons
and ammunition, including safety and security stockpile
management. An effective fight against the diversion
and illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons
is unthinkable without addressing their ammunition.
In that regard, Bulgaria welcomes the adoption by
the First Committee of the resolution on ammunition
(A/C.1/76/L.47) and looks forward to the next steps
towards a new global framework that would address the
existing gaps in life cycle ammunition management.
Finally, the Council should encourage participation
in existing reporting mechanisms, such as the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms, especially on
the transfers of small arms and light weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): We wish to convey our
sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting.
Indonesia remains concerned by the negative
impacts caused by illicit small arms and light weapons.
As has been correctly pointed out, such weapons
contribute to the exacerbation of conflicts. In that
regard, allow me to emphasize the following.
21-34955

22/11/2021

Small arms

First, international cooperation based on universally
accepted instruments is essential. The United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
(SALW) in All Its Aspects remains a fundamental
basis for mobilizing political will. Through the
Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action and the
Review Conference, measures and challenges towards
the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action were discussed.
Over the years, we have noted differences among
States Members of the United Nations with regard
to the Programme of Action, including its scope and
relation to other instruments. Nevertheless, we should
focus on the points of convergence and continue to
effectively implement it. In that regard, we would like
to reiterate our principled position that regulations on
SALW should not hinder the development of national
capabilities, especially for developing countries.
Secondly, in discussing the issue of SALW, the
Security Council should focus on the very pertinent
work of its mandate. Identification and prioritization
in disarmament measures are important, particularly
to support a nationally driven security sector reform.
Disarmament measures could also benefit peacekeeping
operations in effectively and efficiently exercising
their mandates.
In the context of sanctions, our principled positions
remains that it is a last resort and only a means, not the
objective. It should always be a part of broader political
and peacebuilding strategy to address the situation.
Similarly, in the context of sanctions related to SALW,
this principle should also be upheld.
Thirdly, regional mechanisms are important owing
to the complex and transborder nature of many ongoing
conflicts and SALW issues. Indonesia, through the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
has been working tirelessly in implementing the
Programme of Action on Small Arms. The ASEAN
Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime, the
ASEAN Regional Forum and the annual meeting of
the ASEAN Association of Heads of Police are among
the few examples in our region. On a broader scale,
enhancing cooperation among regional organizations is
needed to sharpen the global effort against illicit SALW.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Indonesia’s
support and commitment in combating illicit SALW,

S/PV. 8909

including through the Security Council in exercising
its mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank Mexico and
its team, as well as today’s briefers for their briefings.
Allow me to stress the following points.
First, Costa Rica regrets that the Security Council
has not yet fully integrated the consideration of small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition into its
work, including in its thematic and country-specific
discussions. While small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition are the fire we are fighting today,
ammunition is the oxygen that fuels it, turning guns from
inoperative items into lethal weapons. Nevertheless, it
took the Security Council 68 years to adopt its first
resolution on the matter, resolution 2117 (2013). Costa
Rica commends the role of the elected members for
breaking fresh ground on this issue and encourages the
Security Council to establish a follow-up mechanism to
the biennial reports of the Secretary-General.
Secondly, while arms export assessments are
supposed to consider the risk of gender-based violence,
it is not clear how — or even whether — that happens.
Exporter States must take stronger measures to ensure
that arms transfers do not facilitate or exacerbate
gender-based violence or abuses against women and
girls in recipient States. There is also an urgent need to
improve transparency in the decision-making process
for arms transfers to States with poor human rights
records and to create a public space for debate on
this matter, as well as for possible judicial review of
export licenses.
Thirdly, implementing and enforcing Security
Council arms embargoes at the national and regional
levels continues to be a challenge, as is the case with
weapons and ammunition management and guidelines.
We welcome the Council’s establishment of clear and
well-defined benchmarks that could guide reviews of
the consequences of its arms embargoes on targeted
States. We also encourage the Council to engage in
regular consultations with targeted States and provide
them with capacity-building, similar to what has
been undertaken with regard to both terrorism and
nuclear proliferation.

21-3495533/34

S/PV.8909

Small arms

22/11/2021

Global military spending rose to almost $2 trillion
last year, an increase of 2.6 per cent in real terms from
2019, according to the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute. Such reckless spending levels
represents clear evidence that Article 26 has been,
for the past 76 years, a dead letter in the cemetery of
intentions in the Charter of the United Nations, which
still upholds the values of this edifice. Costa Rica urges
all States to commence without delay the phased and
intentional reduction of global military spending. Such
a reduction is not only feasible, but also imperative.

acknowledge the importance of regional cooperation in
combating illicit cross-border proliferation.

Peace cannot be forced or imposed at gunpoint. We
have to convince ourselves that human security remains
a requirement for global security.

Regional processes such as the African Union’s
Silencing the Guns initiative and the Western Balkans
road map for the control of small arms and light
weapons, jointly initiated by Germany and France,
as well as the Caribbean firearms road map, also
negotiated under the auspices of Germany, have become
models for effective regional arms control. Overall,
such regional processes are an important contribution
to security, particularly in Africa and Latin and Central
America and the Caribbean, where illicit weapons
pose a significant threat to peace and stability. Along
with regional processes, numerous national and local
initiatives around the world play a vital role too.
Germany considers it essential that civil society, women
and youth be included in all those efforts.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): First of all, I would
like to thank Mexico for keeping the Security Council
seized of this important issue.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
(SALW) fuels armed conflicts around the world, and
the illicit trade in these weapons is often also connected
to organized crime, terrorism and human trafficking.
Moreover, small arms and light weapons do not
magically disappear after the end of a conflict, but
facilitate violent crimes, and therefore pose a challenge
for post-conflict recovery.
We need to look at the issue more holistically.
That is why, during our term on the Security Council,
we tried to update resolution 2220 (2015), which was
adopted in 2015. It is unfortunate that our endeavours
were met with heavy resistance. I believe the ideas
that we put forward together with our partners are still
valid and supported by an overwhelming majority of
Member States, including those on the Council. Let me
repeat some of them here.
The Security Council needs to acknowledge the
gendered impact of SALW and promote the equal
and meaningful participation of women as actors
and leaders in the control of SALW. ∙It also should
take into account recent developments in small arms
manufacturing, technology and design that pose new
challenges to the marking, record-keeping and tracing of
these weapons. The Council should increase its support
to, and understanding of, weapons and ammunition
management in peace operations. Finally, it should also
34/34

International instruments such as the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, the Firearms Protocol to the United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Arms Trade Treaty are of key importance,
and they effectively complement the work of the
Security Council.

In the past, we did not have a forum to address
an important related aspect, namely, ammunition.
Fortunately, we are about to close that gap. The Group
of Governmental Experts to consider further steps
to enhance cooperation with regard to the issue of
conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus, chaired
by Germany, paved the way for an open-ended working
group, which is now mandated by the First Committee.
To save lives, we jointly need to step up our efforts
and strengthen control over small arms and light
weapons, including ammunition, during all cycles of
conflict, using all instruments at our disposal. Germany
stands ready to help advance these causes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.
21-34955
