A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/130
26 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.2)]
52/130. Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons
The General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the alarmingly high numbers of internally displaced persons throughout the world
who receive inadequate protection and assistance, and conscious of the serious problem this is creating
for the international community,
Conscious of the human rights and the humanitarian dimensions of the problem of internally displaced
persons and the responsibilities this poses for States and the international community to explore methods
and means better to address their protection and assistance needs,
Recalling the relevant norms of international human rights instruments, of international humanitarian
law and analogous refugee law, and emphasizing the need for their better implementation with regard to
internally displaced persons,
Recalling also the emphasis in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993,1 on the need to develop
global strategies to address the problem of internal displacement,
Noting the progress made thus far by the representative of the Secretary-General on internally
displaced persons in developing a legal framework, analysing institutional arrangements, undertaking
1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

98-76945

/...

A/RES/52/130
Page 2

dialogue with Governments and issuing a series of reports on particular country situations, together with
proposals for remedial measures,
Welcoming the request made by the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1997/39 of
11 April 1997,2 to the Secretary-General to ensure the rapid publication and the wide dissemination of
the compilation and analysis of legal norms prepared by his representative,
Welcoming also the decision by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to extend a standing invitation
to the representative of the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons to participate in its meetings
and those of its subsidiary bodies, and encouraging further strengthening of this collaboration in order to
promote better assistance, protection and development strategies for internally displaced persons,
Recalling its resolution 50/195 of 22 December 1995,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the representative of the Secretary-General on
internally displaced persons;3
2. Commends the representative of the Secretary-General for the activities undertaken so far, despite
the limited resources available to him, and for the catalytic role he continues to play in raising the level
of consciousness about the plight of internally displaced persons;
3. Encourages the representative of the Secretary-General to continue his analysis of the causes of
internal displacement, the needs of those displaced, measures of prevention and ways to increase
protection, assistance and solutions for internally displaced persons;
4. Also encourages the representative of the Secretary-General to continue to pay specific attention
in his review to the protection and assistance needs of women and children, bearing in mind the relevant
strategic objective in the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference
on Women;4
5. Looks forward to the comprehensive study being prepared by the representative of the SecretaryGeneral to promote a comprehensive strategy for better protection, assistance and development for
internally displaced persons;
6. Welcomes Commission on Human Rights resolution 1997/39,2 in which the Commission
encouraged the representative of the Secretary-General to continue, on the basis of his compilation and
analysis of legal norms, to develop a comprehensive framework for the protection of internally displaced
persons, and takes note of his preparations for guiding principles to this end;

2

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23),
chap. II, sect. A.

3

A/52/506, annex.

4

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
/...

A/RES/52/130
Page 3

7. Calls upon all Governments to continue to facilitate the activities of the representative of the
Secretary-General, in particular Governments with situations of internal displacement, encourages them
to give serious consideration to inviting the representative to visit their countries so as to enable him to
study and analyse more fully the issues involved, and thanks those Governments which have already done
so;
8. Invites Governments to give due consideration, in dialogue with the representative of the
Secretary-General, to his recommendations and suggestions addressed to them, in accordance with his
mandate, and to inform him of measures taken thereon;
9. Urges all relevant United Nations humanitarian assistance and development organizations
concerned to enhance their collaboration with the representative of the Secretary-General by developing
frameworks of cooperation to promote protection, assistance and development for internally displaced
persons and to provide all possible assistance and support to him;
10. Also urges those organizations, especially through the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, to
develop a more comprehensive and coherent system of collecting data on the situation of internally
displaced persons, in cooperation with the representative of the Secretary-General;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to the representative to carry out
his mandate effectively;
12. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-fourth session.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
