A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/116
24 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 113
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/631)]
48/116.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of her Office, 1/ as well as the report of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner on the work of
its forty-fourth session, 2/ and taking note of the statement made by the High
Commissioner on 4 November 1993, 3/
Recalling its resolution 47/105 of 16 December 1992,
Reaffirming the purely humanitarian and non-political character of the
activities of the Office of the High Commissioner, as well as the crucial
importance of the High Commissioner’s functions of providing international
protection to refugees and seeking solutions to refugee problems,
Welcoming the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the World
Conference on Human Rights, 4/ particularly as it reaffirms the right to seek
and enjoy asylum, and the right to return to one’s country,
___________
1/

A/48/12.

2/

A/48/12/Add.1.

3/

See A/C.3/48/Sr.23.

4/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

/...

A/RES/48/116
Page 2

Commending the High Commissioner and her staff for the dedicated manner
in which they discharge their responsibilities, and paying special tribute to
those staff members who have lost their lives in the course of their duties,
Noting with satisfaction that one hundred and twenty-three States are
now parties to the 1951 Convention 5/ and/or the 1967 Protocol 6/ relating to
the Status of Refugees,
Also noting with satisfaction the participation of the High Commissioner
in the commemoration of the anniversaries of the Cartagena Declaration on
Refugees of 1984 7/ and the Organization of African Unity Convention governing
the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa, concluded at Addis Ababa
on 10 September 1969, 8/
Welcoming the continuing strong commitment of States to provide
protection and assistance to refugees and the valuable support extended by
Governments to the High Commissioner in carrying out her humanitarian tasks,
Commending those States, particularly the least developed and those
serving as host to millions of refugees, that, despite severe economic and
development challenges of their own, continue to admit large numbers of
refugees into their territories, and emphasizing the need to share the burden
of those States to the maximum extent possible through international
assistance, including development-oriented assistance,
Noting with concern that the number of refugees and other persons to
whom the Office of the High Commissioner is called upon to provide assistance
and protection has continued to increase and that their protection continues
to be seriously jeopardized in many situations as a result of denial of
admission, unlawful expulsion, refoulement, unjustified detention, other
threats to their physical security, dignity and well-being and failure to
respect and ensure their fundamental freedoms and human rights,
Recognizing that, in certain regions, the misuse by individuals of
asylum procedures jeopardizes the institution of asylum and adversely affects
the prompt and effective protection of refugees,
Emphasizing the need for States to assist the High Commissioner in
seeking durable and timely solutions to the problems of refugees, as well as
to take part in efforts to prevent conditions that might give rise to the
flight of refugees, and to address the root causes of refugee outflows, and
underlining, in this connection, State responsibility, particularly as it
relates to countries of origin,
______________
5/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

6/

Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

7/

International Journal of Refugee Law, vol. 3, No. 2 (April 1991).

8/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14,691.

/...

A/RES/48/116
Page 3

Welcoming the continuing efforts of the High Commissioner to meet the
protection and assistance needs of refugee women and refugee children, who
constitute the majority of the world’s refugee population and who are often
exposed to serious threats to their safety and well-being,
Recognizing the increased demands faced by the Office of the High
Commissioner worldwide and the need for all available resources to be fully
and effectively mobilized to meet those demands,
1.
Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance of the function of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of providing international
protection to refugees and the need for States to cooperate fully with her
Office in order to facilitate the effective exercise of this function;
2.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so, including
Governments of newly independent States, to accede to or to declare succession
to and to implement fully the 1951 Convention 5/ and the 1967 Protocol 6/
relating to the Status of Refugees and relevant regional instruments for the
protection of refugees;
3.
Also calls upon all States to uphold asylum as an indispensable
instrument for the international protection of refugees, and to respect
scrupulously the fundamental principle of non-refoulement;
4.
Urges States to ensure access, consistent with relevant
international and regional instruments, for all asylum-seekers to fair and
efficient procedures for the determination of refugee status and the granting
of asylum to eligible persons;
5.
Expresses deep concern regarding serious threats to the security
or the well-being of refugees, including incidents of refoulement, unlawful
expulsion, physical attacks and detention under unacceptable conditions, and
calls upon States to take all measures necessary to ensure respect for the
principles of refugee protection as well as the humane treatment of asylumseekers in accordance with internationally recognized human rights norms;
6.
Endorses, in this connection, the conclusions on the personal
security of refugees and on refugee protection and sexual violence adopted by
the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner at its
forty-fourth session; 2/
7.
Welcomes the High Commissioner’s policy on refugee children and
the activities undertaken to ensure its implementation, aimed at ensuring that
the specific needs of refugee children, including in particular unaccompanied
minors, are fully met within the overall protection and assistance activities
of the Office, in cooperation with Governments and other relevant
organizations;
8.
Acknowledges with appreciation the further progress made in the
implementation of measures within the framework of the High Commissioner’s
programme to ensure the protection and to meet the assistance needs of refugee
women and girls, in accordance with the High Commissioner’s policy on refugee
women;
9.
Stresses the importance of international solidarity and burdensharing in reinforcing the international protection of refugees, and urges all
/...

A/RES/48/116
Page 4

States, as well as non-governmental organizations, in conjunction with the
Office of the High Commissioner, to cooperate in efforts to lighten the burden
borne by States that have received large numbers of asylum-seekers and
refugees;
10.
Urges all States and relevant organizations to support the High
Commissioner’s search for durable solutions to refugee problems, including
voluntary repatriation, integration in the country of asylum and resettlement
in a third country, as appropriate, and welcomes in particular the ongoing
efforts of her Office to pursue wherever possible opportunities to promote
conditions conducive to the preferred solution of voluntary repatriation;
11.
Encourages the High Commissioner, on the basis of her broad
humanitarian experience and expertise, to continue to explore and to undertake
protection and assistance activities aimed at preventing conditions that give
rise to refugee outflows, bearing in mind fundamental protection principles,
in close coordination with the Governments concerned, and within an interagency, intergovernmental and non-governmental framework, as appropriate;
12.
Reaffirms its support for the High Commissioner’s efforts, on the
basis of specific requests from the Secretary-General or the competent
principal organs of the United Nations and with the consent of the concerned
State, and taking into account the complementarities of the mandates and
expertise of other relevant organizations, to provide humanitarian assistance
and protection to persons displaced within their own country in specific
situations calling for the Office’s particular expertise, especially where
such efforts could contribute to the prevention or solution of refugee
problems;
13.
Reaffirms the importance of incorporating environmental
considerations into the programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner,
especially in the least developed countries, in view of the impact on the
environment of the large numbers of refugees and displaced persons of concern
to the High Commissioner;
14.
Recognizes the need for the international community to explore
methods and means better to address within the United Nations system the
protection and assistance needs of internally displaced persons, and calls
upon the High Commissioner to engage actively in further consultations on this
priority issue with the Department of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Internally
Displaced Persons, and with other appropriate international organizations and
bodies, including the International Committee of the Red Cross;
15.
Also recognizes the value of addressing prevention, protection and
solutions on a comprehensive regional basis, and encourages the High
Commissioner to consult with States, other relevant United Nations bodies and
governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, concerning
possibilities for additional measures and initiatives in areas affected by
complex humanitarian problems involving coerced population movements;
16.
Reaffirms the importance of promoting and disseminating refugee
law and principles for the protection of refugees as well as of facilitating
the prevention of and solutions to refugee problems, and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue to strengthen the promotion and training activities

/...

A/RES/48/116
Page 5

of her Office, inter alia, through increased cooperation with bodies and
organizations concerned with human rights and humanitarian law;
17.
Urges States, the Office of the High Commissioner and nongovernmental organizations to pursue their efforts to foster greater public
understanding and acceptance of people of different backgrounds and cultures,
with a view to dispelling hostile, racist or xenophobic attitudes and other
forms of intolerance towards foreigners, including refugees and asylumseekers, displaced people and persons belonging to minorities;
18.
Notes the relationship between safeguarding human rights and
preventing refugee problems, and reiterates its support for the High
Commissioner’s efforts to increase cooperation between her Office and the
Commission on Human Rights, the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat and
other relevant international bodies and organizations;
19.
Welcomes the further progress made by the High Commissioner in
enhancing the capacity of her Office to respond to humanitarian emergencies
and encourages her to provide full support to the coordination role of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, especially in major and complex emergencies;
20.
Encourages the High Commissioner to continue to cooperate fully,
including within the framework of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, with
United Nations agencies, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations, in order to ensure an effective response to complex emergency
situations;
21.
Welcomes the establishment by the High Commissioner of the
Partnership in Action Process in conjunction with the International Council of
Voluntary Agencies as a means of strengthening and improving collaboration
between the Office of the High Commissioner and non-governmental organizations
in meeting greatly increased demands, expresses its support for the process of
consultations through regional preparatory meetings as well as for the global
conference at Oslo in June 1994 and invites Governments to provide financial
support to this important initiative;
22.
Expresses deep concern at conditions in a number of countries and
regions that seriously endanger the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
the security of the staff of the High Commissioner and other relief workers,
deplores the recent loss of lives among personnel involved in humanitarian
operations, urges support for initiatives taken by the High Commissioner and
within the General Assembly and the Security Council concerning the safety of
United Nations and associated personnel, in particular the consideration of
new measures to enhance the safety of such personnel, and calls upon States
and all parties to conflicts to take all necessary measures to ensure safe and
timely access for humanitarian assistance and the security of international
and local staff undertaking humanitarian work in the countries concerned;
23.
Calls upon all Governments and other donors to contribute to the
programmes of the High Commissioner and, taking into account the need to
achieve greater burden-sharing among donors, to assist the High Commissioner
in securing additional and timely income from traditional governmental

/...

A/RES/48/116
Page 6

sources, other Governments and the private sector in order to ensure that the
needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons of concern to the Office of
the High Commissioner are met.
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
