S/PV.9150

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9150th meeting

Wednesday, 12 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adamo/Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Huitfeldt
Mr. Chumakov
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Climate and security in Africa
Letter dated 3 October 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/737)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-62635 (E)
*2262635*

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

risks and creates new ones. Africa, the continent with
the lowest total greenhouse-gas emissions, is seeing
temperatures rising faster than the global average.
Africa lies at the front lines of the unfolding crisis. From
Dakar to Djibouti, desertification and land degradation
drive competition for resources and erode livelihoods
and food security for millions. In the greater Horn
of Africa, a devastating drought is forcing families
to move far from their homes. In the Sahel, conflicts
over resources are intensifying. Violent extremists are
adeptly exploiting them for their own ends.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Climate and security in Africa
Letter dated 3 October 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Gabon
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/737)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Colombia,
Egypt, Germany, Italy, Morocco, Namibia, the Niger,
Poland, South Africa and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa,
Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and Peace Operations; Mr. Tanguy Gahouma-Bekale,
former Chair of the African Group of Negotiators on
Climate Change; and Mr. Patrick Youssef, Regional
Director for Africa, International Committee of the
Red Cross.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/737, which contains the text of
a letter dated 3 October 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee (spoke in French): I would like to thank
Gabon for having convened this meeting. I also thank
His Excellency Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Gabon, for presiding over this
meeting, which is both timely and important.
(spoke in English)
The climate emergency is a danger to peace. And
although there is no direct link between climate change
and conflict, climate change exacerbates existing
2/33

12/10/2022

To support the African continent in addressing the
impact of climate change on peace and security, we must
act on multiple fronts. We can no longer afford to do
business as usual. Unquestionably, we need ambitious
climate action and to accelerate the implementation of
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We look to the
twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
to be held in Sharm El-Sheikh in November (COP27)
—an African-owned, African-focused COP — for
meaningful commitments from the largest emitters. We
cannot hope to achieve lasting peace if we do not meet
our climate goals.
There are three additional priorities for action that
I would like to highlight today.
First, we need to increase our capacity for risk
analysis and integrate a climate lens into our conflictprevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts.
That requires more and better data. With the help of
innovation partners, we are tapping into new tools to
better understand climate projections and trends in
order to reinforce our analytical and early-warning
capacity. In Central Africa, for instance, we are
working to develop a satellite-powered dashboard
to give new insights into water availability and have
a better understanding of the intersection between
transhumance, climate change and conflict.
That kind of work would not be possible without
climate, peace and security advisers deployed in
climate-vulnerable regions to boost the capacity of
United Nations field missions. Both our analysis
and our resulting engagement must become more
regionally focused. Climate change knows no borders.
Its implications for peace and security tend to be most
prominent in borderland areas, which requires crossborder resource sharing or human mobility. Yet existing
peacebuilding efforts are often entirely based on single
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

countries, rather than being reflective of that regional
dimension. It is time we changed that.
Earlier this year, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa completed an assessment
of the implications of climate change for peace and
security across the region. Among its recommendations,
the assessment stressed the need for systematic
collaboration, cooperation and partnership on climate
security at the subregional level. To that end, efforts
to develop a shared subregional vision and governance
framework to institutionalize joint responses and
interventions in the subregion in the short, medium and
long term are needed. The Office is now working with
partners to support the development of a subregional
climate change strategy by the Economic Community
of Central African States. And in West Africa, the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
is working closely with the Economic Community
of West African States on good practices to prevent
herder-farmer conflicts region-wide, including through
land tenure reform and public communication.
Secondly, our efforts to deliver peace and security
must place people at the centre. We need to learn from
those who experience daily the consequences of climate
change and leverage their expertise to develop effective
climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies.
Women are particularly vulnerable to climate
impacts, but they are also crucial agents of change.
They often possess unique knowledge that can help
decrease tensions and strengthen social cohesion,
leading to more sustainable peace outcomes that
benefit people. In Asia, for instance, the SecretaryGeneral’s Peacebuilding Fund has supported local land
committees, accompanied by women mediators, that
have helped resolve community conflicts related to
land use and management of natural resources.
Young people are also key stakeholders driving
innovative climate and peacebuilding action. We
see their activism across Africa and have heard their
testimony in this Chamber. The actions we take today
to address the linkages between climate change, peace
and security will shape their future.
Thirdly, we must seize opportunities for climate
action and peacebuilding to reinforce each other. The
Secretary-General has emphasized that repeatedly.
Peacebuilding and climate action share many of the
same objectives, namely, resilient, just and inclusive
societies. Coherent policies are good for climate and for

S/PV.9150

peace. In that connection, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel is expanding its capacity to
advise partners on conflict-sensitive climate-mitigation
and -adaptation strategies. That engagement will help
develop the mechanisms to ensure that investment in
adaptation and resilience reaches those most vulnerable
and affected by conflict. The Peacebuilding Fund, too,
is increasing adopting a climate lens. Since 2017, the
Fund has invested over $85 million in more than 40
climate-sensitive projects. A review of Fund projects
currently under way will provide valuable direction for
future efforts.
Vital to this ambitious agenda are multidimensional
partnerships that connect the work of the United
Nations, regional organizations, Member States,
international financial institutions, civil society, the
private sector and international and local researchers.
The United Nations is committed to expanding existing
partnerships and forging new ones. Within our own
system, we have established the Climate Security
Mechanism, a joint initiative between the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department
of Peace Operations, the United Nations Environment
Programme and the United Nations Development
Programme to more systematically address climate,
peace and security risks.
Delivering on a commitment to international
collaboration is a significant undertaking. It will require
all of us to work together in new and unprecedented
ways. We look to affected countries and regions to guide
us in those efforts. Africa’s leadership is essential. Our
response today does not match the magnitude of the
challenge we are facing. Let us move faster. We look
forward to more partnerships and collaboration at
all levels.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Pobee
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gahouma-Bekale.
Mr. Gahouma-Bekale (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to warmly
thank the Security Council and its President, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon, Mr. Michael
Moussa Adamo, for having proposed a discussion at
the highest political level on the complex link between
climate change and security issues, particularly
in Africa.

22-626353/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

I would also like to thank the other briefers, namely,
Ms. Martha Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa, and Mr. Patrick Youssef, Regional Director for
Africa of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
(spoke in English)
I have three main objectives for my presentation
today. First, I will try to explain the links between
climate change and peace and security in Africa.
Secondly, I will examine the resources available to
Africa in order to address the threat climate change
poses to Africa and to peace and security, as well as
how to mobilize those resources for lasting peace on
the continent. Finally, I will explore how to maximize
the international community’s support for Africa
so as to minimize climate change’s effects on peace
and security.
One of the most significant risks to peace and
security in this century is considered by many to be
climate change. The science and facts are clear; the
speed at which climate change accelerates is very rapid
and represents a real challenge. Moreover, it threatens to
undermine our efforts to maintain international peace
and security. That is particularly true for the 54 African
States, which are among the most vulnerable to the
climate change crisis and the peace and security crisis.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, Africa
is the continent most plagued by instability, conflicts
and wars. According to a report published in 2021 by
the Institute for Security Studies, 80 per cent of current
peace operations led by the United Nations are deployed
in countries classified as most exposed to climate
change. All the larger African missions are deployed
in areas sensitive to climate change, including South
Sudan, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Somalia.

12/10/2022

droughts, rising sea levels and the increased frequency
and intensity of storms are affecting the lives and
livelihoods of people around the world. In conflict zones
in particular, those effects can exacerbate economic,
social or political factors of insecurity, leaving already
vulnerable populations on the front line of multiple and
intersecting crises.
Africa holds great promise to become the world’s
next powerhouse of economic development. The
population is young, natural resources are plentiful
and many African countries are ready to transform
their economies in order to lift millions out of poverty
and into the middle class. The majority of Africans
under the age of 30 are already unemployed, and the
number of young people will double by 2050, reaching
850 million. But with some initiatives, like the African
Continental Free Trade Area, which entered into force
in May 2019, we can seize this opportunity and hope
for Africa’s gradual integration into a globalized world.
It is only together that we can reach a solution for
climate change. On this note, a strengthened partnership
must be established between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council in the
context of the climate, peace and security nexus. We
need to further consolidate our cooperation in early
warning, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, climate change,
good governance, the promotion and protection of
human rights and the rule of law. Africa needs not
only the collaboration and partnership but also the
commitment of developed countries to fulfilling their
obligations, specifically on finance matters. More
capacity and resources are needed to shift away from
the issues we are facing.

In addition, Oxfam reported in 2021 that 80 per
cent of natural disasters between 1990 and 2016 are
linked to climate change; that from 2015 to 2020, the
impacts of climate change in Africa increased by more
than 20 per cent; that the number of people suffering
from hunger is projected to increase by 10 to 20 per
cent by 2050 due to climate change; and that without
ambitious climate action, up to 100 million people are
likely to fall into extreme poverty by 2030.

The impacts of climate change respect no borders.
They risk hampering development prospects and
exacerbating Africa’s fragile security landscape,
despite the continent’s minimal contribution to the
climate crisis. In addition, climate-related security
threats are part of a range of other challenges facing
the continent, including other more pressing challenges
for African countries. Therefore, an integrated African
response that prioritizes adaptation and means of
implementation support, including climate finance, is
urgently needed to galvanize national and continental
development efforts, while preventing safety risks.

Climate change and disaster risk go hand in hand.
They are determined by the exposure and vulnerability
of an entire system. The rise in global temperature,

I would like to suggest five recommendations
for that purpose: first, development of a national
and regional African climate risk assessment study;

4/33

22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

secondly, integration of climate adaptation into national
development planning, post-conflict reconstruction
and development efforts, while integrating a securityrisk dimension; thirdly, international cooperation and
coordination to develop appropriate responses to crossborder threats; fourthly, a call for a clearly identified
African agenda for the twenty-seventh Conference of
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP 27) to advance continental
priorities, including adaptation and climate finance; and
fifthly, the encouragement of closer coordination among
the relevant actors of the African Union Commission in
addressing climate change policy issues with a view to
supporting the African position at COP 27.
I would like to conclude my presentation by saying
that we are therefore convinced that it is imperative and
urgent to take concrete and urgent measures to address
this threat and that we must act now and in unity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Gahouma-Bekale for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Youssef.
Mr. Youssef (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to express the great appreciation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for
today’s important debate on climate risks and security
in Africa, held at the initiative of Gabon and chaired by
Mr. Moussa Adamo.
(spoke in English)
Representatives of the ICRC, including its former
President Peter Maurer, have told the Security Council
that the convergence of climate risk, environmental
degradation and armed conflict threatens people’s
lives and health and worsens food, economic and
water insecurity. We have also said that climate change
multiplies existing vulnerabilities and inequalities in
conflict zones, and that the impact of such overlap can
shape human mobility and access to resources on a
regional scale. Furthermore, we have drawn attention to
the natural environment being a silent casualty of war,
as well as the consequences of environmental damage
for conflict-affected populations, including a lowered
resilience to climate shocks. Today the ICRC, alongside
the larger International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, works closely with communities for whom
the convergence of those risks is not an abstraction but
a reality. What we see is clear.

S/PV.9150

First, the majority of countries considered the most
vulnerable and least ready to adapt to climate change
are also experiencing wars and armed conflict.
Secondly, those converging shocks are dramatically
affecting people’s lives, as well as institutions and
social cohesion, unfortunately prolonging existing
tensions and perpetuating fragility.
Thirdly, despite clear needs, actors that are best
equipped to provide climate finance and support
climate adaptation are largely absent from those places
because of security risks.
Humanitarian action in conflict areas has also been
affected by climate change, where it is clearer than ever
that steps must be taken to ensure preventive and longterm responses that strengthen people’s resilience and
adaptive capacities. Allow me to offer a few examples
in that regard.
In several countries in the Sahel, we help farmers
and herders cope with increasing variability in rainfall
and periods of water scarcity. Providing solar-powered
water pumps and high-yielding drought-resistant seeds
and training women’s groups in year-round greenhouse
agricultural production are some of our activities
in Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic and
the Sudan.
In Mali, for example, we are focusing not just on
structures, but also on information. That means getting
reliable climate and weather data into the hands of
people who need it — the 80 per cent of the population
that depends on rain-fed farming and grazing. Timing
is also important: we are partnering with the national
meteorological department to ensure the data is not
only accessible but that it also can be understood and
applied to livelihood activities.
In the Niger, where conflict is forcing both host and
displaced communities together in areas with scarce
resources, we are designing an irrigation, agroforestry
and agropastoralism programme aimed at strengthening
livelihoods and reversing environmental degradation.
The programme is indeed based on the notion that in
order to be resilient, a community needs to live in a
resilient environment.
In Somalia, climate change, including severe
droughts, coupled with three decades of conflict are
combining to worsen an already dire humanitarian
situation, in which the recurrent nature of shocks means
that people have little time to adjust to them. The ICRC

22-626355/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

12/10/2022

has supported the creation of agricultural cooperatives
with training, drought-resistant crops, farming tools
and cash for the fuel needed for irrigation. Those
cooperatives have helped people to work together to
enhance resilience in places in which groundwater
production is indeed essential.

In conclusion, building resilient communities
alongside efforts to protect those communities from
violence is indeed critical. This also means committing
more resources to adaptation efforts, particularly for
countries experiencing armed conflict. We must ensure
that those most at risk are our urgent priority.

Frontline humanitarian action is a vital stabilizing
factor in fragmented environments and a building block
towards peacebuilding efforts. However, humanitarians
are not peacemakers and cannot respond alone to the
multitude of challenges necessary to achieve sustainable
peace. As today’s concept note rightly suggests (see
S/2022/737, annex) our common challenge is to work
together, in complementarity and at different scales, to
respond to the combined effects of climate change and
wars. Yet we stumble on the “how” of our collective
response, with risks of over-securitizing the solution or
taking short cuts that ultimately lead to maladaptation.
The Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council are international bodies with the
ability to design responses to armed conflict that are
climate-sensitive. Allow me therefore to offer three
suggestions that can help ensure complementarity and
sustainable impact.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Youssef for his briefing.

First, in order to adequately address growing
climate risks in conflict settings, we need to design
context-specific responses that consider people’s
individual needs and characteristics. There is no
one-size-fits-all approach.
Secondly, we should share knowledge and align
experiences. The Security Council can indeed ensure
this through more regular and systematic discussions,
including with regional and subregional organizations.
Humanitarian organizations can also help other actors
apply a conflict-sensitive lens to their own work and
address some of the risks that limit their action.
Thirdly, a greater respect for the international
humanitarian law that protects the natural environment
can limit its degradation and thus reduce the harm and
the risks that conflict-affected communities endure,
including because of climate change.
On a local level, in places where we work, there
is no shortage of resolve to find ways to cope with the
changing climate. But without decisive support from
the international community, what is happening now in
many parts of Africa will only get worse, and existing
vulnerabilities might multiply.
6/33

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
(spoke in English)
I thank Mrs. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations,
Mr. Tanguy Gahouma-Bekale, Permanent Secretary of
the Climate Council, and Mr. Patrick Youssef, Regional
Director for Africa, International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their instructive briefings.
As long ago as 2009, the Africa Progress Panel,
chaired by the late Kofi Annan wrote,
“The evidence is clear. Climate change is a
reality that is already affecting the lives of millions
of Africans by reducing agricultural production
and food security, increasing water stress,
facilitating the spread of diseases, increasing the
risk of droughts, flooding and mass migration, as
well as by eroding coastal habitats and valuable
agricultural space through rising sea levels.
“This reality is threatening to overwhelm
fragile communities and push millions of Africans
even deeper into poverty...
“[Some] 23 African countries will face
‘a high risk of violent conflict’ when climate
change exacerbates traditional security threats. A
further 14 African countries face ‘a high risk of
political instability’”.
Since then, the international community has lost 13
years through insufficient action to reduce carbon
emissions, despite ever more stark alerts from the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
The frequency and severity of climate-related crises
seem to be rising exponentially in all corners of the
globe. The year 2022 has seen catastrophic droughts,
floods, cyclones and fires, all of which are judged to
have been made more severe by climate change. As we
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9150

speak, 22 million people are threatened with starvation
in the Horn of Africa.

in the climate-change negotiations. Why is President
Bongo Ondimba such a climate activist?

The expansion of the jihadist movement in West
Africa is a clear example of what Kofi Annan was
referring to. Climate change leading to desertification
and higher human-population densities have resulted in
increasingly stressed Peul or Fulani nomadic herders
struggling to find places for their cows to graze.
Youths in these groups are turning to protected areas,
first, perhaps, to provide increased grazing for their
cows, but subsequently as staging areas for attacks on
civilian populations, resulting in the destabilization
of governance, economic strife and armed conflict.
Often these individuals and groups started by looking
for access to natural resources, taking over areas with
weak governance, and only later become radicalized
or co-opted by Islamic interests, which use them for
their cause.

The truth is, as a rain-forest nation, we are acutely
aware that the decisions we make concerning the
development of our country have potentially stark
implications for other nations. Science tells us that
the forests of the Gabonese Republic and the Republic
of the Congo are linked by atmospheric rivers to the
much-drier Sahel region. If we cut our forests, rainfall
in the Sahel will falter, further exacerbating the issues
I referred to previously. The same relationship exists
between the forests of the eastern Congo basin and
Ethiopia. Rainfall in the Ethiopian highlands is linked
to the Congo basin rain forests. If we lose those forests,
we lose agriculture in Ethiopia, we lose the Blue
Nile, and we cause famine in Egypt. The Congo basin
forests, including Gabon, are the heart and lungs of the
African continent, pumping water, the life blood of the
continent, as far as the Mediterranean.

In March 2012, in London, His Excellency
President Ali Bongo Ondimba of Gabon, speaking at a
climate and resource security dialogue for the twentyfirst century, stated,
“Today rainfall and crops in the Sahel are
failing, the Sahara is advancing to the south, and
Lake Chad, which is receding fast, will soon be
little more than a distant memory. Will this be the
source of the next mass movement of environmental
refugees, leading to the destabilization of countries
further south, such as my own? Will it lead to wars
for access to scarce resources? Let us be clear — it
will. As will poverty.
“The resources over which we fight in the
future will not be oil, gold and diamonds: the wars
of the future will be fought over water, food and
land. They will be fought because of the pressures
exerted by a growing body of [humankind] on the
natural world that sustains all of us and whose
balance has been destabilized by the activities of
one species — man.”
Some 10 to 15 years on, have we made any significant
progress to avoid the future that Kofi Annan and
President Bongo Ondimba warned us about?
Some Council members might ask why the
Gabonese Republic, 88 per cent of whose surface area
is covered by tropical rain forests with abundant fresh
water, and which is arguably one of the most naturally
climate-resilient countries in Africa, is so engaged

Furthermore, the Congo basin forests store the
equivalent of almost 10 years of global carbon emissions
in their vegetation and soils. Therefore, if we do not
keep the Congo basin forests standing, we lose the
fight to keep “1.5°C or 2°C” alive, and we are heading
to a 3°C or 4°C warmer world, which would mean it
would get up to 10°C warmer in continental Africa.
If this happens, climate refugees across the continent
will be counted in the hundreds of millions rather
than tens of millions, and the entire African continent
will be destabilized, just as Kofi Annan warned us 13
years ago.
This is not a bad Hollywood horror film. This is
real. But fortunately, an alternate future still remains
possible. If we come together as an international
community and deal decisively with climate change,
we can avoid the worst of its impacts. But if we do
not, future generations will live through a horror that
humankind has never seen.
That is why President Bongo Ondimba travels
to the four corners of the Earth to try and influence
the climate negotiations. That is why the Gabonese
Republic has scheduled today’s debate. And that is
why I am urging the Security Council to set aside the
rhetoric that we all know and understand and come
together to focus the collective energies and know-how
of the members of the Council on the threat posed by
climate change to security in Africa.

22-626357/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

(spoke in French)
The effects of climate change interact with
socioeconomic and political problems in the poorest
countries. The related process shows that there are four
key elements of risk: political instability, economic
weakness, food insecurity and large-scale migration.
Political instability makes it difficult to adapt to
the physical effects of climate change, as it becomes
difficult to manage the conflicts that arise without
violence. Economic weakness reduces the range of
opportunities for the population to earn incomes and
deprives the State of resources that allow it to meet the
needs of the population. Food insecurity challenges the
very basis of liveability in some localities where living
conditions become critical. Large-scale migration
carries a high risk of conflict because of the frightening
reactions it often provokes and the humanitarian crises
that ensue. Not long ago, the President of Gabon, His
Excellency Ali Bongo Ondimba, made a dreadful
observation about the lack of rainfall and harvests in the
Sahel, recalling that the Sahara was steadily advancing
southwards and that Lake Chad was fast receding, and
stressing that those were undeniable factors in the mass
movements of environmental refugees, which could
destabilize countries south of the Sahara.
Today many of the world’s poorest countries
and communities are therefore facing a dual
problem — climate change and violent conflicts, with
the genuine risk that climate change will result in, or
exacerbate, a tendency for violent conflicts. Those
conflicts will in turn leave communities poorer, less
resilient and less able to deal with the consequences of
climate change.
In addition to the typical conflicts that Africa has
experienced — political conflicts, identity conflicts and
conflicts over natural resources — climate change is
emerging as either a clear root cause or an aggravating
factor of conflicts in Africa. To be sceptical about the
obvious and direct link between climate change and
conflict in Africa is to be blind to the reality of what is
happening in the Sahel region, the Horn of Africa and
the Lake Chad and Great Lakes regions.
The Security Council must stop looking the other
way and recognize climate change as a factor that is
inherently fuelling political instability and crises in
many countries in Africa. In this Chamber, where the
peoples of the entire world have placed the destiny of
their security and dignity, we can no longer ignore or
8/33

12/10/2022

ponder the relentless reality, particularly clashes among
farming and pastoral communities caused by droughts
and the insecurity of water resources. The evidence is
so compelling that we can no longer wait to act. We
must collectively find solutions to the threat that is
posed not only to the African people, but to humankind
as a whole, because we must acknowledge our shared
and distinct responsibilities.
Africa is firmly committed to action through the
Africa Adaptation Initiative, of which President Ali
Bongo Ondimba is the political champion on behalf
of the African Union. The initiative focuses on three
objectives: providing Africa with reliable data to
analyse and predict climate events, mobilizing the
necessary financing and supporting the implementation
of appropriate national policies.
The international community’s response to
climate security must drive us to putting the issue of
conflict and climate change as high as possible on
the international political agenda, with innovative
initiatives to reach agreement on the importance of
adaptation, particularly in fragile States, and make
adequate financing available. We must immediately
engage in frank international cooperation at the global,
regional and local levels, prioritizing the understanding
of, and the fight against, the effects of climate change
in order to prevent violent conflicts.
The Security Council now faces its responsibilities
and has the choice between denial or scepticism, on
the one hand, and action, on the other. It goes without
saying that the outcome of denial and doubt around this
table is the slow demise of countless local communities,
an increase in food insecurity, increasing uncontrolled
migration and social tensions as a result of shrinking
living space, rising prices and expanded pools of
recruits for armed groups and terrorist organizations.
That is quite simply a wager on widespread hardship
and turmoil.
Instead, the necessary collective action should
lead us to focus in particular on five essential goals:
developing an appropriate institutional framework,
which includes adaptation to climate change as a pillar
of good governance; strengthening coordination among
the various partners and mobilizing all actors, especially
women and young people, to curb the harmful effects
of climate change on security and peace in Africa;
ensuring that national adaptation action plans reflect
the sociopolitical and economic realities of States
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9150

and the drivers of crises; developing and articulating
the linkage between peacebuilding and development
strategies and climate change adaptation; and linking
international policy frameworks, in particular the range
of different international approaches to the related
issues of peacebuilding, development, adaptation and
disaster management, while encouraging regional
cooperation on adaptation, especially between regional
organizations and the United Nations.

now included in country-specific reports and briefings.
That matters.

Let us have the courage today to see the scale of the
deprived young people who are driven by despair into
the ranks of armed and terrorist groups. Let us have
the courage to see the skeletal children who are dying
from hunger or thirst at the mercy of birds of prey in
the arid lands of the Sahel and the Horn of Africa. Let
us have the courage to exhume from the depths of the
Mediterranean the remains of young Africans whose
pained and peaceless souls lie at the bottom of that
immense cemetery of shame. Let us have the courage
to deal with such human suffering here and now, and
let us act without further delay by responding to the
climate imperative as a threat to international security.

First, we need to build climate-resilient
communities, infrastructure and livelihoods. That
can prevent tensions and avert a return to conflict.
Doing that will require a steep increase in financing
for adaptation, resilience, peacebuilding and early
warning. Norway will do its part. We will double our
climate financing and at least triple our support to
climate adaptation by 2026.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Ms. Huitfeldt (Norway): The climate crisis is rapidly
getting worse. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has warned us that nearly half of humankind
is already living in the danger zone. Let me first start
by thanking Gabon for firmly placing climate-related
security risks on the Security Council’s agenda. I would
also like to thank Ms. Pobee, Mr. Gahouma-Bekale and
Mr. Youssef for their important insights to this debate.
Climate change and environmental degradation
are drivers of instability and conflict. We know that.
In Africa, water stress, droughts and floods are hitting
communities, economies and ecosystems hard. There
is strong evidence that the impact of climate change
can drive conflict, and that it is a serious challenge to
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
That clearly makes climate and security an issue for
the Security Council. That should not be controversial.
Norway has worked to ensure that climate risks and
their peace and security impacts are reflected in
Council resolutions and statements. In the case of South
Sudan for instance, climate and security aspects are

We must also recognize that climate-related security
risks cannot be addressed through military or security
measures. Climate and security must instead be viewed
as an integral part of crisis and conflict prevention and
as an essential component in peacebuilding. Going
forward, I would like to suggest that we focus on three
key areas.

Secondly, we need to ensure meaningful
participation by those who are most affected. We must
build on local knowledge and expertise and ensure
local ownership. We must connect solutions to climate
and security challenges with other agendas that African
countries prioritize, such as women and peace and
security and youth and peace and security. One good
example of that is in the Niger, where Norwegian
and national institutions are working together to help
farmers adapt to climate change. The aim is to strengthen
food security, generate income and create new jobs for
thousands of people. But another key component of the
programme is capacity-building for women and young
people, which benefits the community as a whole.
Thirdly and finally, we must explore new
approaches to mediation and peacebuilding. As
highlighted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, environmental peacebuilding offers promising
avenues for addressing conflict risks. Dialogue on
climate and environmental issues can pave the way for
broader discussions on difficult issues and help to build
trust. We should therefore start expanding our narrative
from talking about climate and security to talking about
climate and peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on Her
Excellency Mrs. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Permanent
Representative of the United States and member of
President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by expressing our deep

22-626359/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

appreciation to Gabon and to you, Mr. Adamo, for
making climate and security a focus of your presidency
this month. Gabon has been a true leader on the issue,
which is very much appreciated by the Council and
others in the international community. I also want to
thank our briefers, who have so clearly articulated the
perils of the climate crisis and its effects on peace and
security in Africa.
I have been lucky enough to spend most of my
professional career in Africa, travelling to countries
throughout the continent. Since arriving here at the
United Nations, I have had the chance to make two
trips to Africa, one of which was with the Security
Council to the Niger, where we had an opportunity to
discuss the environmental impact of climate change
on that country and how it relates to insecurity. Every
time I return to Africa, I am struck by how much the
environment and the climate have transformed. It is
hotter and the weather has become more extreme. We
have seen large-scale droughts and floods, and like you,
Sir, we have watched Lake Chad diminish in size. We
all wonder when Lake Chad will be no more. That is not
just anecdotal; it is scientific reality. Africa is home to
17 of the world’s 20 most climate-vulnerable countries.
Here is what we know. Climate change
threatens the lives and livelihoods of millions of
Africans. It exacerbates displacement and chronic
underdevelopment in countries that are already facing
vulnerabilities in the areas of economic governance and
security. It is also a key driver of food insecurity across
the continent. Climate change means shorter growing
seasons for farmers, which means smaller annual yields.
That has reduced agricultural productivity growth by as
much as 40 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa. Devastating
droughts have wiped out precious livestock. In Somalia,
mothers talk of dead cattle that line the roads as they
walk with their children to seek relief from famine.
Some children do not make it, starving on the journey,
with their mothers forced to leave them behind. That is
unthinkable and truly unbearable.
We also know that some Member States engage in
behaviour that not only exacerbates the climate crisis
but makes it more difficult to adapt. Fish stocks are
being illegally plundered off the coasts of West and
East Africa. Rainforests, a vital natural way to combat
climate change, as we heard from the President, are
being polluted by illegal mining and deforestation.
Endangered species are poached and sold as luxury
goods abroad. Funds from those illicit practices
10/33

12/10/2022

fuel terrorist groups, causing even more instability
and harm.
Given that long list of challenges and the little
time we have to stave off climate catastrophe, climate
and security are connected and must be at the top of
the Council’s agenda. But some Council members
continue to argue that this is not the place to address
climate-induced security threats and worked to defeat
efforts last year (see S/PV.8926) by the Permanent
Representative of the Niger to recognize that in a
Council product (draft resolution S/2021/990). To be
frank, that is dumbfounding, and we really do need to
change course. Climate change is a global challenge
that requires urgent action, including by the Council.
Of course, it is a challenge that requires all of us to
advance sustainable clean policies in our own countries.
As President Biden made clear during the General
Assembly debate last month (see A/77/PV.6), the
United States is implementing a bold climate agenda.
This summer, President Biden signed into law the
single most aggressive action in our history to confront
the climate crisis. It will help our country transition to
a clean economy, and we hope that it will encourage
others to follow suit.
In the twenty-first century, that work is vital
to international peace and security, because the
consequences of climate change are key drivers of
conflict. When areas experiencing conflict or insecurity
meet dwindling food supplies and economic insecurity,
the risk of violence goes up. Droughts, floods, fires and
severe weather are making food and economic crises
even more dire and peacekeeping operations in complex
environments even more dangerous. We also know that
women and girls, and other historically marginalized
communities are disproportionately affected by climate
change and conflict. As water sources dry up, women
are forced to make longer journeys, increasing their
vulnerability to sexual and gender-based violence.
Those trends, along with rising political violence,
conflict and insecurity, leave families with impossible
choices as they struggle to put food on the table.
That is why the United States, through its Feed
the Future initiative, has committed to investing more
than $5 billion over five years to strengthen global food
security and nutrition. Sixteen of the Feed the Future
target countries are in Africa, and the initiative will
help African communities and farmers better mitigate
and adapt to scalable, sustainable, climate-smart
agricultural methods. At the same time, we are working
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

to help half a billion people in developing countries
adapt to and manage the effects of changing climate
through our President’s Emergency Plan for Adaptation
and Resilience initiative.
Here at the United Nations, we must ensure strong
coordination between humanitarian security and
climate programmes. That will help us better address
the root causes of fragility, and we look forward to the
Secretary-General’s new agenda for peace next year.
In all of that work, women must be at the centre of
all decision-making. Women are key to driving local
sustainable solutions.
We cannot wish the climate crisis away, although I
wish we could. We cannot ignore its impact on security
and prosperity in Africa, nor can we pretend that the
Security Council, which is charged with maintaining
international peace and security, is somehow not the
right forum to tackle the security issues that stem
from climate change. Today let us therefore renew our
commitment to working together, here in the Council,
across the United Nations and in our own countries, to
unlock a resilient, sustainable, clean-energy economy
that enables Africa, with its ample resources and
dynamism, to mitigate the impact of the climate crisis.
Ms. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Martha Pobee, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, Mr. Tanguy GahoumaBekale and Mr. Patrick Youssef for their very insightful
briefings. I would also like to thank you, Minister for
Foreign Affairs Michael Moussa Adamo, for convening
this very important debate and for Gabon’s leadership
on climate security and action. Your President’s call
at Africa Climate Week for innovative, concrete and
sustainable solutions led by African nations could not
be timelier, with the twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP 27) just weeks away and
the Security Council facing a deluge of security
issues worsened by climate change. Your statement,
Mr. President, starkly highlights the link between
climate change and peace and security, and the Security
Council has discussed that nexus since 2007. You, Sir,
are also right that it has failed thus far to address it,
as Ms. Linda Thomas-Greenfield has so eloquently
outlined for us this morning.
In the intervening period, the list of countries
and regions destabilized by unprecedented droughts,
heatwaves, floods and other extreme weather events

S/PV.9150

has grown exponentially since 2007. North, West,
East and Southern Africa all feature aspects of climate
stress manifested in humanitarian and security crises.
As the Secretary-General mentioned in this Chamber
yesterday (see S/PV.9149), the fact that Africa has
contributed so little to the cause of climate change yet
suffers so significantly from its impacts is a textbook
example of moral and economic injustice. Moreover,
climate finance flows to African countries account for
only 4 per cent of the global total — a stark deficiency.
Many African countries, notably the most fragile,
receive less than $2 per capita of climate finance. That
is 80 times less than other developing countries, which
already receive insufficient climate finance.
While there may not be agreement within the
Security Council yet on a framework to address the
links between climate change and security, we can
all acknowledge the urgency and wisdom of raising
investments to prevent climate impacts from escalating
into security situations. The United Arab Emirates
believes there is significant potential for the Council
and other United Nations organs to take practical steps
in partnership with national Governments to make a
real difference for the prosperity and security of frontline communities.
In that context, I would like to highlight three areas
of action for this year.
First, climate finance for fragile countries in
Africa must sharply increase. The commitment at the
twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to
double climate finance for adaptation is a much-needed
step forward. But we would like to see additional
commitments by climate finance providers made at COP
27 and across other forums to eliminate the gap in their
investments in fragile settings, without withdrawing
financing from other developing countries. African
countries and regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States, have already done the hard
work of identifying the priority investments, from
food and water resilience to early warning systems. We
commend the COP 27 presidency’s Climate Responses
for Sustaining Peace initiative to drive progress on that
front and match funds with African-led solutions.
Secondly, anticipatory action must be a priority.
Many climate impacts on security are now highly
predictable. Studies by the Office for the Coordination

22-6263511/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

12/10/2022

of Humanitarian Affairs and the Central Emergency
Response Fund indicate that twice as many people
can be served at the same cost when resources are
dispatched in advance on the basis of locally approved,
scientifically credible forecasts. The Council should
send a clear signal on the security value of expediting
such processes and help shift the institutional mindset
from reaction to prevention.

our firm engagement to the multilateral climate
change regime. Climate change is definitely one of
the greatest challenges of our time and thus requires
an effective response of the international community,
based on the best available scientific knowledge and
on the principles underscored in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and its Paris Agreement.

Thirdly, regarding data, the Council needs more
systematic and standardized reporting on climate
security risks. Such analysis should be impartial,
rigorous and focused on presenting the Council with
recommendations on how to react to security threats.
We appreciate the work of the Climate Security
Mechanism in that regard and the growing number
of climate security experts embedded with peace
missions and institutions in Africa. That number should
increase. We encourage further emphasis on analysis
and reporting by the United Nations system, especially
through collaboration with African regional bodies.

Earlier this year, the release of the contribution of
Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change presented
us with a worrisome picture of climate change impacts
and risks around the world, including in Africa.
According to that “atlas of human suffering” — to
quote the already famous sentence of Secretary-General
António Guterres — while Africa is among the regions
least responsible for global greenhouse-gas emissions, it
is disproportionately affected, both in terms of exposure
to its negative impacts and of vulnerability to its risks.
Climate change is already causing substantial damage
and increasingly irreversible losses, particularly in
developing countries.

Climate change is a defining challenge of our
era. Next month’s COP 27 is a key opportunity to
rebalance the global conversation and focus on
investment in African countries, especially fragile
communities. As the incoming President of the twentyeighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the United
Arab Emirates commits to ambitious climate action,
with a special focus on addressing fragility to further
our commitment to empowering the global South.
African stakeholders did not create the problem of
climate change. But time and again, African countries
have shown leadership to develop the strategies to
combat climate security risks and be part of the solution.
The rest of the world needs to listen and respond to their
proposed solutions, working with them accordingly.
A Gabonese proverb states that he who asks
questions cannot avoid the answers. Africa has
answered, and the Council should listen.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative of convening
this meeting and providing us with the opportunity to
debate this important subject. Allow me also to thank
the briefers for their remarks and insights on the matter.
Let me begin by stressing Brazil`s commitment
to addressing the root causes of climate change and
its adverse impacts on all our societies, as well as
12/33

In that sense, much progress is needed within
the context of the multilateral climate change regime
regarding adaptation and loss and damage, as well
as on addressing major financing and other means of
implementation gaps and shortcomings. Brazil believes
that the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP 27), to take place in the coming weeks in
Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, will be a great opportunity to
strengthen UNFCCC action in that regard.
We are gathered in this Chamber today, however,
for a debate within the context of the Security Council.
This exceptional circumstance requires us to present a
number of very important, critical considerations.
At this stage, it is safe to assume that it has
already become clear that the question of potential
linkages between climate change and peace and
security is absolutely divisive and controversial within
the Council. We need to overcome this situation. We
will only manage to do so if we have absolute clarity
regarding the Security Council’s role and functions.
Let me reiterate Brazil’s position on this matter: the
Security Council is not the adequate forum in which
to address climate change. We need to preserve the
primary responsibilities, mandates and tools of the
Security Council and to avoid a duplication of work.
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

While the adverse effects of climate change are a matter
of great concern and, accordingly, must remain among
the priorities of the international community, climate
change is not in itself a direct cause of armed conflicts,
as highlighted by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa, nor does it constitute a direct threat to peace
and security in the sense underscored in the Charter of
the United Nations.
Under certain circumstances though, the negative
effects of climate change may indirectly increase the
risk of conflicts and exacerbate humanitarian crises,
particularly in contexts where climate hazards interact
with high vulnerability. Those vulnerabilities, however,
are fundamentally rooted in socioeconomic development
factors and political governance constraints.
While performing its functions in peacekeeping
missions, the Security Council may be effective on
the ground by contributing to support efforts of host
countries, at their request, to increase local resilience
and build capacities, particularly regarding the
monitoring of natural disasters and early-warning
systems. That does not imply, however, that the Security
Council has, or should have, a mandate to thematically
address climate change. Neither would it be appropriate
to suggest any automatic or direct linkage between
climate change and conflicts.
This year we celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of
the UNFCCC. It is a more-than-opportune moment for
all of us to renew our commitment to work together and
to reiterate the Convention’s centrality as the primary
international framework for addressing climate
change. Brazil remains convinced that the principles
enshrined in the UNFCCC, as well as the provisions
underscored in its Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
remain essential to ensure the unity of the international
community in addressing climate change — now and in
the years to come.
As I already had the opportunity to stress on
previous occasions, what is needed most are concrete
steps towards new, additional and enhanced means of
implementation for developing countries, including
financing, technology transfer and capacity-building.
Proper forums, tools and mechanisms for mobilizing
and providing those resources already exist within the
UNFCCC and the wider United Nations system, and
none of them require the direct involvement of the
Security Council.

S/PV.9150

In addition, we must recall the need to remain
committed to addressing the root causes of climate
change, including by not backtracking in the transition
towards low-emission energy systems. The recent
movements of some developed countries that now seem
to be turning to dirty sources of energy are particularly
alarming in that context, inasmuch as they move us
away from the much-needed steadfast progress in
reducing fossil-fuel burning globally.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I wish to begin by thanking
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon for convening
this high-level debate on climate and security in Africa
and for his statement. We welcome the statements of
Assistant Secretary-General Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee
and Mr. Tanguy Gahouma-Bekale, former Chair of the
African Group of Negotiators on Climate Change. We
also thank Mr. Patrick Youssef, Regional Director for
Africa of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), for his additional perspective.
As a member of the Group of Friends on Climate
and Security, we associate ourselves with the statement
to be read out by the representative of Germany on
behalf of the Group.
The contention on the question of climate and
security is one that, we believe, has to yield to emerging
knowledge of the firm link between the two. As we see
from the field, especially on the African continent,
the two crises interact. In the Lake Chad region, for
instance, where the lake has contracted by more than
90 per cent from its 1960 size, we are witnessing the
threat-multiplier effect of climate change for peace
and security, including on food and water insecurity,
loss of livelihoods, climate-induced displacement and
exacerbating vulnerabilities, tensions and conflict.
Also, in a 2020 study, the ICRC confirmed what was
repeated here today — that of the 25 countries deemed
most vulnerable to climate change, 14 were in conflict.
Moreover, more than half of the ongoing United Nations
peace operations are in countries with the highest
exposure to the effects of climate change.
Therefore, while there may not be a harmonized
view over the degree to which climate change leads
to insecurity or whether, in situations of conflict,
climate-change hazards are reinforced, we cannot
continue to be in disagreement over the notion that,
in seeking to resolve conflicts, climate risks, where
relevant, have to be tackled as part of the peace efforts.

22-6263513/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

12/10/2022

As we confront a worsening ecological threat to the
continent of Africa and its impact on social and political
instability, we must harness available instruments,
such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the African Union
Climate Change and Resilient Development Strategy
and Action Plan (2022-2032), in order to weaken the
link between the two crises and abate its escalation
into violence.

early-warning systems and data-analysis capacities,
which are critical for regional preventive action. In that
regard, we note the international support for the Africa
Multi-hazard Early Warning and Early Action Systems
Situation Room for disaster risk reduction and believe
that its further strengthening could aid in building
capacities to forecast and proactively act on threats and
develop resilience to climate-related security risks on
the continent.

African States contribute the least to increases in
global greenhouse-gas emissions, yet they bear the
greatest consequences of climate change. The twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, to
be held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, should therefore
be a different Conference of the Parties — one where
commitments made are translated into action. That
would be, in our view, a real commitment to breaking
the link between the climate and security nexus on the
African continent.

Thirdly, the Council must enhance its collaborative
arrangements with relevant United Nations entities
in the peacebuilding sector doing commendable
work through interventions aimed at addressing
climate-related security threats. We are told that,
since 2017, the Peacebuilding Fund has allocated
$63.4 million to climate security-related projects in
countries on the Council’s agenda. It is important that
we support the Fund in order to enable it to continue
on that trajectory, while also encouraging synergies
between such interventions and the overall approach
to maintaining sustainable peace. In its collaboration
with the peacebuilding arm of the United Nations,
the Council should also sustain the whole-of-society
approach, while paying attention to vulnerable groups
such as women and young people in the process.

In furtherance of the climate and security agenda,
we will share three main points.
First, the Security Council should not be prevented
from dealing with relevant aspects of the climate
question. As we explained earlier, there is a sufficient
link between the climate and security crises, and
the Council, as the primary organ for maintaining
international peace and security, must embrace climate
action in the resolution of conflicts where it is relevant
and/or useful to do so. That is not to suggest that
Security Council should engage in norm-setting for
climate action, but rather that it should not be made
to shy away from applying norms universally agreed
under the UNFCCC.
We therefore encourage the Council to continue
with the existing practice of including language
relating to climate security in country situations
and
peacekeeping-mission
resolutions,
where
necessary. That practice has led to the creation of an
Environmental Security Adviser position in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. Also, the
inclusion of the climate-security nexus in regionalized
mandates, such as that of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, should be extended to other
applicable missions in the light of the reality of the
issue in the region and the continent at large.
Secondly, in dealing with the climate and security
agenda, the Council should encourage the strengthening
of the capacity of regional and national actors to enhance
14/33

I cannot conclude without mentioning the burning
issue of climate financing. While the countries of
Africa require about $2.8 trillion for the period
2020 to 2030 in order to implement their nationally
determined contributions under the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change, the annual climate financing flows
in Africa is reported as being less than 5 per cent of
global climate financing. It is therefore important for
the international community and donor partners to
increase climate-financing support in order to help
the continent to adapt and to address the menace in a
sustainable manner. Ghana believes that climate-related
security risks are evident in Africa and require total
commitment at the national, regional and international
levels to effectively build resilience in addressing the
situation on the continent.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Gabon for organizing today’s
debate. I also thank Ms. Pobee, Mr. Gahouma-Bekale
and Mr. Youssef for their briefings. I would like to
emphasize three points.
First, combating climate change also means fighting
for international peace and security. The effects of
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

climate change are already being felt everywhere.
Global warming has worsened access to natural
resources, heightened food shortages and made water
resources even more scarce. In Africa, increasingly
extreme and frequent climate crises are exacerbating
conflicts. Climate insecurity is enabling terrorist and
armed groups to exploit people’s frustrations. We must
therefore create a virtuous circle of socioeconomic
development and action in favour of the climate and
biodiversity, and the participation of local populations
is essential to that. That is the purpose of the Great
Green Wall project in the Sahel, a flagship programme
to combat the effects of climate change, desertification,
food insecurity and poverty from Senegal to Djibouti
for which France has helped to mobilize €16 billion.
That is also the objective of the Climate Risk and Early
Warning Systems initiative launched at the twentyfirst Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 21),
with the aim of better alerting populations to dangerous
climate events.
Secondly, the Security Council must fully assume
its responsibilities in addressing climate-change related
threats. It must be able to better assess, anticipate and
prevent the impact of climate change on international
peace and security and to draw conclusions from it.
France would like to make three suggestions to that end.
First, the Secretary-General should prepare
biannual reports for the Council on the consequences
of climate change for international peace and security.
Secondly, recommendations should be developed
for targeted actions in risk areas. Thirdly, the United
Nations should appoint a Special Envoy for climate
security in order to unite the action of the international
community. We also call for strengthening the Climate
Security Mechanism, whose aim is to enable the
consideration of the impact of climate change when
peace and security issues are being addressed.
Finally, as we await the convening of COP 27 in
Sharm El-Sheikh in a few days, it is clear that the cost
of inaction is weighing more heavily on our societies
with each passing day. France calls on each State to
make ambitious, firm and sustainable commitments
that are commensurate with what is at stake and
benefit the populations that are the most vulnerable to
climate shocks. The Council can count on France’s full
engagement in all circumstances.

S/PV.9150

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Gabon for convening today’s debate
and the briefers for the information they provided us.
As we have heard, the adverse effects of climate
change are having a substantial impact on conflicts
in Africa. Mexico believes that the Security Council
should systematically consider how the effects of
climate change are undermining efforts to prevent and
address threats to international peace and security.
The reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change show that climate change has led to greater
food insecurity and increased displacement, thereby
worsening tensions. It has also hampered our actions
to reduce poverty and to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. Droughts, floods and the
desertification process can leave entire populations
without means of subsistence, thereby increasing
their vulnerability. Women, girls and boys, as well as
other vulnerable groups, are often disproportionately
affected by those climate shocks.
In 2021, South Sudan experienced the worst
flooding in 60 years, leading to massive displacement,
exacerbating the humanitarian situation and limiting
the scope of operations of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. Intercommunal conflicts over access to
increasingly scarce natural resources have intensified in
the Sahel. Meanwhile, in Somalia, which is witnessing
the worst drought in four decades, extremist groups are
exploiting the climate crisis as a way to spread their
influence. In that context, we would like to underline
the valuable contribution of the Climate Security
and Environmental Adviser to Somalia of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia.
While climate change is affecting every region
of the planet, the countries with the smallest carbon
footprint, including most of the African States on
the Council’s agenda, are paying an exorbitant price.
Adequate financing for implementing adaptation and
mitigation measures is therefore essential in order to
prevent the adverse effects of climate change from
exacerbating conflicts. We call on developed countries
to fulfil their commitments in that regard, particularly
their pledge to provide $100 billion per year to support
climate action in developing countries, as well as
to increase funding for adaptation to $40 billion by
2025, as agreed in Glasgow during the twenty-sixth
Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.

22-6263515/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

12/10/2022

My country, Mexico, believes that it is essential
to improve the United Nations comprehensive risk
assessments in order to take into account the adverse
effects of climate change. The Climate Security
Mechanism is already doing important work in that area,
and the Security Council could therefore incorporate
the data it has generated into its considerations. That
would enable the Council to take preventive action
to avert or mitigate humanitarian catastrophes in
situations where imminent risks to international
peace and security are identified. We believe that
such an approach would help the Council contribute
to strengthening the African Union’s Agenda 2063, an
instrument, we would like to point out, that explicitly
includes the climate and security nexus, in a reflection
of the continent’s priorities.

among world leaders was muted. In November, at the
twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP 26), in Glasgow, industrialized countries
mostly waxed lyrical in front of cameras and then
limited action during negotiations. The result was a
limp outcome, and a kicking of the can down the road.

Today’s debate has made it clear how climate change
can increase threats to international peace and security.
For that reason, Mexico will continue to support the
Council’s efforts to incorporate the specific effects of
climate change into strategies for conflict prevention
and management.

The energy-supply gaps in Europe resulting from
the war in Ukraine have led to a mass return to its
exploitation of fossil fuels. These are the fossil fuels
that many European and Western Governments insisted
not be developed in Africa during negotiations in
Glasgow, despite the fact that they are still the heaviest
consumers and are responsible for the overwhelming
amount of greenhouse-gas emissions.

Finally, we know that resistance from within the
Council is still significant. That was evident last year,
when a draft resolution (S/2021/990) on this subject
faced opposition from some delegations and was
unfortunately vetoed (see S/PV.8926). We call on all
members of the Council to listen to the voices of African
countries in conflict situations, which are in agreement
that the adverse effects of climate change are a catalyst
for threats to international peace and security.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Mrs. Martha Pobee,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Mr. Tanguy
Gahouma-Bekale, Permanent Secretary of the Climate
Council and Former Chair of the African Group of
Negotiators on Climate Change, and Mr. Patrick Youssef,
Regional Director for Africa of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their briefings.
I have a prediction. In time, we shall all agree about
the vital link between responding to the climate crisis
and the protection of international peace and security.
The question is how much suffering there will have to
be — and by how many millions — before we all reach
that agreement.
In August 2021, the Secretary-General, referring to
a just-released report by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, called the report a “code red for
humanity”. Unfortunately, the expected sense of alarm
16/33

In December 2021, a draft resolution on climate
and security was proposed to the Security Council
(S/2021/990). Despite earning sufficient votes, and
strong support by Member States, it was vetoed by a
permanent member of the Council (see S/PV.8926).
In the year since, the response to what is still named
“climate change”, but that billions experience as a
climate crisis, has only worsened.

To make the double standard even more glaring,
Africa suffers from tremendous deficits in energy,
which is a major factor in its disproportionate poverty
and underdevelopment. Even the fact that closing the
energy deficit for Africa and the continent’s rapid
development are key to its climate-change adaptation
was resisted in Glasgow.
Meanwhile, the climate crisis is manifesting more
destructively in our daily lives. For every heatwave
in a wealthy city, there are biblical floods elsewhere.
And multi-year droughts in such regions as the Horn of
Africa are leading to extreme food insecurity and the
reversal of years of development gains.
This sad litany of short-sighted manoeuvring,
resistance to responsibility and double standards is
where we find ourselves today. It is important that we
establish our precise situation to better debate where
we go from here.
It should now be clear that the key institutions in
global governance are not fit for purpose in advancing
peace, climate justice, pandemic responses and
inclusion. They respond to the crises of the richest
and most powerful while standing on the sidelines for
the rest. From the response to coronavirus disease to
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

climate emergencies, and even combatting Al-Qaida
terrorist groups in Africa, the shortcomings are glaring.
They are deadly. They sap hope in institutions and in
the future that they promise.
To repeat our old arguments is to expect that they
were not heard or that they have been forgotten. But
they have not. The bulk of the public and experts all over
the world, especially in the industrialized countries, are
calling for bold action. We must therefore return to the
insistence that without reforms in the global system,
humankind’s well-being and international peace and
security will be imperilled.
For the sake of today’s debate, and despite the
failings of the past, it is important that we offer a way
forward. To that end, we have five recommendations.
Our first recommendation is that Charter-level
reforms of the United Nations, the Bretton Woods
institutions and the Group of 20 (G-20) are overdue.
Responding to this demand by labelling it wishful
thinking is tantamount to announcing the system’s
irrelevance. It invites, almost inevitably, the emergence
of parallel, and probably conflicting, geopolitical orders.
Let us bring balance to the permanent membership
of the Security Council through the addition not only of
great Powers but of States that can best represent the voice
of the most climate-change-affected and developing
countries. Let us have prompt action by the Resilience
and Sustainability Trust, which is administered by the
International Monetary Fund, in equitably reallocating
the $650 billion in special drawing rights for global
public policy, and in particular for climate adaptation.
Let us see the African Union with a permanent seat at
the G-20.
Secondly, let us understand and act on the fact that
Africa is a natural-capital superpower that holds the key
to the global transition to green. We are not just victims
of the climate crisis; we are the mineral-sourcing key
to its global solutions. It is time that African countries
and regional organizations acted on this knowledge and
claimed our natural resources for our people, captured
more of their value and ensured stable democratic
political systems that can resist external exploitation.
The imperative to protect Africa’s natural wealth is a
global priority to the extent that it should be one of the
drivers of global reform.
Our third recommendation is to remove the barriers
to a high-energy future for all countries, particularly

S/PV.9150

those in Africa. Industry, commerce, jobs and inclusive
growth are powered by energy. Not having that energy
consigns billions to grinding poverty, heightened
security threats and unstable political life. The
transition from a low-energy to a high-energy country
must be as green as possible and be aided by adequate
technology transfer and investment.
Kenya has committed to a 100 per cent use of
renewables for electricity by 2030. We are at 90 per cent
today. To get to 100 per cent renewables for total energy
generation as we rapidly grow our manufacturing
sector and industrialize, major equity investment and
technology are urgently required. The bottom line is
that climate-change mitigation and adaptation cannot
be on the backs of the poorest, and we hope that such
views will not be brought forward at the negotiating
table next month in Egypt.
Fourthly, we need immediate action on the ground.
The link between extreme-weather events — the
majority caused by climate change — and conflicts
within the purview of the Council is undeniable. It
is equally clear that climate-change adaptation is the
most peace-positive undertaking in such regions as the
Sahel and the Horn of Africa. It is critical that a surge
in investments into these regions be made for the sake
of sustained peace and security.
Fifthly and finally, the Security Council cannot
remain on the sidelines when major threats to regional
and international peace and security are made much
worse by climate crises. Let us attempt to deliver a
resolution that leads to pragmatic actions that further
the security of communities in conflict areas within the
purview of the Security Council. That resolution could
promote the requirement that peacekeeping missions
have tactical, operational and strategic environmental
planning based on meeting mandate objectives and
desired end-states. It could encourage the consideration
of environmental initiatives in improving communitymission relations, preserving and protecting critical
environmental infrastructure, and increasing the impact
on mission transition and longer-term reconstruction.
We know what needs to be done. It is now for
those with the urgency, the responsibility and, most
importantly, the vision to do it. Kenya will walk with
all States and institutions that are ready to act.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): At the outset, I take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for holding

22-6263517/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

12/10/2022

today’s debate. I also thank Mrs. Pobee, Mr. GahoumaBekale and Mr. Youssef for their briefings.

deliberate utilization, instead of mindless and destructive
consumption, to protect and preserve the environment.

Representatives will perhaps agree with me that
the maximum impact of the climate crisis is being
borne by the poorest countries and the most vulnerable
communities, which have contributed the least to the
climate crisis; they also lack the financing, technology
and capacity to significantly alter the status quo. That
is more evident in Africa than on any other continent.
Africa and the countries in the global South have
suffered not only due to colonialism in the past, but also
in terms of the exploitation of natural resources that
fuelled the economic progress, industrial revolution
and scientific advancement of the Western world. Any
discussion on climate change cannot do justice by
ignoring that basic historic truth.

India’s experience may be relevant in the African
context as it embarks on its own energy transitions.
The International Solar Alliance, spearheaded jointly
by India and France, is an important platform, which
has a majority of African countries as members
and has promoted the rapid deployment of clean
energy technologies. In recent years, clean and green
energy have increasingly driven India’s development
programmes in Africa and beyond. On the specific
issue of climate and security, allow me to make the
following three points.

The deep bonds of solidarity between India and
Africa represent a defining partnership of the global
South, one that has been forged over several decades,
strengthened by long-standing trade and diaspora
linkages, shared struggles against colonialism and
common development challenges. Today that partnership
is anchored on supporting the efforts of African States
in their pursuit of comprehensive socioeconomic
development, always guided by Africa’s own priorities.
Since 2015, India has extended concessional loans
worth more than $12.3 billion to various projects
in Africa. We completed 197 important projects,
and we are currently executing 65 projects, while 81
projects are being positively considered. Significant
development projects, such as drinking-water schemes
to irrigation, rural solar electrification, power plants,
transmission lines, cement, sugar and textile factories,
technology parks, railway infrastructure, et cetera, have
contributed towards the socioeconomic development
of Africa. India remains committed to its partnership
with Africa in its journey towards the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals and Africa’s Agenda
2063.
India is second to none when it comes to
climate action. Our Prime Minister made ambitious
commitments at the twenty-sixth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP26) in Glasgow over and
above the commitments made earlier. On the sidelines
of COP26, the Indian Prime Minister also introduced
Mission LiFE — Lifestyle For Environment — as an
international mass movement towards mindful and
18/33

First, India has consistently held a principled
position on attempts to securitize climate change.
Linking climate change to security would only
intensify the historical injustice towards developing
countries, which are already at the receiving end of
the environmental crisis. We are committed to climate
action and climate justice, and we consider climate
justice to be integral to the discourse on climate action.
Secondly, we recognize the fact that climate change
may have aggravated existing instability in certain
parts of Africa. But the oversimplification of causes of
conflict will not help in resolving them; worse, it can be
misleading. Morphing localized law and order situations
into international peace and security issues only serves
to distort the narrative on climate change. Moreover,
there is no common, widely accepted methodology for
assessing the links among climate change, conflict and
fragility, as they are highly context-specific.
Even the latest report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change states that non-climatic
factors are the dominant drivers of existing intra-State
violent conflicts, and, while in some assessed regions,
extreme weather and climate events have had a small,
adverse impact on their length, severity or frequency,
the statistical association is weak. The same report
mentions that violent conflicts in the near term will be
driven by socioeconomic conditions and governance
more than by climate change.
Thirdly, we reiterate the pre-eminence of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) as the forum for addressing
climate change and attendant issues. The United
Nations-led UNFCCC, which has a near-universal
membership, has been the main driver over the years
to take us all collectively forward, guided by principles
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

and provisions agreed to by all. It is because of those
principles and provisions that the fight against climate
change has been meaningful. It represents a balanced,
global, democratic effort, where there are concrete
commitments from developed countries, as well as
the genuine requirements of developing countries,
as reflected in nationally determined contributions
(NDCs) based on certain fundamental principles,
foremost among which is common but differentiated
responsibility and respective capability. India
announced its updated NDCs after COP26.
That being the case, India will continue to oppose
any attempt to take climate change out of the UNFCCC
and discuss it separately without such principles and
provisions. That is precisely why we do not subscribe to
the Security Council as a place to discuss this issue. In
fact, we view that as an attempt to evade responsibility
under the UNFCCC and divert the world’s attention
from an unwillingness to deliver where it counts.
It is indeed regrettable that developed countries
have fallen short of their promises, not just on
mitigation and adaptation, but also on providing access
to climate financing and technologies. Consequently, to
us, the attempt to link climate with security seeks to
obfuscate the lack of progress on critical issues under
the UNFCCC.
Affordable access to climate financing and
technologies is critical to moving forward on climate
action. Developed countries must provide climate
financing of $1 trillion at the earliest. As per UNFCCC
provisions, climate financing has to be new, additional
and climate-specific, not just diverted from existing
levels of overseas development assistance towards
climate financing. That problematic clubbing of
development financing with climate financing is
pushing developing countries into more debt.
In recent years, we have collectively made significant
progress, with enhanced climate commitments and
momentum for accelerated actions. But the years ahead
will be critical for concrete deliverables. In that vein,
we look forward to COP27, to be held in Sharm ElSheikh, to usher us into action.
India will always support real climate action
and serious climate justice. We will always speak up
for the interests of the developing world, including
Africa. We will do that at the place it deserves — the
UNFCCC. We hope that the deliberations at today’s
meeting will provide valuable inputs for rendering

S/PV.9150

the climate change debate more inclusive, more
just and more action-oriented, as well as for making
developed countries deliver on their climate financing
commitments, including for Africa.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for focusing our attention on the critical
link between climate change and security. I also extend
my delegation’s gratitude to Ms. Pobee, Mr. GahoumaBekale and Mr. Youssef for their insights.
We have said it before, and we will not tire of
reiterating, that our definition of security must include
the threat posed by climate change for the Security
Council to devise appropriate security policies and
prevent a catastrophic end to life on Earth as we know it.
Indeed, climate change is a code red for humankind.
No one is spared or immune in any nation and continent
on our planet, our only home. The growing climate crisis
drives insecurity and conflict, especially in Africa. We
cannot deny the reality that we face. Climate change
exacerbates and prolongs instability and insecurity
in countries already ravaged by violent conflicts and
economic hardship.
Climate change increases competition for basic
resources, such as water and arable land, escalates
communal violence and undermines the stability and
institutions necessary to provide for public goods. In
Somalia, for instance, clan-related conflicts are mainly
recorded in areas in which pastoralist communities
reside, owing to competition for scarce resources such
as water and pasture, or in areas in which farmers clash
with nomads over farmland.
Climate change is also creating a breeding ground
for the further exploitation of the most vulnerable.
Terrorist organizations take advantage of the hardship
caused by climate change, target critical infrastructure
and humanitarian partners and recruit new members.
Albania remains deeply concerned about the continued
ability of terrorist groups in Africa to restrict relief and
humanitarian assistance to those in need. They falsely
present themselves as a credible solution to mitigate the
impact of climate disasters — this could not be further
from the truth.
To tackle climate change, a global, integrated
response is needed. We believe that response must
include the following four elements.
First, we must honour our pledge to keep global
warming under the 1.5°C limit. Time is running out.

22-6263519/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

Each of us must go the extra mile and step up efforts to
meet our commitments.
Secondly, we must turn promises into actions. We
need to enact supporting measures to build resilience
and foster adaptation. Promises must be upheld to
finance assistance to the most affected populations and
invest in key country-led adaptation programmes, such
as the Africa Adaptation Acceleration Programme. A
clear road map on when and how financial commitments
are honoured must be outlined at the twenty-seventh
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Thirdly, Albania strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call at the opening of the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly (see A/77/PV.4) for
every person, community and nation to have access
to effective early warning systems within the next
five years. Currently, only 40 per cent of the African
population has access to early warning systems to
protect them against extreme weather and climate
change impacts. Such systems save lives and livelihoods,
especially in drought-affected African States.
Fourthly and finally, we must take into account the
devastating consequences of climate change on women
and children. Climate change intensifies the risk of
gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and abuse
in internally displaced persons camps and hampers
children’s access to education. Efforts to mitigate
climate change crises must focus on protecting the
most vulnerable people and communities by promoting
inclusive governance and encouraging the full and
meaningful participation of all communities, women,
young people and civil society.
Allow me to end with the Secretary-General’s
words on United Nations Day 2018:
“Climate change is moving faster than we are,
but we do not give up because we know that climate
action is the only path.”
Four years later, we are still lagging behind,
while climate change is accelerating. We need robust
collective action now, before it is too late.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Gabon for convening
this very important debate in the Council today. We
believe it is very important the Council continue to
progress in its work on climate and security. I also
thank our briefers — Ms. Pobee, Mr. Gahouma-Bekale
and Mr. Youssef — for their very valuable insights.
20/33

12/10/2022

Climate change is one of the defining challenges of
our time. Its consequences are severe, multifaceted and
global. We share the view of our Kenyan colleagues in
that history will judge the Council harshly if we fail
to address this issue. We are not asking the Security
Council to address or tackle climate change, which we
believe should rightly be addressed through the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). We do, however, believe that the Council
should analyse and understand the effects of climate
change on peace and security.
At the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties
to the UNFCCC in Egypt, Member States must
increase their ambitions to urgently deliver on the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. We must make progress
on the commitments made at twenty-sixth Conference
of the Parties to the UNFCCC on climate finance and
on loss and damage. We must work to help those who
are least prepared to face the damaging effects of
climate change.
The impacts of climate change threaten lives and
livelihoods, drive displacement and contribute to
conflict and insecurity. That disproportionately affects
women and girls, people living with disabilities and
marginalized groups, and African countries continue
to bear the disproportionate consequences. Across the
continent, from the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin to
the Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes region, the
impacts of climate change have increased competition
over scarce resources. They have heightened risks and
tensions and contribute to conflict and fragility in
regions in which people are already in humanitarian
need and have limited capacity to cope.
Climate change is an exacerbating factor in
armed conflict. Non-State armed groups and terrorist
organizations have exploited those in vulnerable and
precarious conditions for recruitment purposes. Climate
change is also increasingly recognized as the most
consequential threat multiplier for women and girls.
The need for action is clear, and the time to act is
now. Both the European Union and the African Union
have recognized the link between climate change and
instability. Despite our failure to adopt a much-needed
draft resolution (S/2021/990) on the issue last year,
the Security Council has increasingly incorporated
climate-related security risks into its peacekeeping
mandates. But we believe more can be done to
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

build climate-resilient systems that support peace
and stability.
While, naturally, we were disappointed with the
outcome of December’s vote on the draft resolution on
climate and security (see S/PV.8926), it is clear that
there is huge support for the agenda from all across the
United Nations. Yesterday, in Berlin, Ireland joined a
number of countries, including some around this table,
in launching the Climate for Peace initiative. Ireland
remains determined to advance that work. We will do
so with other ambitious countries and those affected by
the climate crisis during our Council term and beyond.
The Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security
allows Council members to discuss the research and
evidence on climate-related security risks, which in
turn informs the Council’s work. Ireland served, with
the Niger, as co-Chair of the Group in 2021, and we
fully support Kenya and Norway’s leadership this
year. Ireland is supporting the placement of a climate
security advisor in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan through the Climate Security Mechanism. The
Mechanism’s efforts to integrate climate and security
analysis and action into the work of the United Nations
system is essential, as it can help communities to deal
with the impacts of climate change, reduce risks and
promote peace and inclusion.

S/PV.9150

The United Kingdom sees an undeniable link
between climate, nature, peace and security in Africa
and around the world. We were the first to bring climate
security to the Council in 2007 and hosted the first
leader-level debate in 2019. We therefore welcome
continued African leadership on the issue under Gabon’s
presidency and regret that the draft resolution tabled by
the Niger and Ireland in December (S/2021/990) was
blocked by a single veto.
As the Secretary-General has advised the Council
many times before, the impacts of climate change
multiply the threats faced by vulnerable populations.
We are seeing that play out in the drought in East
Africa and changes in rainfall across the Sahel.
Climate change is exacerbating pre-existing drivers
of insecurity, pushing those regions into humanitarian
crisis. Increased competition for water and land, along
with biodiversity loss and migration, is risking conflict,
food insecurity and lives. The Security Council can
help ensure the United Nations system has the mandates
and capacities to integrate climate into its analysis and
response to the drivers of conflict and fragility.

The international community is starting to realize
that the need to address the climate crisis is urgent.
We are grappling with its impacts on people and on
communities in every region and in every country.
Our responses must be comprehensive while being
responsive to particular contexts. We therefore believe
that today’s debate can contribute to that, if it can
build momentum towards the deeper and meaningful
integration of climate-related security risks in the work
of the Security Council.

The United Kingdom is clear that it must accelerate
climate action, deliver on the Glasgow Climate Pact
agreed last year and meet financing commitments
to build resilience. We are working to achieve that
in a number of ways. The United Kingdom made 10
commitments to Africa at the twenty-sixth Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP 26) and has
started delivering on them. In January, we announced
$23 million to support 1 million people in drought and
flood-affected areas in Somalia, Ethiopia, Kenya and
South Sudan. Under the African Union Green Recovery
Action Plan, the United Kingdom has funded experts in
the African Union Commission and enhanced capacity
to implement climate action plans across the continent.
The United Kingdom has committed £100 million to
the Taskforce on Access to Climate Finance, part
of which established a new climate finance unit in
Uganda’s Ministry of Finance. And we have committed
to doubling our international climate finance to at least
£11.6 billion up to 2026, balanced between mitigation
and adaptation. We are also taking responsibility for our
country’s impact on climate change, as the first major
economy to commit to reducing all greenhouse-gas
emissions to net zero by 2050.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking all of our briefers for their presentations today.

Collectively, we cannot allow any rollback from
the commitments made in the Paris Agreement on

In Dakar in April, alongside Ghana, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
Economic Community of West African States, Ireland
co-hosted the regional conference on climate change,
peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel. The
conference’s call to action recognizes the threat that
climate change poses to the peace and stability of the
region and calls for support for countries that wish to
address climate-related security risks.

22-6263521/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

Climate Change or the Glasgow Climate Pact. Instead,
we should redouble our efforts to translate those
agreements into action at COP 27 next month and the
fifteenth Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on Biological Diversity in November. Our commitment
to climate action is the basis for a peaceful and
secure world.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Pobee, Mr. Gahouma-Bekale
and Mr. Youssef for their briefings.
The Russian Federation considers the problem of
climate change a top priority, especially in regions such
as Africa that are particularly vulnerable to natural
disasters. It is an undeniable fact that climate-induced
droughts, floods, forest fires, desertification, hurricanes
and other natural disasters have serious economic
and social consequences. We share the concerns
expressed in the concept note (S/2022/737, annex) of
the Gabonese presidency of the Council in connection
with the fact that in certain regions, and particularly
on the African continent, the effects of climate change
create conditions that lead to intercommunal clashes
and violence. In that regard, we believe it is appropriate
not only to step up global efforts to combat climate
change, but also to help the countries affected adapt
to its negative consequences, and especially with a
view to bringing about qualitative change in their
socioeconomic situations. We believe that solidarity on
the part of the international community is essential to
addressing issues of long standing that continue to beset
Africa, such as problems of access to clean drinking
water, food security, the restoration or strengthening of
industry and agriculture and early-warning systems.
However, it is important to avoid fragmenting
assistance for development and for addressing the
degradation of the environment but rather to focus on
comprehensive and effective measures. Indeed, as the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says in its
report Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability, which has already been cited today,
“[c]ompared to other socioeconomic factors the
influence of climate on conflict is assessed as
relatively weak”.
We believe that, if we are to successfully address
those challenges, we need sustainable socioeconomic
development that is based on national priorities
and takes into account local specifics. We need
22/33

12/10/2022

infrastructure, effective social services and earlywarning and response mechanisms.
We have given particular attention to the African
policy documents that address the links between
sustainable development and security, that is, the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the Silencing the Guns
initiative, which notes the importance of effectively
combating drought, desertification, deforestation and
climate change in the context of the connection to
sustainable development. That is precisely the missing
link in the efforts to forge a chain that ties climate to
security, and in fact it is the main area where action
should be taken.
As far as the Security Council is concerned, we
believe it is important to focus on analysing the reasons
for each conflict. There should not be a single yardstick,
since any errors in defining the specific issues that
exacerbated the differences makes the responses less
effective. Unfortunately, many such country-specific
topics have been on the agenda of the Security Council
for decades. We see no added value in piling on yet
another general criterion. In our experience, the
inclusion of new generic topics at best leads to wasted
resources and at worst becomes yet another tool for
putting pressure on host States. I want to emphasize
that if there is a specific problem in a particular country
or region and the Security Council has the tools to
resolve it, it must take action. But the mandates adopted
by the Council should not constitute a set of priorities
that are most popular at the United Nations and largely
promoted by the West. In parallel, it is vital to expand
our efforts on the humanitarian assistance and social
and economic development fronts, since most countries
affected by conflict find themselves in difficult
socioeconomic circumstances.
There is a hidden agenda in the so-called
securitization of climate. The main apologists for
decarbonization and the green economy are developed
countries that have achieved their economic prosperity
through their exploitation of natural resources, including
fossil fuels, and much of that wealth came from Africa
and still does. The result is that in advocating for
increased ambitiousness on climate, the developed
countries are starting from intentionally advantageous
positions. And now they are continuing to roll back
compliance with their own climate obligations, making
a deliberate choice to sacrifice the global climate
agenda for the benefit of the political agenda.
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Meanwhile, Africa, whose vital interests have
once again been sidelined by the global agenda
dictated by the West, risks being further harmed by
climate-related natural phenomena, as well as the illconceived unilateral decisions of so-called climate
champions. Such double standards and approaches must
be eliminated from future international cooperation
on climate.
We are convinced that the division of labour
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations must be
preserved for the effective functioning of the United
Nations system. The Security Council cannot and
should not duplicate the work of other United Nations
entities. Combating climate change and its negative
social and economic consequences falls exclusively
within the framework of sustainable development.
We call for enhanced cooperation in the relevant
multilateral forums dealing with climate change, in
general, and its negative manifestations in the economic
and social spheres, primarily under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. The United
Nations development system can make a practical
contribution to adaptation, the elimination of the
consequences of cataclysms and strengthening earlywarning systems with the help of international project
activities — the much-needed work of the United
Nations operational agencies. Russia pays attention to
the climate agenda in our interaction with the United
Nations agencies for the benefit of African countries.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates Gabon on the success of its Africa
Climate Week last month. As one of the few countries
where carbon sequestration exceeds carbon emissions,
Gabon has made progress in protecting its natural
environment and addressing climate change, providing
experiences and practices for others to learn from and
draw upon. I welcome Foreign Minister Adamo to
today’s meeting and thank Assistant Secretary-General
Pobee, Mr. Gahouma-Bekale and Regional Director
Youssef for their briefings.
Africa is one of the regions most affected by
climate change, yet it is least able to address its impact.
Africa accounts for less than 4 per cent of global
greenhouse-gas emissions, yet temperature rise on the
continent is higher than the global average. Frequent
extreme weather and meteorological disasters have
seriously affected Africa’s ecological environment and
hampered its socioeconomic development, sparking the

S/PV.9150

thought-provoking question of the relationship between
climate change and security.
Climate change may exacerbate resource shortages
and tensions, but it does not necessarily lead to
armed conflict. This summer, both Europe and parts
of Africa experienced spells of extreme heat, but the
aftermaths were very different, mainly because of
the huge difference in the two regions’ ability to cope
with climate change. That tells us that the ability to
withstand climate shocks is crucial. In order to stop
climate change from becoming a security threat, we
must use a targeted and calibrated response, focusing on
helping Africa to strengthen capacity-building, enhance
climate resilience and accelerate the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In that regard, I would like to make the following
four points.
First, pragmatic actions should be taken to help
Africa enhance its response capacity. According to the
World Meteorological Organization, only 40 per cent of
Africa’s population has timely access to disaster earlywarning information. The international community
should take real action by working on specific issues,
such as monitoring and early warning, disaster
preparedness, as well as prevention and mitigation, in
order to increase support and investment in Africa so
as to effectively enhance its response capacity. China
supports the universal early-warning system initiative
proposed by the Secretary-General and supports the
United Nations in strengthening coordination with the
African Union (AU) and subregional organizations on
climate action in order to achieve greater progress in
enhancing Africa’s climate resilience.
Secondly, developed countries should honour their
climate-financing commitments to Africa as soon as
possible. Helping Africa address climate change is not
about how loudly one chants slogans, but about whether
the commitments are being fulfilled and whether
Africa’s needs are being met. Developed countries
have pledged to provide $100 billion a year in climate
financing to developing countries, and developed
European countries have pledged to double financial
support for climate projects in poor African countries
by 2025. Those pledges must not become merely lip
service. Arrears must be paid as soon as possible, and
new collective quantitative funding targets should be
defined so that African countries can actually receive
the funds needed to carry out work that produces

22-6263523/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

tangible results. International financial institutions
and climate-finance platforms should also lower the
financing threshold in order to ensure that climate
finance is equitable and accessible to Africa.
Thirdly, international equity and justice should be
reflected in the climate issue. Many countries in Africa
are still at the early stage of industrialization and face
the dual task of promoting socioeconomic development
and addressing climate change. Developed countries, on
the other hand, have already achieved industrialization.
Asking Africa and other developing countries to assume
the same climate responsibilities as developed countries
goes against international equity and justice. In order to
achieve the temperature-control target set by the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, developed countries
should take the lead by drastically reducing emissions
and significantly moving up the date to achieve carbon
neutrality. That would provide development space for
Africa and other developing countries. The wavering
and regressive stance of some developed countries on
the issue of climate change is cause for concern.
Fourthly, we should support Africa’s efforts to
promote green and sustainable development. African
countries have realized that a response to climate change
is possible only through sustainable development
and have taken positive steps in that regard. The AU
and African countries have set clear goals for energy
transition and are striving to build a low-carbon,
affordable and clean energy system. The international
community should increase its comprehensive support
to Africa in terms of financing, technology and human
resources in order to help Africa unleash its greendevelopment potential and achieve a green and lowcarbon transformation.
Next month, the twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change will be held in Sharm El-Sheikh,
Egypt. This is a premier international climate forum in
an African country, as well as an important opportunity
for the international community to reaffirm its climate
commitment to Africa. China fully supports Egypt and
Africa in hosting the Conference and looks forward
to its positive and balanced outcome with regard to
mitigation, adaptation and financing.
Towards the end of last year, the eighth Ministerial
Conference of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
adopted the Declaration on China-Africa Cooperation
in Addressing Climate Change, proposing the
24/33

12/10/2022

establishment of a new era of China-Africa strategic
partnership to address the impact of climate change.
The Conference also saw the inclusion of the greendevelopment project in the initial three-year plan of the
China-Africa Cooperation Vision 2035. Last month,
China hosted a ministerial meeting of the Group of
Friends of the Global Development Initiative, where a
proposal was made to promote the Global Clean Energy
Cooperation Partnership. Among the first projects is
the cooperation on climate change response and green
development in 19 African countries. China’s support
of Africa’s efforts to combat and tackle climate change
has been consistent and ever-present.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Jarasch (Germany): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security. Our group of more
than 60 members from all regions of the world is
united by one common concern. Climate change is
increasingly threatening livelihoods, food security,
stability, sustainable development and prosperity, the
effective enjoyment of human rights and, in turn, peace
and security.
We therefore strongly welcome the Security
Council’s renewed attention to this threat, one of the
defining challenges of our time. We are very grateful
to Gabon, as President of the Security Council, for
convening this important debate and are delighted to
welcome Gabon as the newest member of the Group
of Friends.
While climate change is affecting all parts of the
world, it disproportionately affects the poorest and
most fragile regions, which are prone to climate shocks
and have a lower capacity to adapt. In such fragile
settings, women and girls are especially vulnerable to
the negative impacts of climate change.
African States are among those most vulnerable to
the consequences of the global climate crisis, although
they contribute to only around 4 per cent of the global
increase in greenhouse-gas emissions. In many parts
of Africa, we can already see how climate change
exacerbates resource scarcity and food insecurity,
makes people more vulnerable to exploitation by
armed groups, can intensify armed conflict and may
force people to migrate. In addition to that, there is
growing scientific evidence that deforestation in the
Congo basin may alter rainfall patterns and reduce
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

rain not only in Central Africa, but also beyond, with
potentially dramatic consequences for food security
and social stability.
We must therefore intensify our collective efforts
to address the climate crisis while immediately
enhancing support for those most affected, such as
African States. It is only by truly working together that
we can prevent the adverse effects of climate change
from resulting in violence and instability. We therefore
welcome the African Union (AU) Agenda 2063, which
explicitly includes the climate-security nexus among its
core priorities, and efforts to strengthen the partnership
between the United Nations system and the AU.
Member States must limit global warming and
redouble their efforts on climate action to keep warming
below 1.5°C by fully and ambitiously implementing
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, including
through the commitments reflected in the Glasgow
Climate Pact.
Climate finance and means of implementation, as
well as development and humanitarian finance, can, if
used well, contribute to sustaining peace and security.
We must work together to find ways to integrate conflict
sensitivity into mitigation and adaptation efforts. We
must ensure that climate policies and climate financing
take conflict and fragility into account and that efforts
to sustain and build peace take into account the adverse
effects of climate change. Investments in climate
adaptation often also benefit peace and stability. By
mitigating the negative effects of climate change, we
produce security.
In that context, and in my national capacity, I would
like to thank everyone here who has contributed to the
success of the Berlin Climate and Security Conference,
which just concluded today.
Building climate-resilient systems that support
peace and stability urgently requires much more
concerted international effort and strong partnerships.
The entire United Nations system must address that
challenge in all relevant forums and within all relevant
mandates. The United Nations is already doing
important work in that regard. The Climate Security
Mechanism enhances the capacity of the United
Nations system to integrate the analysis of climate
change and address its impacts on peace and security
matters through effective interagency cooperation, and
it should be strengthened.

S/PV.9150

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We welcome the progress made in that regard, including
the recognition of the effects of climate change in
its consideration of the growing number of mandates
for peacekeeping and special political missions. The
Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security has
proven crucial in informing the Council’s work in that
regard. However, more needs to be done to ensure a
truly systematic approach and to create the tools
necessary for the United Nations system to do its part
in preventing and resolving conflicts that are driven or
aggravated by the effects of climate change.
The Group of Friends on Climate and Security urges
all members of the Security Council to listen to the
increasing number of countries who are experiencing
instability and insecurity as a result of climate change
and then support their requests for action by the
Council instead of blocking it. Such action includes
creating and implementing much-needed frameworks
that will enhance the United Nations comprehensive
risk assessments and strategies that take into account
the effects of climate change, capacity-building and
operational response. We stand ready to support all
such efforts.
To conclude, climate change is a global threat to
peace that no region can face alone. African States and
others particularly affected by the dramatic effects
of climate change deserve the full support of the
international community and, when climate change
threatens peace, of the Security Council. We must all
do our part to sustain peace and prevent conflict in the
face of the climate crisis. Let us do so now.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like to express our
deep appreciation for Gabon’s initiative to hold today’s
relevant debate on climate and security in Africa.
Egypt reaffirms its strong commitment, in the light
of its presidency of the twenty-seventh Conference of
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP 27), to strengthening our
joint work in addressing the existential threat of
climate change.
We are steadfast in our commitment to addressing
the challenges posed by climate change and believe that
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the relevant international conventions, especially

22-6263525/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and its Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, remain the platforms with an original mandate
to herald the necessary solutions to address the climate
crisis in all its manifestations. However, climate change
is widely recognized as a threat multiplier and driver
of conflict that is affecting the peace and stability of
several regions globally, especially Africa. That is why
it is important to addressing the increasing connection
between climate change and security.
Africa is contributing the least to the climate crisis,
with merely 3 per cent of global carbon emissions.
However, according to the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change Working Group II, on impacts,
adaptation and vulnerability, it is the most vulnerable
to its devastating impacts, including droughts,
floods, cyclones, rainfall variability, water scarcity,
desertification and sea level rise. Those interrelated
and cascading risks can have far-reaching implications
on peace, security and development across the
African continent. That may lead to displacement and
humanitarian crises that would affect the continent’s
peace and stability.
We believe that there is a dire need to address the
implications of climate change, including on peace
and security, through a holistic approach. Climate
finance is needed now more than ever to address the
adverse effects of climate change, which affect all
forms of livelihoods and have implications on peace
and security. To achieve our ultimate goal of limiting
warming to below 1.5°C, collective action has to be
implemented. I stress the importance of delivering the
financial commitments in the context of the UNFCCC,
especially the $100 billion. Concessional financing
has to be an integral part of the financial instruments
provided to developing countries. Realizing a global
goal on adaptation and a new quantified financial goal
on the basis of providing $100 billion by 2025 remains
a priority that we all need to work together to achieve.
We also support the calls by the Secretary-General to
allocate 50 per cent of climate finance to adaptation
and resilience.
Estimates by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development indicate that annual climate
adaptation costs in developing countries could
reach $300 billion in 2030. Addressing the climate
adaptation needs of developing countries would enable
a preventative effect in that regard. In certain complex
situations, purely technical approaches to adaptation
26/33

12/10/2022

will fail to address the socioeconomic variables that
contribute to conflicts. Therefore, conflict-sensitive
adaptation, which transcends technical responses,
should include multi-disciplinary projects to build
comprehensive resilience against the impacts of climate
change and the related security threats.
Against this backdrop, the Egyptian presidency
of COP 27 will launch an initiative entitled “Climate
Responses for Sustaining Peace”, with the aim of
ensuring that integrated climate responses contribute to
sustainable peace and development in line with national
ownership and context specificity. The initiative aims
to contribute to the realization of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063, as well as to the implementation of
the African Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative
and the African Union Climate Change and Resilient
Development Strategy and Action Plan (2022- 2032).
In conclusion, Egypt remains fully committed to
addressing the issue of climate financing and looks
forward during its presidency of COP 27 later this
year to continuing our global work to reach concrete
outcomes in relation to climate change with a view to
achieving the sustainable development of developing
countries while ensuring their peace, security, stability
and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy thanks Gabon for
convening this timely debate and the briefers for their
insightful briefings. While aligning this statement with
the statement of the representative of Germany, who
spoke on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate and
Security, I would like to deliver the following remarks
in my national capacity.
The two-way interaction of climate and security
cannot be ignored. The adverse effects of climate
change, coupled with other destabilizing factors, such
as extreme poverty, food insecurity, institutional
fragility and terrorism, are posing a serious threat to
international peace and security. At the same time, social
tensions and conflicts can further reduce resilience to
climate change, especially when communities largely
depend on scarce natural resources for their livelihoods,
hampering development perspectives.
African States and their most vulnerable
populations, including women and children, are often
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9150

among the world’s most affected by the disruptions
caused by climate change, which acts as a threat
multiplier for violence and instability. The ongoing
severe droughts and heat waves in the Horn of Africa
and the Sahel are displacing millions of people and
fuelling conflicts. This is not only an African problem;
it is an alarm bell for all of us, requiring that we find
collective solutions, working hand in hand with our
African partners.

At the national level, Italy — through its Carabinieri
Corps — has set up an International Centre of Excellence
for the environment, aimed at training military and
police forces, as well as civilians, on environmental
protection. We are looking forward to working with
the United Nations system and all Member States on
capacity-building programmes.

The report State of the Climate in Africa 2021
reveals that high water stress is estimated to affect
about 250 million people on the continent and displace
up to 700 million individuals by 2030. Italy therefore
welcomes the efforts by African Member States to
bring the links between climate change and security in
Africa to the attention of the Security Council and the
entire United Nations membership.

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I first
would like to thank Gabon for organizing today’s
Security Council debate, which provides an appropriate
opportunity to bring our messages to the United
Nations and to the world in order to raise awareness of
the security consequences of climate change and recall
that not only is climate change an environmental and
economic policy issue, but it is also a major challenge
for international security and an existential threat
to humankind. Morocco congratulates Gabon for
placing this issue at the heart of its presidency of the
Security Council.

As a founding member of the European Union
(EU), Italy sees the benefit of a reinforced partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The nexus between climate change, peace and security
is indeed being mainstreamed across joint United
Nations-EU priorities. In this vein, we encourage all
Member States to back a strengthened partnership
between the United Nations system and the African
Union, to tackle together the risks to peace and stability
posed by the climate crises that are affecting too many
regions in Africa.
To tackle climate change we need to accelerate
international climate action on all fronts: mitigation,
adaptation and finance. Giving increased attention to
the climate-security nexus must also be part of these
efforts. Stepping up climate finance is particularly
critical. Financial flows should be oriented towards
the design and implementation of projects in conflictaffected areas, where the negative consequences
of climate change are most profoundly felt and
aggravate insecurity.
Moreover, we believe that mitigation and adaptation
should be further integrated into the formulation of
mandates for United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We must pursue a holistic approach, ensuring that peace
operations perform efficiently and sustainably in the
field. Italy co-chairs the Group of Friends on Leading
Environmental Management in the Field, together with
Bangladesh, and is particularly engaged in this area.
We will continue to make our contribution.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.

The international community must act where
climate change threatens peace and security before
conflicts break out or escalate. The Kingdom of
Morocco attaches particular importance to climate
action at the national, regional and international levels.
At the national level, Morocco has adopted an ambitious
policy to combat climate change and develop renewable
energy sources. However, we live in a region that
exemplifies the interdependent link between climate
change, security and sustainable development.
The African continent and especially our sister
regions of the Sahel and the Congo basin are unduly
and disproportionately penalized by the consequences
of global warming. As a low emitter of greenhouse
gases, with less than 4 per cent of global emissions,
Africa is unfairly suffering the drastic effects of climate
change — a situation that should be of concern to the
international community as a whole, and of course to
the Security Council.
Based on this observation, Morocco is fully
committed to pursuing the momentum in favour of
cooperative continental progress around ambitious and
concrete transnational projects, which was triggered
during the first African Action Summit, organized by
His Majesty King Mohammed VI on the sidelines of the
twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on

22-6263527/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

Climate Change (COP 22), in Marrakech. In this regard,
and in accordance with His Majesty King Mohammed
VI’s high-level instructions, Morocco is providing,
in the context of South-South cooperation, financial
and technical support for the operationalization and
functioning of the three climate commissions, namely,
that of the Congo basin, which is chaired by the Republic
of the Congo; that of the Sahel region, which is chaired
by the Republic of the Niger); and that of Island States,
which is chaired by the Republic of Seychelles.
Moreover, the twenty-seventh session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 27)
will be held on the African continent, in Egypt, six
years after the COP 22 organized in Morocco. COP 27,
which I would call an African conference, offers an
opportunity to take up matters relating to prioritizing
the financing of climate adaptation in Africa and
offering concrete solutions, particularly with regard to
the adaptation of African agriculture to climate change.
In this spirit, Morocco remains committed to SouthSouth agricultural cooperation, particularly in Africa,
which has more than half of the world’s uncultivated
arable land. Our continent also has a young population
and a huge continental market of more than one billion
people, which must be energized and developed to
ensure food security in Africa.
If there is one promise that should finally be kept
today to developing countries, especially those that
are most vulnerable to global warming, it is of course
the promise to help restore the imbalances caused by
climate change. Accordingly, Morocco welcomes the
commitment made by international partners at the
first summit of the Heads of State and Government
of the Climate Commission for the Sahel Region,
held in Niamey in February 2019, to finance the
implementation of the Commission’s regional priority
programme in the amount of $3.41 billion. That is an
important step that should be continued in order to
provide the Commission with full bilateral, regional
and international support for the implementation of
the climate investment plan. Moreover, the Kingdom
of Morocco, as a founding partner country, and above
all as an active African member of the region, is firmly
committed to supporting the actions of the Sahel
Commission by carrying out the feasibility studies to
finalize its climate investment plan.
28/33

12/10/2022

In conclusion, let us never forget that entire
regions, and several in Africa, will become unliveable
over the next few decades under the scorching effect of
global warming. According to a recent report — issued
yesterday, if I remember correctly — by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, climate change is an increasingly powerful
driver of migration that could force some 216 million
people in the developing world to migrate by 2050,
particularly to already fragile regions.
In that context, we need to step up our efforts to
support green, resilient and inclusive development and
reduce the impact of climate change on vulnerable
African countries. As long as the international
community’s climate targets are not sufficient to
reduce global warming to an acceptable level, the
impact of climate change will be on the agenda of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia congratulates
the Republic of Gabon on using its presidency of the
Security Council to highlight the important nexus
between climate and security.
Climate change effects everyone, everywhere.
Our world is on fire. We see that in African countries,
where we are already experiencing an increase in
persistent drought, extreme weather events, sea-level
rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification, further
threatening food security and efforts to eradicate
poverty and achieve Africa’s Agenda 2063 and the
Sustainable Development Goals, including the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and its Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.
The direct link between climate change and conflict
is not one that we draw naturally and logically. However,
in triangulating the link among climate change, conflict
and development, we can clearly recognize how climate
change interacts with other intervening variables, such
as social, political and economic marginalization,
water scarcity, food security, resource competition, low
economic development, population displacement and
migration, among other things.
When debating the security dimension of climate
change, the Security Council has not always been
forthcoming in establishing a direct link between
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

desertification, land degradation and drought and
ongoing violent conflicts in Africa. It is no coincidence
that 100 per cent of migrants moving towards Europe
from Africa and the Middle East region during 2015
came from highly vulnerable dry lands. Desertification
is a silent, invisible crisis that is destabilizing
communities on a global scale and whose effects are
increasingly felt globally as victims become refugees,
internally displaced people and forced migrants or turn
to radicalization, extremism or resource-driven wars
for survival.
Today land restoration and mitigating the effects
of drought can contribute to better security, since the
disenfranchised populations can enjoy prosperity
arising from land-based jobs, better food security and
better health. The arid and dry-land scenes of desolation
and deprivation that we witness today can be turned
into oases of peace, stability and prosperity tomorrow.
Despite the fact that developed countries have been
the largest contributors to climate change, its costs are
borne by the poorest communities and countries, mostly
developing countries. Those countries are the most
dependent on climate-vulnerable sectors and have the
least capacity to adapt. We therefore call on developed
countries to take the lead in raising both mitigation and
financial ambitions in the fight against climate change.
Africa needs support for climate-resilient technology
to support the economic future of countries like
Namibia that depend on agriculture, but are faced with
challenges, such as adverse weather patterns and scarce
water resources.
While the Security Council has been cautious
regarding such discussions, let us recognize Africa’s
leading response to the threat of climate change.
African countries have demonstrated the necessary
political commitment to fighting climate change. By
2021, all African countries had submitted their revised
nationally determined contributions.
Furthermore, the African Union, through its
Committee of African Heads of State and Government
on Climate Change, has played an exemplary role in
bringing attention to climate change issues at the level
of Heads of State and Government. The Committee
has been providing political leadership and strategic
guidance on Africa’s discussions on climate change by
advocating for a common African position on climate
change. That approach has ensured coordination

S/PV.9150

surrounding climate decisions, including on migration
and security.
Given Africa’s political commitment to countering
the effects of climate change, we urge the Security
Council members to support those efforts through
investments in climate-information services and
disaster risk reduction, including early-warning systems
and adaptation measures for critical sectors, and by
creating the necessary frameworks that will enhance
risk analysis, capacity-building and operational
response. By strengthening the capacity of African
Member States to develop more integrated responses
to climate-related security risks, we empower African
countries to lead the dialogue on their own security
threats with full local and regional ownership.
In conclusion, let us be proactive on this discussion.
Climate change and its threat to peace and security is
no longer a far-fetched tale of a fictional dystopian
world. We call on the Security Council to maintain the
momentum regarding discussions related to climate
and security, as that nexus poses the next frontier of
emerging threats for the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Niger.
Mr. Ousman (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by extending to you, Mr. President, my
warmest congratulations on Gabon’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I can assure you of the Niger’s readiness to
provide you with all the support you need in carrying
out your challenging task.
I would like to thank Ms. Martha Pobee, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, Mr. Tanguy GahoumaBekale, former Chair of the African Group of Negotiators
on Climate Change, and Mr. Patrick Youssef, Regional
Director for Africa of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, for their excellent briefings.
The Niger thanks Gabon for organizing this
debate. If its presidency of the Security Council chose
to convene a debate on the security risks linked to
climate change in Africa, it is because your country,
Mr. President, like other African countries and
beyond, is convinced that the upheavals suffered by
our ecological environment have an impact on conflict
situations and their resolution. For some island States,
those threats are even life-threatening.

22-6263529/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

Although Africa has contributed little to the
phenomenon, it remains the continent that suffers
disproportionately from the harmful consequences
of such climate change, which affects the stability of
many of our States. Indeed, when the unpredictability
of rainfall, desertification, the scarcity of arable land,
drought and the drop in water levels are combined,
that has an impact on the economic and social life of
the populations and leads to conflicts over access to
such resources. When that situation is compounded by
conflict, it complicates the resolution of the latter by
undermining all efforts to achieve and build peace.
That is particularly the case in the Sahel and the
Lake Chad basin regions, which are marked by great
fragility and exponential demographic growth against
a backdrop of increasing insecurity. In that context,
and as we have said before in this Chamber, climate
change and conflict dynamics create a feedback loop
in which the effects of climate change put additional
pressures on the environment and conflicts undermine
communities’ capacities to cope.
As we can tell, the climate-security-development
nexus is undeniable. Managing it effectively requires
cooperative policies that are better adapted to these new
challenges, which spare no country and constitute real
threats to the peace and stability of States, as well as to
the lives and livelihoods of future generations. That is
why we must adopt a more global and concerted approach
in our consideration of climate change, because it is
only together that we will be able to tackle it. The fight
against climate-related security risks will require us
to change our behaviours and attitudes in the constant
quest for a harmonious balance that can ultimately
reconcile humankind and our living environment.
The fight against the harmful effects of
environmental degradation on peace and security
is multidimensional and includes the protection and
recovery of land and the rational management of
natural resources. Essentially, we must create a basis
for sustainable development that by meeting the
needs of the population will also protect them from
the propaganda of terrorist groups. As is often said,
poverty and precarity make breeding grounds for
violent extremism and terrorism.
We believe it is essential to strengthen the Council’s
capacity to understand the security-related impacts
of climate change through a regular report by the
Secretary-General, which should include a thorough
30/33

12/10/2022

analysis of current and future risks and action-oriented
recommendations to enable the Council to fulfil its
core peacekeeping and conflict-prevention mandates.
Moreover, our understanding of the principle of unity
of action at the United Nations means that the fact that
it has one organ with the principal mandate for an issue
should not exclude another of its organs from dealing
with an aspect of that issue relevant to its own mandate.
It was in that belief that during the Niger’s presidency
of the Security Council in December 2021 we initiated
and submitted for members’ consideration, together
with Ireland, draft resolution S/2021/990, on the link
between the effects of climate change and security.
While we regret that the draft text was not adopted,
despite the support of an overwhelming majority of
Member States, we remain confident that our successors
will bring those discussions to a successful conclusion.
To conclude my remarks, at the strategic and
operational levels, we hope to see the implementation of
synergistic and coherent actions for greater resilience
among our populations to climate shocks and emerging
challenges, in the spirit of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. My delegation hopes that the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 27),
to be held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, will lead States
parties to reach agreement on the divisive issues in the
negotiations, to which Africa attaches great importance.
Such issues relate to the financing of climate policies
and action on adaptation for and technology transfer
to developing countries. It is high time that the
promises made to developing countries for funding to
strengthen their resilience to those shocks were finally
fulfilled. The Niger fervently hopes that COP 27 will
serve as a framework for the development of a strong
momentum in favour of a resolute, concerted and global
commitment to the fight against climate change and its
harmful effects, which today hinder the progress of
many of our States towards stability and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): As a member of
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security, the
delegation of Ukraine fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Germany
on the Group’s behalf.
In my national capacity, I would like to thank our
briefers for their substantive presentations. Ukraine
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9150

welcomes today’s debate and expresses its appreciation
to Gabon, as President of the Security Council, for
convening it. The topic of today’s meeting goes beyond
climate and security in Africa and concerns the welfare
of all human beings.

is providing such support and will continue to do so,
most recently through our decision to provide 50,000
tons of wheat as humanitarian aid to Ethiopia and
Somalia. We remain ready to take action in favour of
our common interests.

We live in a globalized world, where a natural
disaster or an armed conflict, no matter how distant it
may seem, inadvertently affects all of our lives. Ukraine
is the key global supplier of wheat, sunflower oil and
corn. One of the consequences of Russia’s brutal war
against Ukraine is global food shortages. According to
expert estimates, the lives of around 400 million people
worldwide, mainly in Africa, depend on the export of
Ukrainian food. The Russian aggression against our
country has broken supply chains and aggravates the
threats that Africa is currently facing owing to climate
change. Food insecurity and poverty have increased as
a result.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.

Ukraine is dedicated to combating the negative
impacts of climate change. We were among the first
in Europe to ratify the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and ranked fourth out of 45 States parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in terms of emissions reductions. Ukraine has
pledged to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by 65 per
cent by 2030 and to achieve climate neutrality by 2060.
We urge the entire global community, States and civil
society, businesses and all human beings to switch to
a pro-Earth way of thinking without further delay. We
believe that it is long past time to consider the entire
planet as our common home.
The challenges Africa is facing today should
leave no one indifferent. We fully support the African
Union’s Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. In that
regard, it is particularly important to continue assisting
African countries in achieving their commitments and
meeting the targets of the Sustainable Development
Goals. However, none of our ambitious goals within
the United Nations can be achieved until the war of
aggression is stopped. It is distracting us and taking
away our resources, which is ruining our big ideas.
We are strengthening our focus on relations with
Africa. An ambitious strategy for the development
of Ukraine’s relations with African States has been
approved. We have been intensifying our dialogue with
every country on the continent, including on climate
policy. We believe that support for African countries is
vital. Despite fighting the ongoing aggression, Ukraine

Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me start by thanking
you, Sir, for convening this important debate, as well
as the briefers for their valuable contributions. We
welcome the Security Council’s continued attention to
climate and security. We also warmly welcome Gabon
as the newest member of the Group of Friends on
Climate and Security.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Germany on behalf of the Group.
Climate change endangers efforts to build and
sustain peace. It exacerbates instability and functions as
a multiplier of threats. It also undermines communities’
resilience and ability to respond to crises. We are all
acutely aware that some regions of Africa are among
those particularly exposed to the effects of climate
change and are coping with multiple climate-related
disruptions. Today I want to focus in particular on two
aspects, climate-induced food security and investing in
resilience to crises.
The effects of climate change all too often destroy
livelihoods, aggravate poverty and increase food
insecurity, which in turn fuels radicalization and
conflicts as communities compete for scarce resources.
The international community should be particularly
worried about the deteriorating food-security situation
in Africa, which is witnessing increased weather
and climate variability. Food insecurity is a complex
challenge, as its key drivers include the effects of
conflicts, instability, climate change and economic
crises. Worryingly, the Russian war against Ukraine has
made an already critical food situation in Africa even
worse. It is a dire example of how a regional conflict
can have global repercussions. The war has contributed
to a sharp increase in fuel, fertilizers and food prices,
as well as a disruption of supply chains. It places an
additional burden on consumers and producers globally,
but it is especially harsh when combined with climate
change effects on food systems.
My second point concerns resilience. Today the
whole world faces the perfect storm of crises. Wars and

22-6263531/33

S/PV.9150

Threats to international peace and security

conflicts continue to rage around the globe. Climate
change affects stability and security in a number of
ways, which makes finding solutions to conflicts even
more challenging. The consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic continue to hamper our economic
ability to invest in resilience.
Therefore, enhancing climate resilience in Africa is
an urgent and persistent need. One aspect of resilience is
to recognize and better understand the multidimensional
relationship between climate change and peace. Poland
argues that regional infrastructure investments should
be seen as a primary tool for building resilience that
can help to respond globally to those multiple crises,
including climate change.
In recent years, the Group of Friends on Climate
and Security has successfully advocated for several
Security Council resolutions acknowledging the
detrimental effects of climate change in conflictaffected regions.
Poland welcomes progress made in that regard,
including the recognition of the effects of climate change,
when considering a growing number of mandates for
peacekeeping and special political missions. We are
satisfied that the Council has incorporated climate
change language in resolutions concerning peace
operations, including those in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mali, South Sudan and Somalia.
As climate change worsens and has far-reaching
effects on stability in the world in the years and decades
to come, Poland believes that investing in resilience
and enhancing risk analysis and operational responses
to climate shocks is critical.
We are supporting many African countries through
our development cooperation programme, Polish Aid,
including on climate adaptation, the protection of
natural resources and strengthening food security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mrs. Zalabata Torres (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): We are facing the climate crisis, a common
challenge of enormous proportions which, similarly
to war, threatens the survival of the human species.
Colombia, a global powerhouse for life, aspires to raise
full awareness of the risks that climate change poses
to international security, some of which are already
materializing — deepening inequalities, putting
pressure on the natural resources on which the most
32/33

12/10/2022

vulnerable populations depend for their livelihoods,
forcing them to abandon their places of origin and
generating conflicts.
The Sustainable Development Goals are a
fundamental road map for mitigating the various causes
of conflict with a view to achieving complete peace,
not only in our country, Colombia, but throughout the
world. We are therefore aware that the implementation
and fulfilment of the Goals will make it possible to
have a world that lives in peace and harmony.
Colombia will stress reaching the most ambitious
agreements possible to curb climate change in order to
reduce the threat to international peace and security. To
that end, we are confident that the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals and the targets set
out by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
are essential to achieving the Goals.
In Colombia, climate change may jeopardize the
livelihoods of rural families, indigenous communities
and Afrodescendent populations — groups that are
especially vulnerable and that, as a State, we have
committed to protect. Moreover, the crisis heightens
the incidence of natural disasters, which increases
the internal displacements of our population. We are
therefore facing a profoundly regressive challenge that
disproportionately affects the most disadvantaged,
exacerbates
inequalities
and
compromises
food sovereignty.
Rising food and energy prices are adding to the
ongoing climate crisis, jeopardizing food security in
Africa and other parts of the world. In the Horn of
Africa, more than 36 million people are being affected
by severe droughts, and more than 16 million have no
access to water. Meanwhile, 345 million people around
the world are facing acute famine, many of whom are in
large parts of Africa, including the Sahel.
The lack of access to resources has serious
implications for peace and security and is a driver
of displacement. Many African regions are today on
the front lines of the war against the planet, and the
world must act in solidarity, recognizing the particular
vulnerabilities that each region of the developing
world faces.
Climate change adaptation contributes to
international peace and security in both Latin America
and Africa. We thank the Government of Gabon for
22-62635

12/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

convening this debate of central importance to the
Colombian Government.
I would like to finish by offering Council members
a piece of the culture of my people, the Arhuaco, who
live in the Sierra Nevada of Santa Marta in Colombia.
We say, “When I am sick, the Earth is sick. When the
Earth heals, the Earth heals me.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank the
Gabonese Republic for convening this important
debate. We also thank the briefers for all their valuable
contributions this morning.
The ticking time bomb that is the climate crisis we
face is certainly one of the most serious threats to our
collective security.
South Africa remains firmly committed to a
collective, multilateral response to that existential threat,
and we are redoubling our efforts at the continental and
national levels to play our part in addressing the crisis.
We call on developed countries to urgently honour
their commitments to developing countries on climate
finance, technology transfer and capacity-building to
advance a critically urgent multilateral solution to the
crisis that could offer us some hope of halting further
damage and averting the worst possible scenarios,
which will have apocalyptic consequences for us all.
As the continent least responsible for the climate
crisis, Africa also finds itself at the epicentre of the worst
impacts of the crisis, experiencing extreme weather
events, such as droughts, floods and cyclones, which
cause enormous damage. In South Africa, we are still
recovering from some of the worst flooding in decades,
which caused untold damage and claimed upwards of
200 lives. Climate change impacts are costing African
economies between 3 to 5 per cent of their gross
domestic product. Despite not being responsible for
causing climate change, it is Africans who are bearing
both the brunt and the cost of the climate crisis.
South Africa recognizes that extreme weather
events, drought, water scarcity, food insecurity and
desertification linked with climate change have the
potential to increase the risk of violent conflict. That is
the case both within sovereign States and across State
boundaries. In Africa, there is also some evidence to

S/PV.9150

suggest that that may be the case in parts of the Sahel,
the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa. In those
specific instances, climate change is a threat or risk
multiplier, escalating existing tensions and conflict
by placing strain on already scarce resources. While
it may be intuitive to assume that climatic pressures
generally contribute to increasing the risk of conflict
elsewhere, scientific evidence to support a more
generalized conclusion of a direct causality between
climate change and threats to international peace and
security is still minimal.
The potential peace and security ramifications
that may arise from climate change are ultimately
best addressed by devoting our efforts and resources
to reversing climate change itself. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
is a fit-for-purpose United Nations body specifically
created to tackle climate change. Unlike the Security
Council, it is representative of all Member States and
abides by important principles, which include equity
and common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities.
In conclusion, we look forward to the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held
in Egypt, as an African-owned and implementation
conference. It should result in balanced outcomes
that address adaptation, mitigation and means of
implementation. It should also agree on a concrete
mechanism for loss and damage.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Accusations were levelled against the Russian
Federation that distort reality. We have responded to
them repeatedly, and therefore we will not spend time
on them today.
We would like to underscore that a number of States
have once again demonstrated that they have been
exploiting Africa and the African agenda. Contrariwise,
the Russian Federation has not been exploiting Africa
and has instead been listening to Africa. We stand
ready to work with its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

22-6263533/33
