S/PV.8239

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8239

th meeting
Thursday, 19 April 2018, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Final progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (S/2018/344)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-11487 (E)
*1811487*

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.

Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations. I
think that I can speak on behalf of all of us in saying that
we have lost a distinguished diplomat and an invaluable
partner and colleague.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

(spoke in English)

The situation in Liberia
Final progress report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(S/2018/344)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Liberia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Alexander
Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of
Law and Security Institutions in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Chid Liberty, Chief
Executive Officer of Liberty and Justice.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2018/344, which contains
the final progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Zouev, Ambassador Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni, Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden,
on behalf of the Chair of the Liberia configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and Mr. Liberty.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2018/8.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zouev.
Mr. Zouev (spoke in French): First of all, I convey
our most sincere condolences to the Ivorian delegation
and to the Security Council on the tragic death of His
Excellency Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent
2/22

19/04/2018

Today marks a historic milestone for Liberia, a
founding Member of the United Nations. For almost
25 years, the situation in Liberia was so concerning
that it was constantly present on the Council’s agenda,
but the country has turned an important corner. On
30 March, our peacekeeping operation — the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) — concluded
after successfully achieving the mandate for which it
was deployed by the Council almost 15 years ago.
It would be no exaggeration to characterize the
Liberia of 2003 as a country in ruins, with a traumatized
population and a predatory State. We may never know
the full human cost of the more than 14 years of
successive, brutal civil war, but we know that far too
many citizens suffered from human rights violations,
far too many families were displaced, and far too many
citizens were victims of sexual violence. I myself
witnessed the extent of the destruction — but also the
opportunity for renewal — when I visited Monrovia
in early 2004, while working on the delicate matter
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants.
It is important to remember the past — the untold
suffering wrought on the people of Liberia, the
destabilization that the country’s conflict brought to
the entire region — in order to fully appreciate the long
path to peace that Liberia has travelled since the Council
adopted resolution 1509 (2003), authorizing the United
Nations to take over peacekeeping responsibilities
previously assumed by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).
The Council has before it the Secretary-General’s
final report on UNMIL dated 13 April (S/2018/344).
As the report reflects major developments in Liberia
through the conclusion of UNMIL’s mandate, I would
like to highlight just a few recent issues.
By-elections originally scheduled to be held in
May to fill senatorial seats vacated by the President
and Vice-President have been deferred due to a lack of
agreement between the National Elections Commission
and the Government regarding the budget for those
elections, which will be held in two of Liberia’s
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

S/PV. 8239

most populous counties. National institutions have
demonstrated on numerous occasions their ability to
plan, organize and secure sensitive political events
such as elections. However, at least for some time, the
Government and its partners will continue to face the
challenge of ensuring that national institutions receive
the financial and other investments needed to sustain
their continued development.

human resources; and a nation fully responsible for
its own destiny, with institutions and a Government
providing basic guarantees of security, protection and
services to all its citizens.

President Weah continues to consolidate his
Government and is progressing in his efforts to
pursue a pro-poor vision for the country. Among the
specific deliverables promised is the development of
Liberia’s road network. The Government has signed a
memorandum of understanding with a foreign private
firm to obtain a loan of $536 million to develop a
road along Liberia’s border with the Atlantic Ocean.
Some have raised concerns about the agreement,
given that the terms and conditions have yet to be
fully disclosed, and could have long-term social and
economic repercussions, as has been the case with
many concession agreements.

(spoke in Spanish)

Meanwhile, last week the Government launched its
road map for achieving its pro-poor national development
agenda. This approach seeks to situate the poor at the
centre of public governance, including by seeking their
input, so as to ensure that economic growth arising
from development initiatives will benefit the most
vulnerable. Going forward, it will remain essential that
all partners remain closely engaged in efforts to finalize
and implement the national development agenda, which
will align with the Sustainable Development Goals.
Although it is a signatory to the Declaration of Table
Mountain on press freedom, over the past week the
Government has had to reiterate its full commitment to
freedom of speech, as some in the media had expressed
apprehension. The United Nations will continue efforts
aimed at building mutual confidence between the media
and Government.
The conclusion of UNMIL’s mandate on
30 March, as determined by resolution 2333 (2016),
was a remarkable demonstration of confidence that
the country is moving steadfastly along the path of
sustained peace. Now, with the people and Government
of Liberia, lies the important work of continuing to
build a nation — a unified, reconciled nation with an
accountable Government committed to addressing
corruption within its ranks; a nation where all citizens
share the benefits of Liberia’s abundant natural and

Although UNMIL has completed its mandate, and
will soon complete its liquidation, the United Nations
remains in the country to support the people and the
Government of Liberia.
I thank the Government of Peru for supporting
important themes for the maintenance of peace as part
of its duties as President of the Security Council this
month. The legacy of UNMIL demonstrates the value
of the maintenance of multidimensional peace and the
capacity of the United Nations to support a country
from conflict to peace. Working with the Government
of Liberia and its people, UNMIL was able to prevent
the recurrence of armed conflict through post-conflict
peacebuilding and progress towards lasting peace and
sustainable development.
(spoke in English)
I wish to conclude by expressing our appreciation for
the essential role played by the Council in restoring and
consolidating peace to Liberia, including through the
deployment of UNMIL; appreciation for the personnel
of UNMIL — civilian and uniformed, women and
men — who served with professionalism, dedication
and a deep commitment to achieving its mandate; and
appreciation for the countries that contributed troops
and police to UNMIL. I remember with appreciation
the service and sacrifice of the 202 United Nations
peacekeepers who lost their lives in pursuit of peace
in Liberia. I would like to express our appreciation for
the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
whose role in Liberia has been and will remain
essential, and for the partners — bilateral, regional
and international — whose contributions helped the
United Nations to conclude the peacekeeping chapter in
Liberia, and whose continued support for Liberia will
help to cement our positive legacy.
(spoke in Russian)
I also wish to express our appreciation for UNMIL’s
leadership. I would like to take a moment to recognize
the presence in the Chamber of Mr. Farid Zarif, the
last UNMIL Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. His focus on preventive diplomacy was
key in steering the mission through its final but still

18-114873/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

critically important phase of mandate implementation.
The presence today of Mr. Zarif and other former
UNMIL personnel in their capacity as private citizens
is a testament to the significance of our collective
achievement that this session serves to underscore.
(spoke in English)
Lastly, I wish to convey our profound appreciation
and admiration for the people of Liberia, whose
resilience was a decisive factor in turning the page
on crisis and conflict, and whose determination will
ensure that the hard-won peace is sustained. The United
Nations will continue to accompany the people and the
Government of Liberia in building a nation that remains
at peace with itself and with its neighbours, free from
the scourge of war, with the hard-won stability enduring
for all of Liberia’s future generations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Zouev for his informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Schoulgin Nyoni.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to brief
the Security Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). This is, indeed, an historic
moment — the final Security Council meeting on
Liberia and the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL).
The Security Council has accompanied Liberia
through the painful years of civil war, through the
challenging years of peacebuilding that followed,
through the trying times of the Ebola pandemic and
now, finally, transition. With successive mandates
to observer missions and peacekeeping operations,
sanctions regimes, panels of experts, resolutions and
statements, this organ has remained committed to a
peaceful Liberia.
On 27 May 2010, at the request of the Liberian
Government, Liberia was placed on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Since then, the PBC has
engaged in building peace in Liberia. As Chair of the
country configuration, Ambassador Skoog visited
Liberia from 21 to 25 March. He did so in order to
engage with the new Government and a wide range of
stakeholders. His aim was to identify peacebuilding
priorities beyond the peacekeeping presence and to
discuss the future engagement of the PBC in Liberia.
4/22

19/04/2018

The Commission played a key role in supporting
the work of the Government and UNMIL in the
development of the peacebuilding plan requested
in resolution 2333 (2016). The statement of mutual
commitments on peacebuilding in Liberia between the
Government and the Peacebuilding Commission has
been a key mechanism of the PBC’s engagement with
Liberia. The peacebuilding priority areas identified in
the most recent statement of mutual commitments are
security sector development, strengthening the rule of
law, promoting national reconciliation, and peaceful and
inclusive elections in 2017. That statement, as well as
the peacebuilding plan, will now form part of the basis
for the new Government’s national development plan.
Over the almost 15 years of its successful mission,
United Nations peacekeeping in Liberia through
UNMIL has been at the forefront of efforts to lay the
critical foundation for peace in Liberia. It has disarmed
more than 100,000 combatants and protected millions
of civilians, assisted in rebuilding the police, justice
and security institutions, facilitated the provision of
humanitarian aid, and supported the development of
national capacity to promote and protect human rights.
UNMIL’s mission did not come without a cost. We
should never forget the 202 peacekeepers who lost their
lives in the service of peace during the nearly 15 years
that the Mission was deployed in Liberia.
UNMIL has benefited from a series of excellent
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
The PBC Chair would like to commend in particular
Special Representative Farid Zarif, Deputy Special
Representative for Rule of Law Waldemar Vrey and
Deputy Special Representative/Resident Coordinator
Yacoub El Hillo. Their engagement and strong
commitment has been crucial to bringing the Mission
to a successful conclusion in partnership with the
Government of Liberia.
After today, Liberia will no longer be on the
Security Council agenda and the United Nations
peacekeeping mission will have ended its operations.
However, the PBC and the United Nations are still
very much involved in supporting Liberia in this new
chapter. With regard to the transition from UNMIL
to a United Nations presence, the Commission has
consistently recommended the continuation of the good
offices role and political accompaniment of the United
Nations, as well as the provision of the expertise needed
for political analysis and the implementation of the
peacebuilding plan following the closure of UNMIL.
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

The good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the mediation efforts of President
Obasanjo and other efforts by the European Union,
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and the broader international
community were crucial in the recent election. It is
strongly recommended that the good offices function
be preserved during a period of heightened risk of
tension in Liberia’s ongoing transition.
Delivering on the promise of sustainable
development is essential to building resilience,
successfully completing the transitions and reducing
the risk of violent conflict or a return to conflict. Allow
me to briefly outline some of the key challenges where
support from the international community will be
needed as we move forward.
We cannot ignore the fact that several of the root
causes of the conflict in Liberia remain. Addressing
decentralization and land issues, as well as ensuring
greater access to justice and increased capacity in
the security and justice sectors, will be crucial for
the continued consolidation of peace. They must
be addressed in the new Government’s national
development plan. The need to strengthen the rule of
law and reconciliation is crucial. In addition, legislation
on violence against women is also still outstanding.
It remains imperative for the PBC to continue to
push for renewed and sustained political leadership
of the key structural reforms, as set out in phase I of
the peacebuilding plan. Moving forward, such reforms
will help to address some of the root causes of conflict
in Liberia. Greater integration of the United Nations
sustaining peace efforts is critical in that regard. That
includes ensuring that sustaining peace in solidly
reflected in the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework and that all parts of the United Nations
system on the ground support the national development
plan in an effective and coordinated way. The PBC has
an important role to play in encouraging such support
and in working with all parts of the United Nations
system to make sure that it happens.
It is clear that concrete progress with regard to the
reforms will also be dependent on economic growth and
financial capabilities. The difficult economic situation
has a continued negative impact on the population.
However, the Government is clear that it has the
necessary political will and energy. To illustrate that,
the President has decreased his salary by 25 per cent.

S/PV. 8239

When President Weah met Ambassador Skoog,
he assured him that Liberia had an enthusiastic and
energetic new Government that was committed to
ensuring the best future for the people of Liberia.
However, the President stressed that the new Government
would need the continued support of the international
community. He stressed the importance of partnerships
in that regard. The PBC will continue to work closely
with the World Bank and other international financial
institutions in that regard. It will also encourage greater
private sector engagement. The Liberia multi-partner
trust fund, with predictable funding from international
partners, in combination with the Peacebuilding Fund’s
catalytic support, has the potential to be an effective
mechanism to enable the continued implementation of
the country’s peacebuilding priorities.
To conclude, the Peacebuilding Commission will
continue its political accompaniment and support
continued international attention. The Peacebuilding
Commission will work alongside the Resident
Coordinator and the United Nations country team to
support the Government’s work towards sustainable
development through the development of Liberia’s
national development plan. The Peacebuilding
Commission will also discuss a framework of
engagement as an option to ensure mutual accountability
between the Government, the United Nations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, including for the important
outstanding priorities of the Liberia peacebuilding plan.
The
President
(spoke
in
Spanish):
I
thank Ambassador Schoulgin Nyoni for her
informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Liberty.
Mr. Liberty: Before I begin, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to brief the
Security Council today on my experience in Liberia.
As a Liberian-American, it is also among the highest
honours of my life to have the opportunity to address
the representatives of the Permanent Mission of Liberia
to the United Nations and, of course, the entire Council.
My name is Chid Liberty. I am an entrepreneur. My
family came to the United States when I was only five
years old to seek refuge from the deteriorating political
situation in Liberia. By the time I had reached my
teenage years, Liberia was in the middle of a full-blown
civil war. The war in Liberia was brutal, characterized
particularly by the use of child soldiers and conflictrelated sexual violence. However, I am here to report

18-114875/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

that today, through the social and political organizing
of civil society groups, such as Leymah Gbowee’s
Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace, through the
regional intervention of our friends in the Economic
Community of West African States, with the help of
bold political home-produced leaders, such as Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf, and through the actions of this body,
Liberia is truly a peaceful country once again.
In January, Liberia completed its first transition
from one democratically elected Government to
another such Government in 71 years. Our election
was not perfect, but it was a testament to the Liberian
people’s commitment to our stable peace. Through
months of challenges and investigating irregularities,
all sides remained committed to a fair election and a
peaceful transition.
Liberia’s peace is about more than just our physical
safety. As for many here, as a young man in the United
States, Liberia became synonymous with those photos
of young boys dressed in ripped army fatigues, carrying
semi-automatic weapons. I therefore cannot express
the feeling in my heart when, on my way to work in
Monrovia on gorgeous mornings, I see children dressed
head to toe in school uniforms. The only marching that
our children are doing is into the classroom and onto
the playground. Despite our low school enrolment rates,
Liberians are more committed than ever to educating
our next generation. My business, Liberty & Justice,
makes and distributes free school uniforms to children
who cannot afford them. Research of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology shows that when school
uniforms are donated, attendance increases by up to
62 per cent and test scores improve. Out of every three
young girls who receives a donated school uniform, two
will delay their first pregnancy. We pay for the unforms
through the sales of our brand, UNIFORM, which is
sold predominantly here in the United States through a
partnership with Bloomingdale’s.
Our peace is not just for kids. When I first got
back to Liberia in 2009, we had a poverty rate of
approximately 80 per cent and a formal unemployment
rate of 80 per cent. That really drove the decision of
myself and my partners to start a factory to provide
formal jobs for women, particularly those who were
internally displaced or vulnerable to chronic formal
unemployment. Women are left out of the formal
economy, especially in such major industries in Liberia
as mining, rubber and logging. With the help of United
States impact investors, we established the first fair
6/22

19/04/2018

trade factory in Liberia and begin shipping orders
for American brands and, eventually, our own brand
uniform. I wish to note that the security guards at our
factory are all former child soldiers who now protect
the very women they used to victimize.
Today, Liberia’s per capita gross domestic product
has almost recovered to its pre-war levels despite major
setbacks from the Ebola outbreak and a drastic slide in
commodity prices. However, this is not about statistics.
It is about real people. I am inspired to share the story
of one of our workers. Jenna came to the factory in 2010
without enough money to even afford a matching pair of
slippers. During the war, her first husband abandoned
her with a few of her children and moved to Sierra Leone,
leaving Jenna and her children as refugees in their own
country. They lived in one of the camps for internally
displaced persons on the outskirts of Monrovia. One
day, Jenna’s women’s group told her that there was a
factory offering jobs and that she did not need to know
how to read or write. Fortunately for us, Jenna came.
Although she could not fill out any paperwork, it turns
out she has an incredibly rare talent — operating a
sewing machine. She quickly became and still is the
number one sewing machine operator in our factory.
Over the past eight years, she has learned to read and
write through programmes sponsored by the factory.
Today Jenna is employed, literate, remarried, foodsecure, healthy and happy, and has all her children
in school.
I am here mostly to give thanks. We know that the
commitments, financial and otherwise, were not easy to
make when this organ unanimously adopted resolution
1503 (2003). I am also here to report that United Nations
investments were not made in vain. The United Nations
Mission in Liberia officially ended its functions in
March, and I can say that Liberia is truly a post-conflict
success story. Mission accomplished. However, I would
be remiss in letting the mission end here.
As we look to the future, Liberia now more than
ever needs to strengthen our private sector. We have a
young population that needs to be educated, employed
and engaged in the democratic process. I hope we can
all agree that to continue the spirit of the Mission means
we all need to find ways to invest in Liberia’s youth.
We need foreign investment in young entrepreneurs
that will create Liberia’s jobs of the future, build our
domestic tax base, and support our civil society. Many
people think investing in Liberia is still too risky;
however, having seen Liberia lose a generation first18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

hand, I know that the risk of investing in Liberia is
nowhere near as risky as not investing in Liberia.
I thank the Council for the honour of addressing
it today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Liberty for his informative briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I should
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule
of Law and Security Institutions, Mr. Zouev, as well
as Ambassador Schoulgin Nyoni of Sweden, for their
remarks today. I would especially like to welcome
Mr. Liberty to the Council today and to thank him for
his briefing and for telling us about his very inspiring
work on the ground in Liberia.
Today we reflect on the history of a more than
14-year-long peacekeeping mission that made an
invaluable contribution to peace and security in
a country racked by years of civil war, chaos and
hopelessness. In the 14 years before the arrival of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in 2003,
Liberians endured a horrific civil war that killed up to
a quarter million men, women and children, and left
half of Liberia’s population displaced. Throughout the
fighting, human rights violations and abuses, including
torture, rape, sexual slavery, summary executions and
the unlawful use of and recruitment of child soldiers
were prevalent.
A comprehensive peace agreement finally brought
the calm that allowed for the arrival of UNMIL.
UNMIL has played an indelible role in Liberia’s return
from devastation through the application by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of good
offices, the reporting of its political and human rights
units, the mentorship of its police units to their Liberian
counterparts, its capacity-building of Liberia’s courts,
and at times its very physical presence. UNMIL has made
a difference. It helped Liberia navigate the challenging
days that come with any overwhelming transition.
Last month, a Mission that had more than 15,000
military personnel at its height saw the last of its
military, police and civilian numbers depart. The
United States commends the personnel and leaders of
UNMIL for their service and sacrifice in establishing
peace and security, and remembers those who lost
their lives in its pursuit. UNMIL’s personnel should

S/PV. 8239

never forget that their presence really changed lives.
The Council’s action has had tangible impact as well,
and as penholder the United States thanks past and
present Council colleagues for their collaboration and
commitment to Liberia over all these years.
At UNMIL’s 30 March closure, we were able to
look back and see that it was able to achieve so much.
Many of its achievements reflect the success that is
possible when certain factors are in place. One year
ago, Ambassador Haley outlined a set of peacekeeping
principles as a pathway to more efficient operations
and successful outcomes. For UNMIL, many of the
conditions outlined in those principles were in fact in
place, and we believe they played a significant role in
the Mission’s success and its eventual ability to close.
First, UNMIL enjoyed strong relations in
collaboration with the host country Government.
From its earliest support to elections to its recent
collaboration on the peacebuilding plan for Liberia,
the Mission and the Government were real partners
working towards a common goal — peace and security
for Liberians. Secondly, UNMIL’s mandate was
realistic and achievable. It was called on to support
political solutions, help the country recover from total
devastation, build the capacity of its core institutions,
and consolidate democracy through elections and the
democratic transfer of power. The conduct of elections
is a challenging enterprise no matter where they
happen, and UNMIL worked with the Government and
regional and international partners to contribute to their
successful execution. During the contentious challenge
in 2017, the Mission engaged stakeholders to ensure
they employed legal channels. After the challenges had
run their course and elections resumed, we understood
just how far Liberia and its institutions had come.
The United States also commends the leadership
of UNMIL’s last Special Representative, Mr. Farid
Zarif, and mission personnel who worked arduously in
preparation for the conduct of elections. We commend
the leadership of Presidents Johnson Sirleaf and
Weah and the candidates in the elections for finding a
resolution that put the people of Liberia first and that
brought about the first democratic transition of power
in over 70 years.
Finally, we want to address the issue of
reconciliation and human rights. In any post-conflict
setting, the complex challenges of reconciliation and
healing can linger. However, despite the passage of

18-114877/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

time and positive momentum, addressing them remains
critical. As former South African President Nelson
Mandela once said, “true reconciliation does not consist
in merely forgetting the past”. In that spirit, we strongly
commend the national reconciliation conference led
by the Liberian Government last month. We applaud
President Weah’s call for inclusiveness and dialogue so
that all in Liberia feel that they have been heard and
included in the work to reconcile the past and forge a
common Liberian national identity.
We also applaud the revised Strategic Road Map for
National Healing, Peacebuilding and Reconciliation and
the 12 agreed thematic areas of national reconciliation.
We hope for immediate progress in the reconciliation
objectives of the peacebuilding plan and realization
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s
recommendations, along with the legislator’s longoverdue passage of the land rights and local Government
bills. We encourage the continued development of
Liberia’s Independent National Commission on Human
Rights and its collaboration with civil society to further
embed respect for human rights as a cornerstone
of Liberian society. Moreover, we commend the
agreement between the Government and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) in the establishment of the OHCHR
country office on 2 April.
The closure of the Mission sees the United Nations
and Liberia beginning a different period in a different
form. To prepare for this eventuality, in UNMIL’s final
mandate we asked the Mission and the Secretariat
to develop a peacebuilding plan for Liberia, which
they did in close consultation with the Government
and civil society. We again thank all of those who
put in the long hours and great effort to produce the
plan in a remarkable 90 days, and we also thank all
Member States, some represented here, that have
made significant contributions towards the success
of that plan. We encourage all of Liberia’s partners to
stand beside the Government as it seeks to unleash the
potential of the country and its people.
In conclusion, UNMIL demonstrated what is
possible when peacekeeping missions enjoy the full
backing of the host country, support political solutions,
have achievable mandates and put forth clear exit
strategies. At this historic moment for Liberia, as
the baton is passed from peacekeeping to further
peacebuilding, we again commend UNMIL’s significant
achievements and applaud the contributions of its
8/22

19/04/2018

personnel and the sacrifices made by its peacekeepers.
With the Mission’s closure, we send our encouragement
to the members of the United Nations country team and
its Resident Coordinator as they adjust to a new and
different phase of effort. But most of all, we salute the
Liberian people and their resilience.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Alexander Zouev for presenting the final progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) (S/2018/344). We also
thank Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni, who spoke on behalf of
the Chair of the Liberian country configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for the plans
announced for the PBC’s future participation in the
country’s development programmes. We also listened
with interest to the statement by Mr. Chid Liberty, a
representative of Liberian civil society.
The Russian Federation greatly appreciates
UNMIL’s efforts to stabilize the situation in Liberia,
of which a recent example has been the measures
undertaken by the Mission to assist in preparing and
conducting presidential and parliamentary elections.
The success of those events has helped to reinforce
State institutions in the country and led to a general
improvement in the situation. It is important that
the Liberian people have managed to settle their
election-related differences in a peaceful manner,
harnessing their existing legal mechanisms through the
Supreme Court.
Needless to say, today we should also remember
those who have sacrificed their lives in peacekeeping
missions in order to make it possible for us to consider
this Mission closed. We want to warmly thank all
of those who have contributed over the years to the
success of a mission that becomes part of history today.
In that regard, we want to particularly commend the
good offices of Special Representative Farid Zarif.
The United Nations presence has made a notable
contribution to maintaining calm in the country during
the post-election period.
We are satisfied with the security situation in
Liberia. On the whole, it appears that the authorities are
coping with the functions that were transferred to them
from the United Nations peacekeepers in July 2016.
The democratic transfer of power that took place
at the beginning of 2018 has made a considerable
contribution to State-building. However, Monrovia is
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

still facing the challenge of ensuring the establishment
of State institutions throughout the country. Until
then, it is difficult to see how the authorities will be
able to implement the provisions of the peacebuilding
plan. Furthermore, Liberians are showing insufficient
momentum in reforming law-enforcement bodies and
the justice sector, which are crucial to the State’s ability
to maintain the necessary level of security. The new
president of Liberia has major tasks ahead with regard
to settling inter-ethnic and inter-communal conflict,
resolving land and territorial disputes, and, crucially,
restoring trust in the criminal justice system. It will
also be important to pay serious attention to finding
solutions to the underlying causes that led to the initial
outbreak of the conflict, especially issues linked to
land use.
We believe it is essential for Liberia to establish
effective cooperation with countries in the region,
particularly Côte d’Ivoire, in order to maintain
stability in the border areas. These issues are becoming
increasingly urgent in the light of the growing terrorist
threats in the region. We also want to emphasize the
importance of encouraging the process of returning
Ivorian refugees to their homes.
We were pleased to note that the national healthcare system has taken the lessons from the fight against
Ebola on board. However, the epidemic prevention
mechanisms must not be allowed to atrophy.
We hope that Monrovia will continue to work
to strengthen its State foundations, maintain
peace and stability and achieve consistent
socioeconomic development.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and
Ambassador Irina Schoulgin Nyoni for their very
informative briefings. I also thank Mr. Chid Liberty
for his valuable remarks on the essential role of civil
society in Liberia.
We meet today at a significant moment for the
Government and the people of Liberia. The United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) completed its
mandate on 30 March after almost 15 years of service.
Fifteen years ago, Liberia was a completely failed
State. Half of the population was forcibly displaced.
Many citizens were victims of human rights violations.
Despite that very low starting point, Liberia has gone
through a remarkable journey of transformation, with
the assistance of UNMIL. It is currently on the edge

S/PV. 8239

of a new era of greater inclusiveness and the equal
participation of all Liberian citizens in the political and
economic life of the country.
The inauguration of President George Weah was a
milestone on the path of the post-conflict transformation
of the oldest republic in Africa. Poland congratulates
the people of Liberia and their political leaders on the
progress they have made in restoring peace and on
their persistent resolve to remain peaceful throughout
the electoral process. We also commend the National
Elections Commission and the Supreme Court, which
ensured the credibility of that process.
We welcome the essential role played by civil
society in restoring peace in Liberia. Religious and
traditional leaders, representatives of women’s and
young people’s groups, as well as election observer
groups and the media, have made significant
contributions to maintaining a transparent and peaceful
electoral process.
Liberia is still facing many challenges, including a
dire economic situation, limited progress in addressing
the root causes of conflict, and structural inequalities.
It will be important to enhance accountable governance
and build the democratic foundations of the nation.
We therefore welcome the leadership shown by
President Weah and his commitment to fighting
corruption, promoting good governance and taking
national reconciliation forward, as well as advancing
constitutional reform and decentralization. We also
appreciate the Liberian authorities’ efforts to give
priority to the Sustainable Development Goals in the
country’s national development plan, which will help to
sustain peace and lay a foundation for sustainable and
inclusive development.
Despite the closure of the peacekeeping operation,
the United Nations should remain closely engaged in
supporting Liberia in its efforts to meet its challenges
to sustaining peace and achieving sustainable
development. It is our obligation to preserve UNMIL’s
gains and achievements and support dialogue on the
challenges the country still faces.
Finally, we would like to express our appreciation to
UNMIL for restoring and sustaining peace in Liberia.
We thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
excellent leadership. We also thank his predecessors
who contributed to the achievement of UNMIL’s
mandate. And we pay tribute to the 202 United Nations
peacekeepers who paid the ultimate price in the pursuit

18-114879/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

of peace in Liberia. As we can see today, their sacrifice
was not in vain but has brought back hope and peace to
the people of Liberia.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, and Ms. Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, speaking
on behalf of the Chair of the Liberian configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. My
delegation would also like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his tireless efforts to bring stability to Liberia as Head
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).
The briefing bringing us together today is especially
important to my delegation, marking as it does the
symbolic closure of a third peacekeeping operation in
West Africa, after those of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone and the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire. That reflects the effectiveness of
our shared Organization and its resolute focus on its
primary purpose of maintaining peace and security
around the world.
The closure of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia marks a defining moment in that country’s
history, but also for the United Nations in its strategic
and pragmatic approach to peacekeeping operations
around the world. The lessons learned from UNMIL’s
experience will unquestionably enable us to strengthen
the effectiveness of our structures and mechanisms
dedicated to preserving international peace and security.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to salute the memory of the 202 peacekeepers who
lost their lives in the service of peace during the 15
years of the deployment of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. Liberia has achieved reconciliation and
enjoys excellent relations with neighbouring countries,
including Côte d’Ivoire, as President George Weah’s
recent trip to Abidjan on 4 and 5 April demonstrates.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the essential contribution of the Liberian
political stakeholders, who decided to place their
national interests above all other considerations
during a critical period in their country’s history. My
thanks also go to the United Nations and to all the
bilateral and multilateral partners whose multifaceted
contributions have enabled Liberia to restore peace
and stability. Along with the rest of the Council, my
delegation welcomes Liberia’s evolving sociopolitical
10/22

19/04/2018

development, as manifested in the recent holding
of open, transparent and peaceful elections and an
exemplary political transition that shows Liberia to be
a country that has definitively chosen a path of peace
and democracy.
Many challenges remain, but we believe firmly that
the commitment and political will of the new Liberian
authorities will enable Liberia to begin again on solid
ground. In that regard, we note the Government’s
determination to combat corruption, promote good
governance and advance the national reconciliation
process. However, it will need the support of the
international community if it is to strengthen the
credibility and legitimacy of its governmental
institutions. As the Secretary-General has called for,
international efforts must therefore continue so that
Liberia’s partners can support the Government’s efforts
to sustain peace and strengthen the investments that
have already been made towards the country’s lasting
stabilization. Liberia’s fresh start must be based on
a sound footing so that it can make resolute progress
towards development in the interests of its people.
The final departure of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation is a milestone and marks
the host country’s break from a long, painful but
instructive interlude towards a transition to sustainable
development and stability. Building on the results
achieved with a view to sustaining peace and stability
will continue to be essential in order to prevent any
backsliding. It is therefore incumbent on the United
Nations country team, along with the Government of
Liberia and regional and subregional organizations, to
work together towards that goal.
For its part, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its readiness
to share its experiences with its neighbour with a view
to helping it to regain peace and stability once and
for all, within the framework of a dynamic bilateral
partnership between the two States.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank
Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, for his briefing.
We also appreciate Sweden’s efforts in its role as Chair
of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we thank Ambassador Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni for her briefing, including on the Chair’s recent
visit to the country. We were also pleased to hear the
views of Mr. Liberty.
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

Liberia has indeed made remarkable progress in
consolidating its peace and stability and strengthening
its democratic institutions. The peaceful and successful
holding of the recent legislative and presidential
elections clearly demonstrated the resilience of the
country’s democratic institutions. We congratulate
the people and the Government of Liberia on their
achievement in ensuring a democratic transfer of
power. That is a success for Africa as a whole, as well
as for Liberia and the region.
The United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
completed its mandate last month at a time of great
hope and optimism, and we appreciate its important
contribution to promoting peace, stability and
development in Liberia. In the words of the country’s
newly elected President George Weah, the United Nations
has had a positive impact on the lives of Liberians, as
well as on every part of the fabric of Liberian society,
since its arrival in 2003. We appreciate the dedicated
efforts of Special Representative Zarif and the civilian
and military personnel of UNMIL, as well as the
contributions of the troop- and police-contributing
countries. We pay tribute to the 202 peacekeepers
who made the ultimate sacrifice in advancing peace in
Liberia. Ethiopia is proud to have played its part in the
stabilization of Liberia through its contribution of three
infantry battalions to UNMIL.
We welcome the adoption today of presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/8, which, among other things,
requests the Secretary-General to undertake a study of
the role of UNMIL in the resolution of conflicts and
challenges in Liberia, with a view to drawing lessons
for the best practices of United Nations peacekeeping
missions in transition. We believe that will be vital
to enhancing the overall effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping.
In spite of the remarkable progress made over the
past decade and a half, Liberia still faces enormous
challenges. That is why it needs the continued support
of the international community, post-UNMIL, to
sustain peace. We believe that the efforts to address the
root causes of conflict should be enhanced by fostering
reconciliation, strengthening democratic institutions,
promoting popular participation and expanding social
services. In that regard, we welcome the alignment
of Liberia’s national development agenda with the
Sustainable Development Goals, which will help to
address poverty in Liberia and improve the economic
situation of its society’s most vulnerable sections,

S/PV. 8239

particularly women and young people. We also note the
continued implementation of the Liberia peacebuilding
plan, developed in close consultation between the
United Nations, the Government of Liberia and
partners. Its implementation will be vital to sustaining
peace in the country, and we hope that all stakeholders
will fulfil their commitments and support its full
implementation. The Peacebuilding Commission and
its Liberia configuration play an important role in
that regard, and their ongoing active engagement will
continue to be absolutely vital.
Finally, as Liberia opens a new chapter in its history,
we hope that the United Nations, the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other bilateral and multilateral partners will continue
to support and accompany the country’s efforts to build
and sustain peace.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev
and Mr. Liberty for their briefings today, which capture
both the distance that Liberia has travelled since the
civil war and its possibilities for the future.
At the outset, I would also like to commend the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for its
efforts in support of the people of Liberia as they
moved from the ashes of war to rebuild their country.
It is worth taking a moment to appreciate the fact that
the United Nations Mission in Liberia is a mission
that has successfully delivered on its mandate. It did
so by building trust with the Government and the
people of Liberia. UNMIL’s well-planned transition
phase is indicative of the Mission’s professionalism
and will ensure that the United Nations continues to
support the country going forward. I commend Special
Representative Zarif for his leadership and good
offices. We also pay tribute to the peacekeepers and
civilian personnel who lost their lives while promoting
peace, stability and development in Liberia.
I must admit that it is quite special for me to
participate in this, the very last Security Council
meeting on UNMIL, having served as the only Swedish
diplomat in Monrovia during the transition period in
2004 and 2005. At the time, UNMIL was new and had
just started to bring hope of an end to the violence. At the
same time, I know that Ambassador Skoog would have
liked to be present to add his personal impressions to
his briefing as Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. However, as the Council is

18-1148711/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

aware, he is in Sweden making the final preparations
for the Council’s visit over the weekend. I hope that
the Council will allow me to convey the Ambassador’s
impressions and thoughts from his recent trip instead.
First, the transition from UNMIL to the United
Nations country team illustrates how far Liberia
has come. The security situation in the country is
stable. The elections put the Liberian constitutional
framework to the test. The use of legal means to address
grievances after the elections underscores the progress
that has been made in the rule of law over the past
13 years. The elections also demonstrated Liberians’
strong desire to maintain peace and actively engage in
strengthening democracy in the country. During his
time in Liberia, Ambassador Skoog was particularly
impressed and heartened by Liberia’s young people
and their commitment to peace and the democratic
process. They are a vital resource for the country that
the new Government must harness and nurture. The
next generation of Liberians has high expectations and
will hold the Government to account.
The election process, however, also reminded us of
the complexity and fragility of the situation. As I said
in the briefing, many of the root causes of the conflict
remain. Tackling those issues is a prerequisite for an
inclusive and equitable society. Continued reforms and
the enactment of pending legislation on, for example,
land rights, local Government and domestic violence
will be of paramount importance in that regard.
As we have said many times before, there can be no
peace without development and no development without
peace, or without respect for human rights Taken
together, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace resolutions form a powerful
framework for building peaceful, prosperous, inclusive
and sustainable societies. The Sustainable Development
Goals represent the indispensable building blocks
for the resilience that is needed to support peaceful
democratic transition and reduce the risk of violent
conflict. Liberia’s rich natural resources mean that
the Government has the opportunity to promote the
revitalized economy that the country so desperately
needs. However, to harness that potential and to build
trust, the country’s natural resources must be managed
in an open and transparent way, assuring long-term
gains for all of the people of Liberia.
During his visit, Ambassador Skoog was honoured
to participate in the Liberia Moment Conference. The
12/22

19/04/2018

Conference, which was also attended by the Deputy
Secretary-General, the President of Liberia, United
Nations leadership and youth representatives, among
others, marked the starting point for an in-depth
consultation process by the Government on the design
of its new national development plan. It also marked
a farewell to UNMIL. Following his meeting with
the President, Ambassador Skoog noted that the new
Government was both committed and engaged, and
already taking the lead in identifying the country’s
challenges and formulating priorities for the future.
The President’s pro-poor agenda and commitment to
anti-corruption are promising. We are looking forward
to seeing how those commitments will be translated
into action that can deliver tangible improvement in
the lives of Liberians, not least in the rural areas. It
will be imperative to ensure that the new Government
takes forward residual tasks in the peacebuilding plan
and the statement of mutual commitments as part of
the new national development plan. Ambassador Skoog
reiterated that point throughout his visit.
Lastly, as we celebrate the successes, we must
remain conscious of the challenges ahead. There is a
real risk that the Government will not be able to meet the
high expectations for clear and quick results in people’s
lives. The President underlined to Ambassador Skoog
the continued need for partnerships and support. It is
therefore essential to ensure that international attention
on Liberia does not wane. There will continue to be a
need for a strong and coherent United Nations presence
in the country going forward, with the capacity to
support the Government in preventing conflict and
addressing its root causes. Ensuring political capacity
and sustaining the good offices that have been so
crucial in Liberia will continue to be important, as will
support to the Resident Coordinator’s Office. As we
saw during the elections, the Economic Community of
West African States will also have an important role to
play in support of the country.
The international community must also ensure
continued and predictable resources for sustaining
peace. The planned multipartner trust fund, managed
by the Resident Coordinator in cooperation with
the Government, could be an excellent vehicle for
coordinated and predictable support, in combination
with the catalytic support of the Peacebuilding Fund.
The transition will not end when the peacekeepers
leave, and Liberia should not fear being left to face
the challenges of the future alone. We, the partners
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

of Liberia, are committed to sustaining peace in
Liberia. As Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we will continue to play
our part.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the end of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), but I would like to begin
by thanking Mr. Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General
for Rule of Law and Security Institutions, and the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden for their
very insightful briefings. I would also like to thank
Mr. Chid Liberty for his relevant and particularly
encouraging remarks.
As I mentioned, France welcomes the end of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. Its
withdrawal demonstrates that it has fulfilled the duties
entrusted to it. Although the United Nations is so often
and so unfairly pilloried, this is another peacekeeping
success story for the Council and for the United Nations
as a whole. It can be added to the list of recent success
stories in Côte d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Haiti.
UNMIL was established in 2003 with a mandate
to enforce the ceasefire. Throughout its 15 years in
the country, it has made a significant contribution to
stability in Liberia. I would like to take this opportunity
to pay a well-deserved tribute to all the United
Nations personnel who participated in the Mission
and contributed to its success on the ground day after
day, particularly the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif. I would also like to
pay tribute to the memory of the 202 Blue Helmets who
lost their lives in Liberia. The considerable progress
that the country has made since 2003 goes a long way
to making their sacrifice worthwhile. UNMIL’s success
should serve as a source of inspiration to the Council
as it deploys other peacekeeping missions in difficult
situations where they face challenges in fulfilling their
mandates. It reminds us that the recipe for success lies
in a strong commitment on the part of the Council,
which kept the Mission in Liberia for 15 years, as
well as in the implementation of a genuine national
reconciliation process on the ground, without which
long-term stability would be impossible.
UNMIL’s departure does not signal the end of the
United Nations in Liberia. On the contrary, it provides
an opportunity for the Organization to adopt new
support strategies with frameworks and instruments
that can better meet the current needs of the Liberian

S/PV. 8239

people. The United Nations country team on the ground,
in close cooperation with the Liberia configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, will therefore continue
to provide support. It is also essential that the broader
international community continue to support Liberia,
alongside the new United Nations mechanism. As
Mr. Liberty so eloquently stated, that is the key to
sustaining the excellent results gained so far, promoting
development in the country and creating jobs. It is also
fully in line with the Secretary-General’s vision of
mobilizing the international community throughout the
conflict cycle, which we fully support.
Liberia was recently able to demonstrate how far
it has progressed along the road to democratization
and stabilization. The peaceful holding of the most
recent elections is a major achievement, to the credit
of all Liberian stakeholders. It marks the first peaceful
transition between two democratically elected Presidents
since the civil war began, which tells us that Liberia has
turned the page and is now a truly mature democracy.
The recent transfer of power in Liberia also represents a
response to the deep aspirations of the Liberian people.
It is a truly historic moment. France has expressed its
willingness to support President Weah in achieving the
ambitious goals that he has outlined for his country. We
therefore call on all of Liberia’s partners to support the
new Government’s national development plan.
Regardless of the progress that has been made
so far, we should not underestimate the challenges
that Liberia still faces on the road to sustainable
development and peace. They include the fight against
corruption and the issues of national reconciliation
and governance, especially through the rebuilding and
operationalization of the Liberian armed forces. Other
challenges include the problem of ensuring respect for
human rights, especially the situation of women, which
cannot be considered satisfactory until considerable
progress has been made in combating gender-based
violence. Liberia’s lasting stabilization will also require
major efforts to combat impunity and energetic action
to address the root causes of conflict.
Our meeting today celebrates UNMIL’s true
success in the service of Liberia and its people. That
success, however, is only one stage on the long path
to sustainable development and stabilization in Liberia.
As President Macron emphasized to President Weah
when he visited Paris at the end of February, France
will stand firmly beside its Liberian partners in order to
ensure that Liberia continues advance in that direction.

18-1148713/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev for his insightful briefing on
the final progress report (S/2018/344) of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL).
(spoke in Russian)
We thank Mr. Alexander Zouev.
(spoke in English)
We would also like to express our deep appreciation
to our dear friend and colleague, Ambassador Schoulgin
Nyoni, for updating us on the work of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. And
we commend Mr. Chid Liberty, of Liberty and Justice,
for his efforts to provide economic opportunities for
Liberians. We would like to make four points on the
subject of today’s meeting.
First, we wholeheartedly congratulate the people
of Liberia and the United Nations on the country’s
successful elections, its historic democratic transfer
of power and the successful conclusion of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). We commend the
Liberian people for the fact that they have come such
a long way in restoring peace in their country. They
should be supported by the international community as
they work to consolidate their hard-won achievements.
Secondly, we are encouraged by President Weah’s
determination to address the remaining challenges — including,
among other things, the economic situation, poverty,
structural inequalities and, most of all, corruption — and
to promote good governance and national reconciliation. To
achieve those goals, Monrovia will require ongoing bilateral
and multilateral political support and technical expertise
from the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and neighbouring countries. That should be
reinforced by active United Nations engagement through the
United Nations country team, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
Thirdly, we welcome the launch of an inclusive
process for formulating a new national development
agenda for the period from 2018 to 2024, as well as
the Government’s vision for addressing poverty and its
people-centred approach to development. We commend
its alignment of that strategy with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and call on the Government
to continue its efforts to empower women and young
people and to apply a whole-of-pillar approach to the
security-development nexus, among other things. We
14/22

19/04/2018

also fully endorse and share in the words of Deputy
Permanent Representative Pawel Radomski of Poland
with regard to the role of religious leaders in fostering
peace. We would like to remind our colleagues of the
Arria Formula meeting on that subject that my Mission
is organizing in cooperation with the Alliance of
Civilizations, to be held next Tuesday.
Fourthly, we believe that predictable and sustainable
financial assistance will be critical to rebuilding
Liberia, especially with regard to infrastructure,
development, education, health, the rule of law, land
reform and youth development. It is our earnest hope
that the international community and donors will come
forward to respond generously to the appeal for funds
for the newly established multi-partner trust fund in
order to enable Liberia’s peacebuilding plan to reach
its goals. At the same time, the Government should
continue to reduce its dependency on aid and establish
an environment conducive to foreign investment and
economic and fiscal recovery. It will also be equally
important to consolidate the Government, bring about
national reconciliation and transitional justice, mitigate
humanitarian crises and respect human rights.
In conclusion, we fully support and welcome the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/8) adopted today
on UNMIL. We would like to express our appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zarif, and the Mission’s personnel for their
contribution to restoring stability in Liberia. We also
pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeepers who lost
their lives in the pursuit of peace in the country. We
look forward to the results of the study of the role of
UNMIL in the resolution of conflicts in Liberia, and
believe that the lessons learned will help to improve the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
I would like to once again reiterate Kazakhstan’s
commitment to working with members of the Security
Council and others to ensure a peaceful and prosperous
future for Liberia.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would very much like to thank Mr. Alexander
Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law
and Security Institutions, Ambassador Schoulgin
Nyoni, speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Mr. Chid Liberty for their valuable briefings.
Approximately 15 years have passed since the
Council established the United Nations Mission in
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

Liberia (UNMIL) pursuant to resolution 1509 (2003),
in order to support and rebuild a nation devastated by
two civil wars that had persisted for 14 years, resulting
in thousands of victims and ruined infrastructure
and requiring the deployment of more than 180,000
peacekeeping troops.
We are here today to discuss UNMIL’s successful
withdrawal. We rarely discuss an item on the Council’s
agenda with a positive conclusion, but this is a moment
that we hope will be repeated in the future with many
peacekeeping missions. Liberia today is a perfect
example of local, regional and international engagement
working together to build a State capable of sustaining
itself. We applaud UNMIL’s efforts, with the support
of international partners. to rebuild and promote the
country’s security sector and achieve stability in
Liberia. The international community must continue to
support Liberia after the Mission’s withdrawal through
the United Nations country team and the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel. We also welcome
the moral and sustained support provided by the
Peacebuilding Fund of the Peacebuilding Commission
in its efforts on behalf of Liberia’s development.
The role of the United Nations country team
will increase in importance following the Mission’s
withdrawal, particularly in the light of the difficult
economic situation facing Liberia today. We
therefore call for continued support from the United
Nations country team, as well as the United Nations
Development
Programme,
the
Peacebuilding
Commission and international partners to implement
various development projects aimed at achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, as Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed indicated during her visit
to Liberia this past month. The Liberian people will
face challenges following the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission. However, we are certain that they are
ready to overcome them. We urge Special Representative
Mohammed Ibn Chambas to provide the necessary
good offices and support of the United Nations Office
for West Africa to the Liberian Government during the
next stage so as to meet the Government’s needs with
regard to developing the infrastructure and a system
of governance.
I would like to take this opportunity to convey my
gratitude to UNMIL and the Mission’s staff, particularly
those who sacrificed their lives to ensure security and
stability in Liberia. I also thank the Secretary-General,
Special Envoy Farid Zarif and his predecessors for

S/PV. 8239

their tireless efforts in achieving the progress that
we are witnessing today in Liberia so as to become a
success story in Africa. I would be remiss if I failed
to commend the work of the Economic Community of
West African States to achieve stability and support
the work of the United Nations in Liberia, especially
in the context of the presidential elections in December
2017. The elections demonstrated the determination
of the authorities in Liberia and their independence in
holding credible, transparent and successful elections.
We appreciate the role played by political stakeholders
in Liberia in turning to the national justice system for
the settlement of electoral disputes.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the people of Liberia on achieving a
successful outcome. That would not have been possible
without their determination. I convey my gratitude
also to the recently elected President of Liberia, His
Excellency Mr. George Weah, for assuming his new
office. We welcome all his efforts and initiatives to
achieve a number of goals, including improving the
economic situation, promoting investments and fighting
corruption, as well as encouraging good governance,
national reconciliation and ,lastly implementing, the
Sustainable Development Goals.
In conclusion, it seems fitting for me to quote from
President Weah’s inaugural address:
“Ending a peacekeeping mission successfully is
something in which all Liberians and her partners
should take great pride. We thank all Member
countries of the United Nations for [their] support,
and I promise to continue to build on the success
that we have achieved together”.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express or gratitude
for the briefings by Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Sweden, on behalf of the
Chair of the Liberia configuration in the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Mr. Liberty, whose presentation
provided us with an encouraging perspective on
his country.
We are pleased by the political and social stability
that Liberia has been able to achieve since the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), which ended its operations on 30 March. The

18-1148715/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

inclusive democratic process and the participation of
stakeholders at all levels in the political sphere, together
with the contribution of the international community
and the United Nations, have made it possible to
achieve the goal of stability that the people of Liberia
have longed for. We commend the work of UNMIL
and its leadership in fulfilling its mandate, including
monitoring the ceasefire and supporting the Liberian
Government’s efforts to strengthen peace and stability,
as well as actively contributing to the protection of
civilians, training local security forces and working to
create a peaceful environment conducive to the holding
of the elections held last year.
We also acknowledge and emphasize the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is intended
to support Liberia’s efforts in the areas of security
sector reform, the rule of law, reconciliation and
national cohesion. Similarly, we believe that promoting
development in Liberia is a priority area. It is imperative
that peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development
programmes be integrated in a coherent manner so
as to respond effectively in the post-conflict context.
We are aware that Liberia must continue to deal with
important challenges — peacebuilding is a daily effort
that requires the active participation of all the people of
Liberia and of the entire international community.
We highlight the transfer of security responsibilities
to the Liberian authorities in connection with the
democratic process the main objective of which was
the holding of the October 2017 presidential and
representative elections and the transfer of political
and administrative power to the new Government in
January 2018. The important ties linking good practices,
inclusive dialogue and strengthening cooperation
between UNMIL and the Liberian Government have
made achieving that important milestone possible. We
also appreciate the outstanding contributions and good
offices provided by the African Union and subregional
organizations, exemplified par excellence by the
outcome of the summit conference of the Economic
Community of West African States Authority of Heads
of State held in June 2017, which led to the signing of
the Farmington River Declaration, pursuant to which
the majority of the Liberian political parties committed
to carrying out the peaceful holding of elections, which
was fully borne out by the electoral process.
We also underscore the outstanding work of
Ms. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, former President of Liberia,
who paved the way leading to the stability of her
16/22

19/04/2018

country. We are confident that His Excellency President
George Weah will continue to lead the Government and
the people of Liberia on the path towards consolidating
the process of national reconciliation through inclusion
and combating impunity for abuses committed during
the civil war. Ensuring the welfare of the population, in
particular the most vulnerable groups, must be the main
interest leading towards stabilization and definitive
peace for the sole benefit of the Liberian people.
We would be remiss if we did not mention the
impact that the Ebola epidemic, which resulted in
a situation that went far beyond a mere health crisis.
Ebola and its rapid spread throughout Liberia caused
the humanitarian situation to deteriorate drastically
and that country to become the most affected in the
region, both by virtue of the number of deaths and of
cases reported. We believe that to be an urgent wake-up
call for the international community so that a crisis of
those proportions is never repeated in any country in
the world.
Lastly, we express our gratitude to UNMIL and
pay tribute to all the men and women of its military,
police and civilian components who spared no effort in
fulfilling its mandate, while demonstrating their deep
commitment over the past 15 years and successfully
concluding the work that has laid the groundwork for
prosperity in Liberia.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zouev and Ambassador
Schoulgin Nyoni for their respective briefings. China
listened closely to the briefing by Mr. Liberty.
The security situation in Liberia has stabilized
in recent years and economic development is back on
track. China is confident that under the leadership
of President Weah the Liberian Government and its
people will achieve even greater success on the path of
nation-building and development.
China pays tribute to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) as its mandate has come to an
end and commends it for the important contribution
it has made to maintaining peace and stability in
Liberia. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
an important means of maintaining international peace
and security. China has always believed that United
Nations peacekeeping should be subjected to timely
adjustments in accordance with actual conditions and
developments on the ground, up until its final exit.
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

At the same time, it is necessary to fully respect
the will of the countries concerned and to work in
close coordination with countries of the region and
subregional organizations. UNMIL is a success story
that is worth studying in order to identify lessons
learned. Following the departure of UNMIL, we
call upon the international community and Liberia’s
bilateral and multilateral cooperation partners to
enhance coordination with the country. We also
call on the United Nations country team and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as regional and
subregional organizations, to strengthen coordination
with the Liberian Government and to leverage their
own expertise to play a positive role in strengthening
the capacity-building of the country and to continue to
assist Liberia in its economic and social development
and the improvement of people’s livelihoods.
Whether in nation-building or fighting the Ebola
outbreak, China has consistently stood by Liberia’s side.
China has actively participated in UNMIL operations.
In 2017, the United Nations conferred Peace Medals to
all members of the Chinese peacekeeping riot squad.
In February, the squad was awarded Liberia’s national
medal by President Weah.
Looking forward, China will continue to pursue
an African policy based on sincerity, practical
results, affinity, good faith and upholding the values
of friendship, justice and shared benefits. China will
forever be a true friend and reliable partner of Africa.
China will continue to play a constructive role,
alongside the international community, in order to help
the African continent achieve durable peace, prosperity
and development.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to express my thanks
to Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and
Deputy Permanent Representative Schoulgin Nyoni for
their detailed briefings on the situation in the Republic
of Liberia.
We in Equatorial Guinea have always closely
followed the developments in the Republic of Liberia
and now much more so as a member of the Security
Council, since we are dealing with a brotherly country
whose problems we care about and have felt as
almost our own. That is why I would like to convey
Equatorial Guinea’s total commitment and support for
the pacification, stabilization and normalization of the
situation in this brotherly country. In fact, during the

S/PV. 8239

Ebola crisis, my country contributed $3 million to the
three affected countries in the region.
Overall developments in Liberia have been very
positive and stable. The country has made commendable
efforts to consolidate the political and economic
development process under way, and it is important
that the international community continue to assist the
country in those efforts.
We would like to congratulate the Government
and the people of Liberia and all the actors in the
country for the civic and peaceful manner in which the
electoral process took place — beginning in October
2017, with the holding of the first round of elections
for the presidency and the House of Representatives,
and culminating successfully on 26 December 2017,
with the holding of the second round of the presidential
elections, which led to the election of His Excellency
Mr. George Weah as President.
The successful conclusion of the political process
in Liberia was also made possible by the joint work
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), whose work I commend.
Furthermore, the successful outcome of the situation
in Liberia confirms the validity and appropriateness of
regional efforts to resolve disputes.
The end of UNMIL’s mandate, on 31 March, has
opened a new stage in the history of Liberia that should
serve to consolidate peace and enable this brotherly
country to optimize its undeniable economic potential.
The international community and donors must honour
their commitment to implementing the peacebuilding
plan in Liberia. The presence of the Peacebuilding
Commission is very important at this stage.
Liberia is a good example of how the goodwill,
positive attitude and sense of responsibility of the
different political actors can lead to the successful
outcome of a situation that seemed very complex. That
fact should fill the Council with hope as it continues its
efforts to restore and build peace in conflicts, complex
as they may be. Peace in Liberia is an asset for the
Council, ECOWAS, the African Union and, above all,
the people of Liberia — the primary winners in this
long crisis.
My wish is that the positive signs and developments
we see in Guinea-Bissau will follow the example of
Liberia and obtain the same results after the legislative

18-1148717/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

elections in November and the presidential elections
next year.
Finally, I wish to pay glowing and well-deserved
tribute to UNMIL for its commendable and tireless
efforts to promote peace, security and stability in this
brotherly country. We pay tribute to the UNMIL troops
who, over the course of the many years of conflict,
made the ultimate sacrifice.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our briefers, starting with my Swedish colleague
and, through her, I thank all who have done so much
on the Peacebuilding Commission and the Liberia
configuration. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev for his impressively
multilingual briefing, and Chid Liberty for what I
thought was an inspiring and uplifting story. I think
his comments showed just how important it is that
the Security Council remain focused on the impact of
conflicts on children and women. He really brought
that home to us in an inspiring and uplifting way.
In 2003, when the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) was launched, the then-SecretaryGeneral made his first report to the Council based on
assessment mission. He said in his report then:
“Liberia remains highly unstable, however, as
armed groups, militia and criminal elements
operate throughout the country”; (S/2003/875,
para. 22)
“[police] officers lack training and have not been
paid since early 2002”; (ibid., para. 24)
“[n]early 1 million Liberians, or a third of the
population, are displaced”; (ibid., para. 30)
“[i]t is estimated that Liberia has some 27,000 to
38,000 combatants, many of whom are children.”
(ibid; para. 42).
It is clear to us all that the Liberia of today is not
the Liberia of 2003. We in the Council should be united
in congratulating Liberia’s leaders and people and in
thanking UNMIL for that remarkable achievement.
UNMIL has been able to keep and build the peace since
2003, which is a considerable feat given the history of
exclusion, political instability and cycles of violence.
We therefore pay tribute to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Farid Zarif and to all United
Nations peacekeepers and staff who worked in Liberia
for their work and their duty. We particularly remember
18/22

19/04/2018

the 202 United Nations peacekeepers who, sadly, gave
their lives in service to the people of Liberia and in the
service of all of us here who send those peacekeepers
on such missions.
I want to use this moment to reflect on some of
the lessons learned from UNMIL, in particular with
regard to what went well but also what could have been
done differently. They are important lessons not only
for other peacekeeping missions but also for how we
sustain peace more generally — a concept that we are all
debating in different formats at the moment. As to what
it did particularly well, UNMIL encouraged inclusive
national ownership and supported local capacity,
which are two key conditions for sustaining peace. The
change brought about in Liberia’s police force from the
description by the then Secretary-General in 2003 to
what exists now is perhaps an excellent example of that.
UNMIL also coordinated extremely effectively
with international and regional actors, especially the
Economic Community of West African States, which
remains a shining light in the Council’s engagement.
The good offices of UNMIL were very effective at
preventative diplomacy. For example, that helped
to ensure that a difficult election process remained
peaceful in accordance with the Constitution and the
rule of law. UNMIL demonstrated the strengths of a
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace. The joint
peacebuilding plan between the Mission, the United
Nations country team and the Government set clear
and shared priorities to guide the transition. Under
Sweden’s leadership, the Peacebuilding Commission
played an invaluable role.
However, we should also be honest about the
shortcomings of the Mission and learn from those as
well. Arguably, the Mission stayed for too long and
created overdependence on the United Nations. A
reluctance to discuss an exit meant that the transition
planning started too late, which resulted in funding
gaps and United Nations development actors not
stepping up earlier. The Mission implementation plan
should have included benchmarks and timescales in
order to better focus staffing, resources and effort and
allow the Security Council to better track progress. In
the Security Council — and I know that it is a feature
of some of what the Secretary-General has said to us
over the past couple of months — we could perhaps
have ensured that there were more realistic mandates
with greater clarity on what constituted a sustainable
end state.
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

Looking forward, through an enhanced Resident
Coordinator office there is a clear role for the United
Nations to support the new Government in consolidating
stability and in promoting inclusive development. With
its commitment to peaceful, just and inclusive societies,
the framework of the Sustainable Development Goals
provides a strong basis for that. The United Nations
will also have a unique role in promoting coordination
among the international donors in a way that supports
the priorities of the Government of Liberia. The United
Nations must be careful that, while it absolutely must
provide that support, it must also not assume any of the
responsibilities of the new Government. We would urge
the Government to meet the commitments made in the
peacebuilding plan.
In 2003, in his report the then Secretary-General
concluded: “The road to lasting peace and security in
Liberia is still fraught with multiple and formidable
challenges” (ibid., para. 105). Liberia has certainly
faced its fair share of challenges in the past 15 years.
However, today we should celebrate the fact that, with
the support of the United Nations, the people of Liberia
have overcome them. Perhaps a reflections for all of us
around this table is the fact that Liberia was once an
intractable conflict. Once it hosted the largest United
Nation peacekeeping mission. Once it saw terrible
violence against women and children, including through
child soldiers. A quarter of a million people died in the
second civil war. There were the very familiar issues
of internally displaced persons, refugees and food
insecurity. Today we can look across some of the issues
on our agenda and, very sadly, note the similarities.
However, the ultimate lesson is perhaps that, with hard
work, sustained engagement and the determination
of us all, we can see more Liberias emerge out of
today’s agenda.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to start
by thanking the briefers — Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zouev, Ambassador Schoulgin Nyoni and
Mr. Liberty — for their very informative briefings. I
think that the picture that Mr. Liberty painted before
our eyes of the children in their school uniforms
shows them as a real symbol of not only the hope and
but also the opportunities that lie ahead for Liberia.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif, who is here with us today, the preceding Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Liberia for

S/PV. 8239

their leadership and all the staff of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for their outstanding work
in the country and for bringing it to where it is today.
The essence of today’s briefing is to reflect on the
successes and lessons learned from UNMIL and to
look forward to a peaceful and inclusive Liberia. We
can be proud that UNMIL has left a Liberia that looks
very different to where it started. Allow me to focus on
three important aspects with regard to the departure of
UNMIL and the situation in Liberia: first, the successes
of UNMIL and the progress in Liberia; secondly, the
remaining challenges; and, thirdly, the lessons learned
from UNMIL.
UNMIL was present in Liberia for 14 years. In those
14 years, the country made significant progress leading
up to the elections in 2017 and 2018 and the peaceful
transfer of power from President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf
to President George Weah. We hope that President
Weah continues to build on the work of the previous
Administration, working towards a Liberia that is
both peaceful and inclusive. Entrepreneurs and young
professionals are the future of Liberia. Mr. Liberty,
who addressed the Security Council today, is a part of a
new generation and of the engine that will be essential
to Liberia’s future. Although we all acknowledge that it
has come a long way, Liberia still has a few hurdles to
overcome on the way ahead.
That brings me to my second point: addressing
the root causes of the conflict and sustaining peace.
We must consider that Liberia is a country that has
seen violence. It is still a new democracy with young
institutions. While the situation in Liberia is relatively
stable, a stagnant economy, youth unemployment,
human rights violations and a lack of land reform and
reconciliation policies could pose threats to peace
in the country, particularly now that UNMIL is no
longer present.
In the light of the high-level event on sustaining
peace next week, I want to highlight that the departure
of UNMIL and the situation in Liberia provide an
opportunity for the whole United Nations system to put
the sustaining peace agenda into practice. We must seize
that opportunity. Moving forward, the role of the United
Nations country team and the active engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission will be crucial. In the light
of that, the Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
necessary strengthening of the United Nations country
team and the Office of the Resident Coordinator.

18-1148719/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

19/04/2018

Those offices will be crucial to guaranteeing the active
engagement of the United Nations in protecting human
rights, ensuring the full and meaningful participation
of women and girls, addressing the root causes of
the initial conflict and building strong institutions to
sustain peace in Liberia.

that offers plenty of opportunities for its people, in
particular the children in their school uniforms that
Mr. Liberty spoke about.

Moving on to my third point, the lessons learned
from UNMIL and the importance of building on those
lessons when considering exit strategies in other
contexts are essential. The Liberia peacebuilding plan
is the first of its kind requested by the Security Council.
We consider such longer-term planning crucial when
looking at exit strategies. The Liberia peacebuilding
plan provides a solid basis for a common vision and
direction for the country, which in turn makes it easier
to determine the priorities of a United Nations country
team. In addition to the preparation of a peacebuilding
plan, we also learned that we must carefully time the
exit of peacekeeping and special political missions.

First of all, we would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Alexander Zouev, Ambassador
Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, and Mr. Chid Liberty for their
valuable briefings.

Lastly, in the case of Liberia, we learned more
with regard to the important interlinkage between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. One cannot occur
without the other. We have to ensure that the host
country’s Government has the capacity and the authority
to support both the peacekeeping and the peacebuilding
process. And, as I said, it is important to reflect upon
the lessons learned. In that light, we welcome today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/8), and would also
welcome a broader report on the lessons learned in
that regard.
Today will hopefully be the last time that we
discuss the situation in Liberia on the agenda of the
Council in this context. In conclusion, I would like to
stress the importance of the good offices role of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in
Liberia and the role of a strengthened country team in
Liberia in view of the sustaining peace agenda.
Additionally, I would like to highlight once again
that the Liberian Government can count on the continued
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission countryspecific configuration for Liberia as a tool to support
the transition from UNMIL to a United Nations country
team and beyond.
Let me reiterate our thanks to Special Representative
Zarif, UNMIL and the United Nations country team
for their great effort and leadership. I would also like
to reiterate our support to the Government of Liberia
along its path towards a peaceful and inclusive Liberia
20/22

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

After 14 years of civil war, today Liberia stands as
an example of peacebuilding. Peru salutes the people
and the authorities of that country for such an important
achievement. We also emphasize the importance of the
backing and support of the international community,
the Peacebuilding Commission and such regional and
subregional organizations as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. Liberia
is also an example of how a United Nations mission
can support a country’s efforts to achieve sustainable
peace. In welcoming the successful closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) after
15 years on the ground, we would like to highlight
the work carried out by all of its personnel under the
leadership of Mr. Farid Zarfif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Liberia.
Peru expresses its satisfaction at having been able
to contribute to the consolidation of peace in Liberia.
Since UNMIL’s inception and for 10 years, we have had
military personnel deployed in the field, supporting the
Liberian efforts. In order to meet the challenges that
the construction of sustainable peace presents in this
new phase of the Liberian process, we would like to
underline the importance of continuing to advance in
the following three areas.
The first is national reconciliation. We consider
it important to accelerate the implementation of the
peacebuilding plan. We encourage the authorities to
adopt a legal framework that promotes reconciliation
and inclusion. We emphasize that the participation of
women and youth is key to building sustainable peace.
The second area is human rights. We are concerned
by persistent human rights violations, mainly against
women and children. We therefore welcome the
establishment in Liberia of an Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
we are confident will help to reverse that situation.
18-11487

19/04/2018

The situation in Liberia

The third area is institutional reform. We consider
it important to continue working on the construction
of democratic institutions, increase social cohesion,
guarantee access to justice, strengthen respect for
human rights, expand the presence of the State
throughout the territory and promote the development
of the country. In that regard, we welcome the pro-poor
agenda that the current Government of Liberia has
designed within the framework of the peacebuilding
plan and the Sustainable Development Goals of the
2030 Agenda. We also welcome the programmes
for Liberian youth promoted by the United Nations
Development Programme.
In conclusion, we would like to recall that Liberia
is the first African country in which a woman was
elected president. We encourage that the example of
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf be followed in the region
and in the world, and that women assume leading roles
in the public life of their countries and communities.
We also want to welcome the commitment expressed
by the Government of President George Weah to
continue working in favour of peace and development
in his country, with a special emphasis on the fight
against poverty.
We are convinced that the United Nations country
team, together with regional organizations and other
international partners, will continue to support Liberia’s
efforts to strengthen its democratic institutional
framework and promote national reconciliation,
sustainable development and human rights.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Davies (Liberia): We have certainly heard
great remarks today, including the briefing from the
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, Mr. Alexander Zouev.
May I join others and register our regrets for the
sudden death of the Permanent Representative of Côte
D’Ivoire. This has certainly dealt a huge blow to us all.
I would like to reaffirm the words of Ambassador
Schoulgin Nyoni, and emphasize that today is not only
a historic moment marking the final Security Council
meeting on Liberia and the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), but also a moment of pride and joy
for Liberians, particularly considering from where we

S/PV. 8239

have come, where we are and where we are headed as
a nation.
It has been approximately eight years since the
Government of Liberia requested the SecretaryGeneral in May 2010 to place Liberia on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. That request received
a positive response from the President of the Security
Council on 19 July of the same year, and today we are
closing this chapter in a way. To whom can we be grateful
for all the gains we have made over the years? I would
start by thanking God Almighty, and the international
community as a whole. Particularly, we would like to
express our gratitude to the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the European
Union and, of course, all the organs of the United
Nations, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission.
We also want to highlight the support received from
philanthropic individuals and organizations. They all
matter to us. To the people of Liberia, especially our
mothers and sisters, and to UNMIL we pay special
tribute, including Mr. Farid Zarif and his team. We are
grateful. Their resilience has been a beacon of hope.
Without their fortitude, we would not have made this far.
Do we close the chapter today without challenges?
My response to that question is an emphatic no.
Challenges still loom: decentralization, land ownership
and disputes, corruption, violence against women and
girls, a struggling economy and poor infrastructure,
among others. We can assure the Council that those
issues will remain front and centre for the current
Administration. Yet for us to successfully surmount
those challenges, Liberia will need continued and
unflinching support, not just from the traditional
donors but from everyone.
Meanwhile, we would like to seize this moment to
assure all present of our renewed commitment to uphold
the rule of law, in particular free speech — which
is currently being enjoyed as before — and good
governance, among others. We have no doubt that the
national development plan, the Strategic Road Map for
National Healing, Peacebuilding and Reconciliation,
the peacebuilding plan, the Multi-Partner Trust Fund
and the pro-poor agenda are invaluable and critical
instruments to ensure that Liberia remains on the right
trajectory, significantly in terms of peace sustenance
and development. Additionally, we will continue to
build on the positives of past leaderships and will
guarantee that no Liberian is left behind.

18-1148721/22

S/PV.8239

The situation in Liberia

At this juncture, allow me to pay special tribute
to those who lost their lives as we together strived for
peace in Liberia, including the 202 United Nations
peacekeepers. We salute them all. We will continue to
memorialize their immeasurable contribution to the
peace Liberia enjoys today. May their souls find sweet
and perpetual rest, and may their loved ones find the
courage to move on if they have not.
In conclusion, I would like to make known the
following. Even during our darkest moments and

22/22

19/04/2018

difficult days, and in our deepest despair, we still
believed that Liberia would rise again. And today
Liberia is rising. The briefing of Mr. Chid Liberty
is an attestation. Liberia, once a beneficiary of a
peacekeeping mission, is now a contributing nation
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your kind
consideration and for this esteemed honour.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

18-11487
