S/PV.9032

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9032nd meeting

Thursday, 12 May 2022, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mills. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-34709 (E)
*2234709*

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the fighting, are abominable, and the human toll must
be condemned.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Hostilities in populated areas are extremely
destructive. The use of wide-area explosive weapons in
these areas comes with a very high risk of indiscriminate
effects and must be avoided.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Estonia, Poland, Slovakia and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Joyce
Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator;
and Mr. Omar Abdi, Deputy Executive Director for
Programmes at UNICEF.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: As the Security Council received an
in-depth humanitarian briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths last Thursday (see S/PV.9027), I
will keep today’s remarks brief. I know that Mr. Abdi,
Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, will of course
provide details on the impact this war is having on
children. Let me update members with the latest on
the United Nations joint efforts to negotiate more
humanitarian pauses to allow safe passage for civilians
trapped by the fighting.
On Monday, together with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, we were able to evacuate
another 174 civilians from the Azovstal steel plant and
other parts of Mariupol. This was the third operation
in the past week out of Mariupol, bringing the total
number of civilians evacuated from the steel plant,
Mariupol and neighbouring towns to over 600. This is a
truly monumental feat amid the shelling and destruction
ongoing in the east.
This is a glimmer of hope. Yet, as we have seen these
past couple of days, this war continues on its destructive
path. The intense fighting is causing immense human
suffering. Civilians, particularly women and children,
are paying the heaviest price. Recent reports of the
shelling of a school in Bilohorivka in Luhansk oblast,
where women and children were seeking shelter from
2/25

12/05/2022

The presence of landmine and unexploded ordnance
also significantly affects humanitarian response and
access. Even before this war, eastern Ukraine was one
of the most mine-contaminated regions in the world.
Support for mine action is crucial. Demining is a
priority to open up humanitarian space.
Under international humanitarian law, the parties
must respect all civilians, as well as civilian homes,
schools, hospitals and other essential infrastructure;
they must take constant care to spare them. This
includes allowing civilians to leave areas of hostilities
voluntarily and safely. It includes having special
consideration for the needs of people facing specific
risks, such as women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities. I also urge parties to the conflict to
remove any barriers to the movement of humanitarian
staff to ensure the continued delivery of life-saving
assistance across Ukraine.
Let me briefly update Council members on the
latest figures. Almost 14 million Ukrainians have
been forced to flee their homes, of whom 8 million are
internally displaced. Some 227 partners, the majority
national non-governmental organizations, have
provided humanitarian assistance to over 5.4 million
people, many of those in the east. This scale-up
is unprecedented.
As Council members are aware, in addition to the
evacuations from the Azovstal plant and Mariupol,
five inter-agency convoys carrying essential medical
supplies, water, food rations, non-food-items, waterrepair systems and generators have provided a lifeline
to civilians encircled by fighting. This is by no means
enough. Both parties have been notified of these
convoys. I urge them to continue their facilitation
efforts so we can reach many more civilians. This is
also required of them under international humanitarian
law. We must urgently take our efforts to scale.
Our recent efforts to evacuate civilians in the east
have shown us that there is goodwill and common
ground for us to build on between the parties. As
requested by the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9032

Griffiths is exploring ways to bring the parties together
to discuss humanitarian issues, including safe passage
for civilians and the movement of humanitarian
convoys. Earlier this week, Mr. Griffiths was warmly
received in Ankara by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
His Excellency Mr. Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, and Presidential
Spokesperson İbrahim Kalın. Their discussions focused
on Turkish support for the efforts of the United Nations
towards progress on pressing humanitarian concerns
in Ukraine.

year came to a standstill when the war broke out. As of
last week, at least 15 of 89 UNICEF-supported schools
in eastern Ukraine had been damaged or destroyed
since the start of the war. Hundreds of schools across
the country are reported to have been hit by heavy
artillery, air strikes and other explosive weapons in
populated areas, while other schools are being used
as information centres, shelters, supply hubs or for
military purposes, which will have a long-term impact
on children’s return to education.

We must explore all options to reach more people
where needs are the greatest. We remain firmly
committed to leaving no stone unturned in finding
measures — from local pauses to wider ceasefires — to
save lives. The world expects this of us. The people of
Ukraine deserve this.

These attacks must stop. All parties must honour
their legal and moral obligation to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, respect international
humanitarian and human rights law, and ensure that
the rights of children are upheld. In 2021, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2601 (2021), which
condemns attacks on schools and calls for all necessary
safeguards to uphold the right to education. The Safe
Schools Declaration outlines what is needed to enhance
protection of education in conflict. What is needed now
is the courage, discipline, and political will to translate
these words into action.

The President: I thank Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdi.
Mr. Abdi: I would like first to express our
appreciation to Ambassadors De La Fuente Ramírez
and De Rivière for requesting today’s meeting. I would
also like to thank the United States for calling this
briefing during its presidency of the Security Council.
It has been just one month since UNICEF last briefed
this Council on the situation of children in Ukraine
(see S/PV.9013). As each day passes, more Ukrainian
children are exposed to the horrors of this war. In just
this past month, the United Nations verified that nearly a
hundred children were killed, and we believe the actual
figures to be considerably higher. More children have
been injured and faced grave violations of their rights.
Millions more have been displaced. Schools continue to
be attacked and used for military purposes, and water
and sanitation infrastructure has been affected. The
war in Ukraine, like all wars, is a child-protection and
child-rights crisis.
Last month, UNICEF briefed the Council following
the attack on Kramatorsk train station, which was
an attack on families fleeing the violence and which
interrupted the work of our team on the ground to
deliver desperately needed humanitarian assistance.
We meet again today after another horrifying attack,
this time on a school in Luhansk, which is yet another
stark example of disregard for civilian lives. Today,
even more families are mourning the loss of loved ones.
It is also a stark reminder that, in Ukraine today,
education is also under attack. In February, the school

Schools are a lifeline for children, especially
in conflict. Schools are a safe space, with routines
providing protection from harm and a semblance
of normalcy. Schools are also critical conduits for
information about the risks of deadly explosive
ordnance, and they are a connector to essential health
and psychosocial services. The education workforce
in Ukraine — teachers, principals, social workers,
psychologists and other professionals — are equally
affected by this conflict. Supporting them so they can
stay and deliver is more important than ever.
We must also ensure creative, multifaceted, and
flexible solutions that combine low- and high-tech
methods to reach all children and minimize disruptions
to their learning. In mid-March, over 15,000 schools
resumed education in Ukraine, mostly through remote
learning or in-person/hybrid options. The Ministry
of Education and Science, supported by UNICEF and
other partners, is doing everything possible to reach
Ukrainian children, including supporting online
education from kindergarten through grade 11. We
are also supporting an ongoing digital campaign on
explosive-ordnance-risk education, while providing
education-related supplies. However, remote learning
can be only a temporary solution. Lessons from the
coronavirus disease pandemic show the importance of

22-347093/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

children learning in a school setting with their peers
and teachers.
In the broader region, thanks to the European
Union’s temporary protection directive, Governments
and municipalities in neighbouring countries are
enrolling children in national school systems and
alternative education pathways, which is helping ensure
the continuity of children’s learning and supporting
their completion of the school year. It is estimated that
3.7 million children in Ukraine and abroad are using
online and distance-learning options. But enormous
obstacles remain, including capacity and resource
constraints, language barriers and unpredictable
movements of children and their families.
We must make every effort to reach those most at risk
of being left behind. For the youngest learners, access to
education can be especially challenging: less than 5 per
cent of preschool-aged refugee children are estimated
to be enrolled in public kindergartens. Children with
disabilities need access to inclusive services and
assistive technology, as well as targeted programmes
to cover their specific needs, including rehabilitation.
In the past month, we have seen small moments of
relief as children and other civilians were evacuated
from Mariupol and reached relative safety in other
front-line locations. Humanitarians have reached
millions of people in need across the country with
health, education, water and essential supplies, as well
as information, counselling and psychosocial support.
Yet we know that the situation for children and
their families in conflict-affected areas without access
to humanitarian assistance continues to be grim.
Children and parents tell us of enduring a living hell,
in which they were forced to go hungry, drink from
muddy puddles and shelter from constant shelling and
bombardments, and of dodging bombs, bullets and
landmines as they fled.
The war in Ukraine has also had a devastating
impact on the most vulnerable children globally, as
world food and fuel prices have spiked to all-time highs.
Children already affected by conflict and climate crises
across the world — from Afghanistan to Yemen and the
Horn of Africa — are now paying a deadly price for
another war far from their doorsteps. The repercussions
of the war in Ukraine will continue to ripple across
the globe.
4/25

12/05/2022

Ukrainian children have been uprooted from their
homes, separated from caregivers and directly exposed
to war. Their schools have been destroyed, and the
critical infrastructure essential for their survival and
well-being, including hospitals and water and sanitation
systems, are being devastated by the fighting.
Ukrainian children tell us that they want to reunite
with their families, return to their communities, go
to school and play in their neighbourhoods. Children
are resilient, but they should not have to be. They have
already paid an unconscionably high price in this war.
We must do everything possible to help ensure it does
not also cost them their futures.
Once again, as humanitarians, we will do
everything we can to continue meeting the needs of
the children affected by this war and to provide safety,
stability and protection, but that will never be enough.
Ultimately, children need an end to this war — their
futures hang in the balance.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdi for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ms. Joyce Msuya and Mr. Abdi for
their briefings. Their briefings confirm our concern
about the terrible impact that the conflict in Ukraine
is having on the lives of children, which is why my
country and France requested this meeting.
As long as a cessation of hostilities is not achieved,
the priorities of the international community must be to
provide humanitarian assistance; to protect the civilian
population, in particular the most vulnerable groups,
such as children; and to avoid further damage to the
infrastructure essential for their survival.
Attacks such as the one on a school in the Luhansk
region are absolutely unacceptable and condemnable.
Attacking schools is a clear violation of international
humanitarian law, to which we must not turn a blind
eye. In that regard, we are mindful of the work of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We regret the fact that Luhansk is not an isolated
case. The use of explosive weapons near schools and
institutions of higher education and their access roads
should be avoided at all times. Also, armed forces
must be adequately trained to avoid affecting the
civilian population.
The impact of the war on children is simply
devastating. As UNICEF has indicated, two thirds of
Ukrainian children have been displaced by the conflict,
and in most cases they have had to leave the only home
they have ever known. The conflict also affects the
mental health and psychosocial well-being of an entire
generation — those who have been displaced as well as
those who have stayed behind. The trauma generated
by this war does not discriminate; the constant
bombardment and psychological harassment caused by
the warnings of imminent attacks will have profound
and long-term repercussions. We recognize the efforts
of UNICEF and other institutions to address the dire
mental health crisis, and we believe that comprehensive
strategies are needed to address it.
We are also concerned about the increase in
reported cases of sexual violence against children, for
whom support services are very limited. The impact
on health facilities also translates into the deterioration
of sexual and reproductive health services and care
for newborns.
The massive wave of displacement has made
children and adolescents a target for human trafficking
networks; unaccompanied and separated children
are especially vulnerable. We call on host countries
and institutions such as the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL to address
those new circumstances and to register and identify
refugee minors.
Finally, we cannot fail to mention the situation of
children with disabilities, whose vulnerability is even
more acute.
Mexico also stresses that any child fleeing Ukraine,
or any other country, must be afforded the same
treatment: there cannot be a system with two levels of
standards in the treatment of refugees.
Any war is a war against children, and this war is
no exception. That is why we ask the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, in the next report on that issue, to include
Ukraine with a view to establishing a monitoring and

S/PV.9032

reporting mechanism and to list those responsible for
grave violations against children, as well as to address
the situation in the Working Group on Children in
Armed Conflict.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Msuya and Mr. Abdi for their briefings.
The Russian aggression continues inexorably. The
Russian army continues to kill civilians, including
children, and to destroy civilian infrastructure.
We all know that the number of civilian victims is
much higher than the figures reported. The head of the
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine recently
spoke of thousands more deaths, including in Mariupol,
that black hole that is so difficult to access.
The cost of the war for children is terrible. Two
thirds of Ukrainian children have been displaced, and
the majority of them are unable to attend school. France
condemns all attacks against schools, including the
one in Bilohorivka. In addition, more than 200 medical
facilities have been attacked or destroyed, according to
the World Health Organization.
Attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as the
killing and mutilation of children, are serious violations
of international humanitarian law and the rights of
children in wartime. We call on the Secretary-General
to use all the tools established by the Security Council
to verify facts and attribute responsibility, including
the Secretary-General’s annual report and his list of
infamy of parties who have committed grave violations
against children. Those who kill children and attack
schools belong on that list.
Those crimes will not go unpunished. France will
continue to support investigations to combat impunity,
while lending its full support to the Ukrainian justice
system and to international jurisdictions, including the
International Criminal Court.
There is an urgent need for action. We call on
Russia to respect the order of the International Court
of Justice to end this unjustifiable and devastating war
and to withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory.
The protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure is a priority. We therefore reiterate our
call for an immediate cessation of hostilities. Respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights
is non-negotiable. Humanitarian access must be
guaranteed. France calls on the parties to cooperate with

22-347095/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Human Rights Council’s
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine.
France commends the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which have enabled the
evacuation of several hundred civilians from Mariupol.
It is essential that the evacuation of civilians and all the
wounded continue, allowing the evacuees to choose their
destination. We also commend the work of UNICEF
and UNESCO to ensure that displaced children have
access to education, including distance learning.
The whole world is affected by this war, which
increases the threat of a major global food crisis on
a daily basis. We reiterate our call on Russia to lift
the blockade of Ukrainian ports in the Black Sea in
order to enable the exportation of food. France will
continue to intensify our efforts to counter the negative
impact of this war on the most vulnerable countries, in
particular through the Food and Agriculture Resilience
Mission initiative.
France and its partners will remain fully mobilized
in support of Ukraine and the Ukrainian people. France
will also continue to do its part, with aid amounting
to $2 billion, as announced by Emmanuel Macron,
President of the Republic, at the Warsaw donors’
conference on 5 May.
Having just commemorated the end of the Second
World War, we are determined to continue to mobilize
for freedom and peace in Ukraine and on the entire
European continent.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Ms. Msuya
and Mr. Abdi for their update.
We meet again to discuss the situation in Ukraine.
The war continues its destructive path. The overall
situation is dire and worsening. People continue to
suffer. The lives of countless civilians, particularly
women and children, are being devastated because of
this war of aggression that continues unabated.
If one would try to summarize the news that we
get every day from Ukraine, including what we heard
from the briefers today, it would be continued shelling
with mounting civilian victims, targeted cities with
large-scale destruction of civilian infrastructure,
persistent attacks of hospitals, health-care facilities
and schools, horrible crimes, including extrajudicial
6/25

12/05/2022

killings, torture, rape and mass graves, countless
shocking personal stories of lives uprooted and ripped
apart that will never be the same again. We also hear
about the continued Ukrainian resistance against the
ongoing war that they did not want and did not choose.
As the war goes on and intensifies, so does the
magnitude of human suffering. In only three months,
more than 7,000 civilian casualties have been registered
and 14 million people have been forced to leave their
homes. Two months ago, the United Nations projected
that some 4 million people would be displaced by the war.
In less than 10 weeks, that number is now 5.8 million,
and the new projection is double — 8.3 million. That
requires more financial support for refugees and host
countries to face challenges related to access to food,
housing, transportation and services.
The massive destruction of civilian infrastructure
has made life unbearable or completely disrupted for
millions of people because the systematic destruction
of health facilities, transport, supplies and warehouses
only severs basic services.
Against that backdrop, we are particularly
concerned by reports of unlawful attacks on schools,
which deprives civilians of access to education. It is
unbearable to see a school reduced to rubble. Schools,
like hospitals, should be safe places, immune from
harm and free from attacks. In Ukraine today, they are
not safe. An average of 22 schools a day have regularly
been under attack in Ukraine since the start of the war,
disrupting the education of those 5.5 million children
who are still in the country. Their school year ended
on 24 February. At least one in six UNICEF-supported
schools in eastern Ukraine have been damaged or
destroyed since the start of the war. Only a few days ago,
more than 60 people were feared dead after a Russian
bomb flattened the school being used as a shelter in the
village of Bilohorivka, in the Luhansk region. There is
no justification for such recklessness.
In the context of that desolate picture, we are pleased
to highlight that, on a positive note, UNESCO’s Global
Education Coalition, composed of some 200 members
from the private sector, civil society, academia and the
United Nations family, is working to ensure the right to
education and the continuation of learning in Ukraine.
Digital devices will be provided to Ukrainian teachers,
who will reach out to hundreds of thousands of learners
in order to ensure the continuity of online learning. In
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

addition, a high-education e-assessment platform will
allow some 200,000 students to pass their examinations.
As the military aggression escalates, civilian
casualties and more crimes and crimes against
humanity mount, reports and preliminary facts
gathered on the ground raise serious concerns about
grave breaches of international humanitarian law
in Ukraine. A report recently published pursuant to
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Moscow Mechanism analyses a shocking
range of apparent war crimes, from rape to torture to
deportation and the use of human shields. It marks an
important step in a long road to a full understanding of
the illegal and criminal acts committed and suffered in
the ongoing aggression. It concludes that, among other
things, the two most blatant attacks mentioned several
times during our discussions here — the bombing of
the Mariupol maternity and children’s hospital and the
bombing of Mariupol’s Donetsk Academic Regional
Drama Theatre, where several hundred civilians were
killed — most likely constitute an egregious violation
of international humanitarian law and that those who
ordered or executed those attacks committed a crime.
We must do all we can in order to secure the rights
of children. In that respect, we call on the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative on Children
and Armed Conflict to add Ukraine as a situation of
concern in the upcoming twenty-second annual report
on children and armed conflict, in the light of the
grave violations committed against children in eastern
Ukraine between 2014 and 2021, as well as evidence
of an alarming increasing in grave violations across
the country amid the rapid and ongoing escalation of
hostilities since late February. A thorough investigation
must be carried out, and accountability must and will
be ensured.
The seismic effects of Russia’s war in Ukraine are
being felt everywhere. Stores in places far from Russia
and Ukraine are running out of cooking oil, farmers
are scrambling to buy fertilizers and Governments are
struggling to respond to public disquiet due to the sharp
rise in prices. Disruptions to the flow of those essential
goods are compounding other supply chains, causing
shortages and pushing millions of people into hunger.
There must be no mistake about who is responsible.
Ceasefire arrangements for the evacuation of some
600 civilians from the steel plant in Mariupol show
that it is possible to find solutions. It is possible to

S/PV.9032

silence the guns in the name of life when there is a will
to do so. Similar arrangements should be extended to
the wounded soldiers who are still there. We support
the efforts of Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
commend United Nations actors on the ground for
their contribution and encourage them to continue
their efforts.
In conclusion, this senseless war must come to an
end. The sooner it happens, the better for Ukraine and
its people to start healing their profound wounds, the
better for Russia and Russians to shed their attitude
of self-victimization and the better for everyone,
everywhere.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegations of Mexico and
France for convening today’s meeting. I would also like
to join previous speakers in thanking Ms. Joyce Msuya
and Mr. Omar Abdi for their briefings.
After several months of the violent conflict in
Ukraine and its resulting humanitarian crisis, Ghana is
deeply concerned about the lack of satisfactory progress
towards finding a solution to the situation. It is indeed
disheartening to know that innocent children have been
caught up in this armed conflict, and sadly will be the
most adversely affected by the horrifying situation.
As the war continues to affect social institutions,
education has undeniably been one of the major
casualties, leading to severe disruptions in the education
of children. My delegation takes note of the report of
the Ukrainian Ministry of Education and Science that
1,397 educational facilities across the country have
been damaged and 102 destroyed by bombings and
shelling, as of 26 April. Indeed, the reported attacks on
schools and other educational facilities across Ukraine
may constitute gross violations of international
humanitarian law, particularly against children.
On that note, my delegation strongly condemns
the bomb explosion at a school building in Luhansk,
in eastern Ukraine, on 7 May, which resulted in a
considerable number of civilian casualties, and we
wish to commiserate with the bereaved families and
the people of Ukraine. Ghana reiterates its call on all
parties to refrain from attacking civilian infrastructure,
especially infrastructure whose destruction impacts the
lives of children.
Without the immediate cessation of hostilities,
the 7.5 million children in Ukraine will continue to be

22-347097/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

12/05/2022

endangered by the escalating armed conflict. It is very
disheartening to see images of students forced to hide
in basements and bomb shelters and children missing
months of schooling, which will certainly impact their
future negatively. The persistent impunity and highhandedness against children, schools and educational
facilities in Ukraine must not only stop forthwith but
the perpetrators must also be held accountable for
their actions. In the meantime, Ghana is still hopeful
that the war will end soon by peaceful and diplomatic
means so that teachers and students can return to their
normal routines.

In conclusion, for the sake of the lives of the
innocent children in Ukraine, we reiterate our call on
the Russian Federation to heed the repeated calls of the
international community to withdraw all its invading
troops from the internationally recognized borders of
Ukraine and pursue the path of dialogue and diplomacy.

In the difficult circumstances faced in Ukraine, the
fact remains that war is usually traumatic for children,
especially when they are directly affected. The mental
impact, especially on children, is likely to have
devastating consequences for several years to come. In
that connection, humanitarian efforts should focus not
only on the physical needs of the affected children in
Ukraine but also on their psychological needs and their
need for emotional assistance, as the damage of the war
will result in long-lasting psychological trauma.

The humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine is deeply
disturbing. We do not believe that it is inevitable for it to
continue. However, we fear that the Council is settling
into a familiar tragic pattern. The military conflict
is becoming a protracted affair, in which the civilian
population continues to suffer gravely. Rather than
diplomacy, negotiation and a ceasefire being sought
with ambition, far too much energy and attention are
being used to make and defend accusations of violations
of international humanitarian law.

My delegation reiterates that the mental well-being
and safety of the children in Ukraine should be our
ultimate concern and should remain at the forefront of
the action of the international community, including
the Security Council. At this juncture, we wish to
commend the efforts of UNICEF and its partners in
providing education-related supplies and appropriate
learning opportunities for Ukrainian children in formal
and informal settings.

We are forced to restate the obvious — that our
responsibility as the Security Council is to protect
international peace and security. Of course, our efforts
to advance humanitarian aims in conflict are critically
important, but the primary responsibility of the
Council remains international peace and security. We
must therefore urge the Council and all its members to
make every effort to find a path to negotiating peace for
Ukraine and its suffering people — a peace that respects
and protects Ukraine’s rights as a State Member of the
United Nations.

My delegation calls on host and transit countries
to ensure that the best interest of children, including
learning opportunities, forms an essential element of
their interventions. We believe that such interventions
will minimize the enduring impact that the ongoing
crisis will have on the lives of children in Ukraine
and on their education. In the spirit of resolution 2601
(2021), I would like to reaffirm Ghana’s commitment
to United Nations endeavours to protect children in
Ukraine, as well as its efforts to ensure uninterrupted
education for them.
We encourage the continued deployment of
the good offices of the Secretary-General in the
international endeavour to bring an end to the war and
facilitate a diplomatic solution to the ongoing security
and humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.
8/25

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Joyce Msuya and UNICEF Deputy Executive
Director for Programmes, Mr. Omar Abdi, for their
briefings. I also welcome the participation of the
representatives of Ukraine, Estonia, Poland and
Slovakia in today’s meeting.

The unfolding political situation in Europe,
with alliances rapidly developing that may entrench
differences, needs to be stabilized for the sake of
international peace and security. If the Security Council
and the international community truly embrace a
preventive approach, then that is a priority. It is also the
best safeguard against the humanitarian crisis that will
otherwise emerge as a result of a broadening of the war
in the future.
With regard to current humanitarian developments,
Kenya condemns the recent attacks on civilian objects,
including the reported bombing of a school in Luhansk
that is believed to have been sheltering approximately
90 civilians. We again urge all parties to prioritize
the protection of schools and other critical civilian
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

infrastructure, in accordance with international
humanitarian law. We commend the Secretary-General
for his efforts, which resulted in the recent round of
evacuations to safety of more than 170 people who
were trapped in the Azovstal steel plant and other areas
of Mariupol.
We must not forget that this war has an impact on
economies and vulnerable people around the world.
The disruption of food and energy supply chains is
compounding food and energy insecurity, especially in
fragile contexts, and is driving millions of people deeper
into poverty and humanitarian crises. We therefore
appeal for enhanced support for other humanitarian
situations, particularly in the global South.
In
line
with
the
Secretary
General’s
recommendations on the basis of the assessmentsof his
Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
Finance, States should resist export restrictions and
make reserves available to countries with serious food
insecurity. We urge States, United Nations agencies
and international financial institutions to urgently
implement the Secretary General’s recommendations.
Time and boldness are of the essence if the war is not
to lead to the escalation of multiple crises worldwide.
In conclusion, we call on the parties to the war
in Ukraine and their allies and partners to make
greater efforts to achieve a meaningful cessation of
hostilities. In the meantime, we strongly urge Ukraine
and the Russian Federation to offer guarantees for safe
humanitarian passage for trapped civilians, particularly
in eastern Ukraine.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers
for their grave accounts of the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine.
Norway once again condemns in the strongest
terms Russia’s unprovoked war of aggression against
Ukraine, which has created a humanitarian disaster
that is the responsibility of Russia alone.
The civilian suffering must end. The Security
Council’s joint expression of support last week for
the Secretary-General’s effort to search for peaceful
solutions (S/PRST/2022/3) is a first step towards that
end. We need to see a path towards peace.
The ongoing attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Ukraine is having a particularly
devastating and unacceptable impact on children and
their families and communities. The use of heavy

S/PV.9032

explosive weapons in populated areas is destroying
homes, schools and health centres, with children at
especially high risk of suffering lethal and debilitating
injuries — a risk seven times higher than the risk for
adults. We also condemn the use of anti-personnel
mines and cluster munitions, weapons that will continue
to kill and injure long after the conflict ends.
The most recent attacks by Russia against schools
and the civilians seeking shelter therein demonstrate a
blatant disrespect for international humanitarian law.
Those attacks are clearly in contradiction of resolution
2601(2021) on the protection of education in conflict,
which was unanimously adopted by the Council just
months ago. We call on all parties to protect and respect
the civilian character of schools and educational
facilities in accordance with international humanitarian
law. Continuing education, even during armed conflict,
is crucial, including for displaced children. Their right
to education must be upheld.
All Ukrainian children are affected by this war.
Many are displaced across borders or internally in
Ukraine. We are particularly concerned about the
high number of children who are separated from their
families. Unaccompanied children are in a particularly
vulnerable situation and are at risk of human trafficking
and sexual violence and abuse. Access to child
protective services is key, including child-appropriate
mental health and psychosocial support.
Norway is alarmed about the situation for the many
civilians, including children, the elderly and persons
with disabilities, who remain trapped in the battle zone.
All civilians, including those in care institutions, must
have access to humanitarian assistance and safe passage
for voluntary evacuation to safety. We are appalled by
the reports of involuntary evacuations, deportations
and so-called filtration camps.
We are also deeply concerned about the increasing
reports of conflict-related sexual violence, including
against men and boys. It is of the utmost importance that
all survivors be assured of their sexual and reproductive
health and rights. The atrocities committed during the
war must be investigated and those responsible must be
held accountable. We support the ongoing investigations,
and we underline the importance of utilizing expertise
on child protection, children’s rights and gender. In
ensuring documentation and accountability, it is also
important that the right to freedom of expression and

22-347099/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

free access to information be vigorously defended.
Journalists must be protected.
I would like to conclude by commending the
humanitarian organizations that are working every day
to mitigate the humanitarian consequences of the war,
especially local civil society organizations, which are
doing a tremendous job.
But for the humanitarian crisis to truly end, the war
must stop. Russia chose to invade Ukraine, in breach of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Russia must also stop the war and withdraw its troops
from Ukraine immediately.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Ms. Msuya and Mr. Abdi
for their helpful and informative briefings.
Over the past 25 years, the Security Council has
repeatedly recognized, condemned and sought to
address the impact of conflict on children. While it
will take time for the United Nations monitoring and
reporting mechanism to establish the full extent of the
impact of Russia’s invasion on children, there is already
evidence that Russia is committing four of the Security
Council’s six grave violations against children in times
of war that are listed in resolution 1261 (1999).
First, children have been killed and maimed.
Reporting from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights suggests that at least
238 children have been killed and 347 injured, although
the true toll is likely to be far higher.
Secondly, schools and nurseries have been targeted
across Ukraine and, as with the tragic bombing of
the Mariupol theatre, children sheltering have been
mercilessly targeted.
Thirdly, there are credible allegations of sexual
violence against children by Russian forces and, as
others have said, mass displacement has left children
exposed to human trafficking and sexual exploitation.
Fourthly, reports of forced deportations continue,
with more than 700,000 people, including many
mothers and children, having been moved to Russia.
There is now a very real risk of a lost generation and the
continuation of a cycle of violence caused by Russia’s
invasion and the devastation that it has created.
In order to address that, we need to work together.
10/25

12/05/2022

First, we urge all countries to endorse and
implement the Safe Schools Declaration of 2015, which
is designed to protect education in armed conflict.
Secondly, the international community must ensure
that all credible allegations of crimes on the territory
of Ukraine be investigated, including grave violations
against children, whoever is accused of committing
them. We support all efforts to improve our collective
understanding of the situation on the ground through
the collection of evidence and data and the work of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom is proud to continue
to play a leading role in the humanitarian effort in
Ukraine, delivering vital supplies and life-saving
medical aid to those most in need, including children,
but humanitarian support is not a solution to the
suffering of children in Ukraine. Only the withdrawal
of Russian troops and an end to Russia’s war in Ukraine
will end the cause of the suffering.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): We thank
the briefers from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and UNICEF for their
presentations. We would also like to thank France and
Mexico for their initiative to discuss the impact of the
conflict in Ukraine on children and education.
Children in Ukraine — as elsewhere — must be
protected from the harm of violence and under no
circumstances should they be subject to violations of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law or international refugee law. Brazil is deeply
concerned by the continued reports of child casualties
due to the use of explosive weapons, mine-related
incidents and explosive remnants of war.
Both parties to the conflict must avoid the use
of explosive weapons in densely populated areas,
including near schools or universities or along routes
to or from them. Schools and medical facilities should
never be used for military purposes. It is of the utmost
importance to implement resolution 2601 (2021), on
the protection of education, which Brazil co-sponsored
last year. The Safe Schools Declaration, which we have
also endorsed, also provides important guidelines on
the matter.
In the face of conflict, children and their parents
have to endure great challenges. There are reports
of Ukrainian parents who, out of desperation, sent
their children abroad with strangers. Authorities in
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

neighbouring countries have identified children as
young as 4 and 5 years old crossing State borders
alone or with barely familiar people. For them, family
reunification should be pursued with great urgency.
We cannot overestimate the impact of war on
traumatized children. Furthermore, due to disruption
of the school system countrywide, their studies are
discontinued and compromised, with a lasting impact
on their personal development. As the conflict persists,
the damage to children’s education grows starker.
The cessation of attacks against civilian
infrastructure is key in protecting children from the
harm of conflict. Resolution 2573 (2021) provides
fundamental guidance for the protection of objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
Children forced to flee their homes to ensure
their own survival are especially vulnerable. Brazil
is concerned by the alarming number of children who
have become internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees. Support from the international community
is needed more than ever, especially for those children
who are unaccompanied or separated from their parents
and family members.
As they are forced into the condition of refugees or
IDPs, children can become more vulnerable to crimes,
including sexual violence and exploitation. Their
physical integrity and well-being should be a priority
for all Member States.
In line with our tradition of solidarity, Brazil
has been granting humanitarian visas and residence
permits for displaced Ukrainians and stateless persons
affected or displaced by the armed conflict in Ukraine.
Once on Brazilian territory, they have full access to
all public services and social benefits, on an equal
footing with Brazilian nationals. Brazilian civil society
has been forthcoming in mobilizing to provide further
specialized assistance to aid local integration. Other
Brazilian humanitarian actions include the donation
of water purifiers, food, essential supplies and
medical items.
We shall recommit to our efforts to end the conflict
and prevent a lost generation of Ukrainian children as
victims of trauma without access to proper education.
The silencing of the guns and the withdrawal of troops
may not be enough to end the war, but it could be the
first glimmer of hope for the Ukrainians to resume
their lives in peace.

S/PV.9032

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): My thanks go to our
briefers this morning — Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya and Deputy Executive Director Abdi — for
all the work that they and their colleagues have done
to help alleviate the suffering inflicted upon the
Ukrainian people by the Russian Federation’s senseless
and illegal war.
Shockingly, two thirds of all children in Ukraine
have had to flee their homes — many leaving behind
parents and grandparents, all leaving behind the
lives they knew. Those children face the horrendous
risks of abuse, trafficking and exploitation. That is
unconscionable. We have heard reports of children killed
and maimed by indiscriminate attacks. We are also
hearing chilling reports of sexual violence perpetrated
by Russian soldiers, with children reportedly among
those violated. That is abhorrent. We simply cannot
accept such violations of international law causing such
suffering and trauma, whether in Ukraine or anywhere
else in the world. Those horrific violations must end
and those responsible must and will be held to account.
As civilian infrastructure across Ukraine continues
to be demolished by Russian forces, we must respond
to the destruction of hundreds of schools, including
kindergartens. Attacks on schools in violation of
international law have profound impacts on the children
affected. Let us remember that, as in the case of killing,
maiming and sexual violence, attacks on schools and
hospitals are listable under the children and armed
conflict agenda. If the Council is to protect children in
armed conflict and seriously tackle impunity, we must
support the integrity and the impartiality of listing on
those grounds.
The Council recognized the right of children to
education in conflict with the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2601 (2021) just a few months ago. Are
our memories really that short? Our words should
be followed by actions. Collectively, we need to take
action to address the disruption of education through
the provision of education in emergency settings,
psychosocial services, mental health support and
health care. It is clear that child protection capacities
in Ukraine need to be urgently resourced. As far as
possible, the Council should support United Nations
monitors and child protection staff.
Ireland calls on the Secretary-General and Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter to consider adding
Ukraine as a situation of concern in the upcoming

22-3470911/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

12/05/2022

annual report on children and armed conflict in order to
further assist the extremely important monitoring work
carried out by United Nations staff. Grave violations and
abuses have been committed against children in eastern
Ukraine since 2014. Now, with the alarming increase
in violations since the further Russian invasion two
months ago, we would fully expect to see that reflected
in upcoming reports. We also call on the SecretaryGeneral and Special Representative Gamba to use all
tools and mechanisms to address any violations related
to children and armed conflict taking place in Ukraine
and to deliver on accountability.

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya and Deputy
Executive Director Omar Abdi for their briefings.

The most innocent of victims, millions of Ukrainian
children, are being robbed of their childhoods and
of their futures by this war. Denying children their
right to education has profound impacts not only on
their individual development but also on the future of
Ukrainian society as a whole.

We welcome the safe evacuation of civilians,
including children trapped in the Azovstal steel plant in
Mariupol, under the coordination of the United Nations
and the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
hope that Russia and Ukraine will continue to increase
coordination on humanitarian issues and make every
effort to reduce the humanitarian impact of the conflict.

We continue to see the devastating impact of
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas,
including on schools. Now and long after the conflict,
contamination by explosive remnants of war will
have a disproportionate impact on the children of
Ukraine, carrying risks of death or injury and further
blighting their futures. Equally, robbing children of
the possibility of routine vaccinations exposes them to
critical outbreaks of communicable diseases, which can
also have long-term, debilitating consequences.
The evacuations from Mariupol negotiated by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations have shown
that it is possible to do the right thing for civilians and
that the humanitarian notification system can function.
We must continue all our efforts to help the people
of Ukraine.
The reverberations of the war, as we know, reach
far beyond Ukraine’s borders; we also know that
they will reach beyond this generation. We all have a
responsibility to support the people of Ukraine long
after this war has ended.
At this table, we have repeatedly called for the
war to end — for the Russian Federation to withdraw
its forces and engage in true dialogue and diplomacy.
However, as long as armed conflict continues, Russia
must comply with its obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law. We
will not tire of making this call; we must meet our
responsibilities. The children of Ukraine deserve
nothing less from us.
12/25

The conflict in Ukraine is inflicting on children
pain that is foreign to their age. Protecting children
from harm is an obligation under international law that
must be fulfilled by the parties to the conflict. China
reiterates its call to ensure the security of children
and the infrastructure on which they depend and to
give priority to children’s needs in evacuation and
humanitarian relief operations.

The attack on a school in the village of Bilohorivka
on 7 May resulted in the loss of many lives. Such
incidents are deeply deplorable. Schools should
not be targeted or used for military purposes. The
circumstances surrounding and the specific causes of
the incident should be verified and established. Any
accusations should be based on facts.
The conflict, which has been raging for more than
two months, has uprooted more than half of Ukrainian
children. Millions of children have taken refuge in
neighbouring countries. China appreciates the safe
haven, humanitarian assistance and psychological
support provided by Ukraine and neighbouring
countries as well as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF and other humanitarian
agencies to children seeking refuge.
China calls on the international community to
continue to step up relief efforts to ensure that every
child in need receives effective assistance. The risk
of human trafficking, sexual exploitation and abuse
faced by children seeking refuge, especially separated
or unaccompanied children, is worrying. China calls
on UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
other agencies to strengthen monitoring and support
the countries concerned in taking measures to prevent
and eliminate violations against children.
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9032

The World Health Organization’s (WHO) warnings
about disruptions in routine immunizations for children
and the growing risk of outbreaks of epidemics such
as measles should be taken seriously. China supports
WHO in in its efforts to cooperate with Ukraine and the
countries concerned to ensure that children can receive
vaccinations on time.

appear to have reached its limits, and its impact is
disproportionately affecting children. Well over half
of Ukraine’s 7.5 million children have been displaced
as a result of the conflict. There are also deeply
disturbing reports of hundreds of children having been
killed and maimed since the conflict began that should
be investigated.

Education gives hope to children in conflict and is
also a matter of the future of Ukraine. China supports
UNICEF in its efforts to help the Ukrainian Government
provide educational supplies and learning opportunities
to internally displaced children and encourages the host
countries to integrate refugee children into their own
educational systems in order to ensure that children’s
right to education is not disrupted by the conflict.

War is always deeply traumatizing, particularly
for children. This conflict is no exception, and there
is a dire need for essential services such as education
and health care to be provided urgently and to continue
throughout the course of the conflict.

Achieving peace is the best protection for children.
Dialogue and negotiation are the most realistic and
feasible path to achieving a ceasefire and to stopping
the war. The international community should encourage
Russia and Ukraine to return to the negotiation track
and continue creating the political conditions necessary
for the restoration of peace.
China welcomes the presidential statement
adopted by the Security Council last week on Ukraine
(S/PRST/2022/3) calling for the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and supporting the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to promote peace.
Sanctions will not bring about peace but will
only accelerate the spillover of the crisis, triggering
sweeping food, energy and financial crises across the
globe and making children around the world suffer
the bitter consequences of sanctions. With children
living in conflict situations in Afghanistan, Yemen
and the Horn of Africa as well as the Sahel region
bearing the brunt of the humanitarian impact, China
once again calls on the parties to remain rational and
exercise restraint, transcend prejudice and strife, and
make unremitting efforts towards the early resolution
of the crisis in Ukraine so that children can enjoy a
peaceful future.

We know only too well from our own region
and beyond the costs of conflict for children and
their education — from children in Syria who have
been denied an education for more than a decade, to
Palestinian children facing continued disruptions to
their schooling, to girls in Afghanistan who have been
denied secondary education since August 2021, to
children in Yemen, Libya, the Horn of Africa and the
Sahel, as well as countless additional examples from
around the globe.
There is a lost generation of children and youth
who simply will never regain a meaningful opportunity
to learn. The children of Ukraine could face that
same fate while this armed conflict continues, and we
therefore, like others, urge that all diplomatic efforts
be made to end it. It is crucial that we redouble our
commitment to ensure educational access in Ukraine,
where the conflict has already significantly disrupted
children’s access to education, which comes on top of
the coronavirus disease pandemic-related disruptions,
which had negatively impacted children’s lives before
the conflict had even begun.

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I, too,
should like to join others in thanking the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Joyce
Msuya, and the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF,
Mr. Omar Abdi, for their valuable briefings.

As the international community responds to the
urgent humanitarian needs in Ukraine, education must
be a priority. It is also critical to ensuring that future
generations have the skills necessary to effectively
contribute to their communities. We must think about
the period after the conflict as much as the period of
its duration. As UNICEF recalled, children will have
a much better chance of recovering if they can quickly
return to school and to some form of normalcy in
their lives.

As we have heard from today’s briefers, the extent
of the devastation due to the war in Ukraine does not

In the light of all those difficult realities, I would
like to focus on the following points.

22-3470913/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

First, we remain deeply concerned by reports
of the ongoing damage and destruction of civilian
infrastructure, including health and educational
facilities. The bombing of the school in Bilohorivka
over this past weekend is one disturbing example.
UNICEF has noted that at least one in every six
UNICEF-supported schools in eastern Ukraine has been
damaged in the course of the conflict. We underline
the importance of protecting educational facilities and
ensuring continued access to education.
Secondly, facilitating access to education,
particularly for refugee children, is imperative to
supporting children’s development and maintaining
a sense of stability in their lives. We commend the
neighbouring host countries, as well as UNICEF and
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, for facilitating the continuation of
education services, including by providing equipment
that supports online teaching, in addition to expanding
digital education platforms. Such efforts are invaluable
and must be supported by the international community.
Furthermore, distance learning can mitigate some of
the disruptive effects of the conflict, and we noted that
12,600 schools providing education to nearly 4 million
students are now operating remotely.
Thirdly, providing psychosocial services is critical
to ensuring children’s well-being during and after the
war. Children have been uprooted from their homes
and separated from caregivers. Many children have
witnessed or experienced violence, including reported
sexual violence, and all credible reports should be
investigated. We commend the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF
for their support for the provision of psychosocial
services to children, as well as their efforts to
particularly help children with disabilities.
Finally, we reiterate our call on all parties to abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian
law. We further underline that the protection of
children and all civilians can be assured only through
a cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine and the
reaching of a diplomatic solution to this conflict. That
is essential not only for the children of Ukraine, but also
for all children globally living through years of armed
conflict. None of those children should be neglected
by the Security Council. The reverberating impact of
this conflict, including through the rise in food and
commodity prices, will fall the heaviest on the health
and development of children.
14/25

12/05/2022

In that vein, we call on both sides to remain
committed, despite the difficulties, to dialogue and for
the international community and the Security Council
to support efforts to end the conflict and establish a
process for peace. We are encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts in that regard, as well as the feedback
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to the Council that recent efforts to evacuate
hundreds of civilians in Mariupol have shown the
goodwill that exists on both sides and are grounds to
build upon. We must build on that opportunity and
double-down our efforts to support such initiatives.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the UNICEF Deputy Executive
Director for Programmes, Mr. Omar Abdi, and Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya to this meeting. We
listened carefully to their briefings.
Today a number of representatives spoke on issues
other than children and education, which was the topic
of today’s meeting. But I am not going to respond to
that. I will focus on children and education.
We believe that the topic of today’s meeting is
particularly relevant, since we are focusing not only
on children, but also on their education, which is
fundamental for their personal development.
For more than eight years in Ukraine, the Kyiv
regime has been waging a civil war against its people.
The plans that the Maidan authorities had for the
children of Donbas became clear from the words of
former Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, spoken
in 2014 in relation to the people of Donbas, citizens of
Ukraine — citizens of his own country:
“We will have work; they will not ... We will care
for people — children and pensioners; they will not.
Our children will go to schools and kindergartens,
but theirs will sit in basements ... That is precisely
how we will win this war.”
Mr. Poroshenko kept his promise, unlike many
others. The Ukrainian authorities have indeed kept the
children of Donbas out of their basements with their
shelling. Schools, hospitals, children’s playgrounds
and critical infrastructure have been targeted by the
Ukrainian military. However, our Western colleagues,
for political reasons, prefer to ignore that.
Over the past eight years, more than 100 children
were killed in Donbas as a result of the Ukrainian
armed forces’ shelling. The residents of Donbas have
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

a tradition of taking flowers to the Alley of Angels,
a monument to the children who died at the hands of
the Ukrainian military, who took up arms against their
own people. Many Ukrainian prisoners of war are also
taken there today for educational purposes so that they
realize with whom they have actually been fighting all
these years.
Between 2014 and 2022, more than 200 educational
facilities have been damaged in the Luhansk People’s
Republic alone, almost half of which were schools
and kindergartens.
This spring, children are once again being killed
by Ukrainian shells in Donbas. The number of orphans
whose parents have been killed by the Ukrainian
army’s shelling is also increasing. Russia is helping
the inhabitants of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s
Republics as much as it can. As of the beginning of May,
more than 215,000 children without parental care have
arrived in our country. Some of them came with their
guardians and legal representatives. Approximately
1,200 children came from orphanages in the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics. We work closely with
the authorities of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s
Republics on the adoption of orphans. Temporary
guardianship, which allows children to be temporarily
placed with Russian families, is being used in the
interests of the children.
We send humanitarian aid to children in Donbas.
With regard to refugee children, we organize their
placement in schools, making use of all options:
ordinary schools, home-based schools, inclusive
schools and distance learning.
The Russian armed forces are doing their utmost to
ensure the safety of children during the special military
operation in Ukraine. We strongly condemn violations
of international humanitarian law, particularly those
committed against children. We regard as unacceptable
both deliberate attacks on children and other categories
of protected persons and the indiscriminate or excessive
use of force and use of schools for military purposes.
Today we once again heard from a number of colleagues
accusing the Russian military of committing acts of
violence, including sexual violence, against children.
Such comments were made by my British colleague in
particular, as well as other speakers. Those accusations
are absurd. In that regard, I would like to refer to a
primary source. In an interview with the Belsat television
company, the Ukrainian Presidential Commissioner

S/PV.9032

for Children’s Rights, Darya Gerasymchuk, said the
following: the Ukrainian Prosecutor General’s Office
does not have a single such confirmed fact.
Many educational buildings in cities where there
is active fighting have been used by the Ukrainian
military as strongholds, causing considerable damage.
We have the strong impression that the norms of
international humanitarian law exist for anyone
but Kyiv. The occupation of schools, kindergartens
and other children’s educational institutions by the
Ukrainian armed forces is not the exception but the rule.
That inhumane method of warfare endangers the lives
of children, deprives them of their right to education
and destroys Ukraine’s educational facilities.
The deliberate destruction of civilian objects is a
trademark of Kyiv. That is not Russian propaganda, as
some people here would like to believe. On 6 May, we
held an informal Arria Formula meeting of the Security
Council and gave the floor not only to independent
foreign journalists but also to ordinary people from the
two republics. Without hiding their feelings, they told
us how the so-called heroic Azov Battalion had shot
at civilians before their very eyes, including in buses
with children who were trying to evacuate from the
war zones, how those battalions drove people from
their flats and the wounded from hospitals, how they
occupied kindergartens and schools and how they set
up their camps and warehouses for storing weapons and
ammunition there. There are many such testimonies,
and we are carefully documenting them.
The actions of the Kyiv authorities also cast a
shadow over other so-called soft law documents on the
protection of schools and education. I am referring in
particular to the Safe Schools Declaration — a text that
is not legally binding, but about the importance of which
our Western partners talk so often. And what do we see?
Ukraine, which has supposedly publicly committed
itself to that instrument, is completely ignoring it. In
that way, not only do Ukraine’s actions pose a risk to
children whom the Ukrainian armed forces are using as
human shields, but they also devalue the significance of
that instrument.
Incidentally, Ukraine readily targets schools not
only on its own territory and in the Donbas. For example,
yesterday, a school in the village of Solakha, which
is in the Belgorod region of the Russian Federation,
was bombarded.

22-3470915/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We would also like to draw the Council’s
attention to another important fact: the Ukrainian
nationalists — in particular, fighters from the infamous
Azov regiment — have been recruiting children into the
Ukrainian armed forces for many years and have also
been educating them to hate everything Russian. To
this end, in a number of regions in Ukraine, they have
set up children’s camps where children from the ages of
7 to 18 are hosted. One of these camps was the Pilgrim
orphanage in Mariupol, where children were turned
into future fighters. Another similar establishment is
a Ukrainian youth organization called Centuria, whose
ideology is based in radical Ukrainian nationalism.
Even before the beginning of the special military
operation by Russia in Ukraine, reports on the training
of child soldiers appeared repeatedly, including on
Western television. In 2018, journalists from the
Associated Press in Ukraine observed how young
people from the Azovets youth camp were taught to
“destroy sub-humans”. Journalists from the United
States suffered culture shock.
Since our discussion today is on education, I would
like to talk about the quality of education in Ukraine,
which the Kyiv regime has continually tried to tailor to
its ideology. We have analysed more than 300 school
textbooks and manuals from the country, which has
shown that ongoing targeted work is seeking to create
a chain of information that distorts history and historic
truth. I am not even talking about the fact that fascist
collaborationists are presented to children as heroes.
Rather, I am talking about the fact that, in contemporary
Ukrainian education, the goal is, from the earliest
ages, to orient Ukrainian young people against Russia;
we have been sculpted as the enemy for a long time
now. In the post-Maidan years, it has become common
practice for Kyiv’s education system to issue materials
teaching children how to use firearms against so-called
separatists and occupiers.
The total Ukrainization of education and the
rewriting of the pages of history that the Russian and
Ukrainian nations share is what is being done by the
Ministry of Education and Science in Ukraine. In 2016,
this authority, “taking into account the historic events of
recent years”, established 25 educational programmes,
with the broadest changes being brought to the history
and geography programmes.
I even brought with me a geography textbook for
eighth-grade students edited by Maslyak and Kapirulin.
16/25

12/05/2022

Believe it or not, the forefathers of the French, the
Spaniards, the Portuguese, the Turks, and even the
Jews all came from Ukraine. I turn now to my French
colleague, Mr. De Rivière, to ask him if he knew that he
was in fact Ukrainian. If he does not believe me, he just
needs to read this textbook — it really says so. The iron
logic behind this is that, since the French are descended
from the Gauls, then they came from Galychyna, which
is now in Ukraine.
According to the authors of the textbook,
Ukrainians and Poles have Slavic roots, but Russians
have Finno-Ugric roots. Belorussians were stripped
of their Slavic identity, having been relegated to the
Baltic peoples. In the book The History of Ukraine, for
seventh-grade students, edited by Lyakh and Temirov, it
says that the Ukrainian people have existed for 140,000
years. In a history book for ninth-grade students, edited
by Turchenko and Moroko, it says that by the end of the
eighteenth century, Ukrainians were one of the largest
nations in Europe. In this regard, we should mention
that Galichanets, the author of the book The Ukrainian
Nation is absolutely convinced that “the population of
Eastern Europe entered the first millennium of the new
era under the name Ukrainians” — notwithstanding the
fact that no one called the inhabitants of the territory of
modern Ukraine Ukrainians.
Even in the work of Taras Shevchenko, the
nineteenth-century poet who is much revered in both
Ukraine and Russia, the term “Ukrainians” is entirely
absent. The inhabitants of those lands were called
Ruthenians, Russians, or in extreme cases, Little
Russians, but I am not going to get into this subject,
which is so unpleasant for my Ukrainian colleagues.
There are a range of different absurd examples
from Ukrainian school curricula and textbooks. For
example, there is a Ukrainian historian, Valeriy Bebik,
who is not the only one to assert that Constantinople
was a colony of Chersonesus, which is now Sevastopol,
and that the ancestor of the Scythians were Heracles,
a native of Crimea, whose roots are to be found on the
island of Khortytsa in the Dnieper. The city of Mena
in the Chernihiv region, it turns out, got its name from
the first Egyptian Pharaoh, Menes, and according to his
calculations, the “Ukrainian State” itself has existed
for more than 7,500 years.
Genghis Khan, the famous twelfth- and thirteenthcentury Mongol commander, was, according to
Mr. Bebik, in fact called Bogdan. If you do not believe
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

me, Mr. President, then the author advises you to read
The Secret History of the Mongols, where Genghis Khan
is called Bogd Khan. From this, it is clear that he was
not a Mongol at all, but a real Ukrainian. Besides, this
historian is certain that he fought under the Ukrainian
trident and the country’s yellow and blue banners.
Of course, Mr. Bebik’s main conclusion is that
Ukraine was the cradle of global civilization. Even
Jesus Christ, in Mr. Bebik’s terms, as he said in one of
his interviews, could be from Galicia. This is no joke. I
am simply quoting an interview with him on this topic.
Some Council members might ask why I am
spending so much time on this person. Of course, there
are many crazy people in our countries who promote
marginal and very controversial theories of history.
There are naturally many of them; we have them in
Russia too. But there is one nuance in this regard, and
that is that Valeriy Bebik is not any ordinary madman,
but a distinguished madman and a leader of other crazy
pseudo-historians. In 2015, when Poroshenko said that
the country urgently needed a special “Ministry of
Information Policy” — in essence, a Ministry of Truth,
or, rather, a Ministry of New Truth, but you can call
it what you wish, Mr. President — the man appointed
Interim Chair of the Advisory Board of the Ministry
was Mr. Valeriy Bebik, who became, simply stated,
the chief historian of Ukraine. Furthermore, he was
repeatedly nominated for the National Ukrainian Prize
named for Taras Shevchenko, which is a State award
given for a significant contribution to the development
of culture and art. The decision to award it is made by
the President personally for work that

S/PV.9032

The humanitarian situation in Ukraine is getting
worse as the fighting continues. To date, nearly
14 million people have been forcibly displaced since the
war in Ukraine began. Half of the refugees or displaced
persons are children. Whether these displacements are
to other cities in Ukraine, to neighbouring countries or
to more distant lands, they remain a source of trauma
and distress.
Women and children, who are among the largest
contingents of civilians fleeing combat zones, are
also paying the highest price for the consequences
of war. Among the children who have left Ukraine
since 24 February, a number are unaccompanied
minors, which increases their risk of being subjected
to all sorts of abuse, trafficking and exploitation.
These vulnerabilities are exacerbated by the daily
difficulties inherent to water shortages and difficulties
in getting health care or energy. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees statistics on children
killed or injured during the fighting, particularly in the
eastern and western regions of Ukraine, are chilling.
We call once again on the warring parties
to
respect
international
humanitarian
law.
Civilians — and in particular children, as well as
humanitarian personnel — should never be targeted
by fire. We also call on the parties to facilitate the
deployment of unhindered humanitarian assistance
wherever there a people in need without discrimination.

We hope that, ultimately, Ukrainian children will
be able to continue their education under a normal
curriculum and not be fed the drivel that the Ukrainian
authorities are forcing on them at the moment.

The situation of children calls for the greatest
attention of the international community in order to
mitigate the consequences of the war on their daily lives,
particularly in terms of schooling. It is important that
we make it possible for them to continue their studies.
We are grateful to UNICEF for the inventiveness
it has shown in continuing to provide schooling for
children affected by war in host countries by setting up
temporary classes and distance-learning opportunities
and organizing educational and recreational activities.
I would also like to specifically congratulate all
the countries that have received refugees and made
arrangements for the urgent schooling of refugee
children from Ukraine.

Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank Ms. Joyce Msuya and Mr. Omar Abdi
for their respective briefings, and I thank France and
Mexico for their initiative in requesting today’s briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine focusing on
the situation of children in the context of the war.

We commend the work of UNICEF, which is
fulfilling its mandate towards children in Ukraine by
addressing families and children in order to provide for
their hygiene needs, their primary or specialized health
needs, including psychosocial health and mental-health
care, while also ensuring their safety. We are also

“represents the highest spiritual achievement of the
Ukrainian people to advance the historical memory
and identity of the nation”.
Bebik was therefore not just some kind of misfit but was in
essence the father of modern Ukrainian historiography.

22-3470917/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

grateful to all the United Nations specialized agencies
deployed on the ground and encourage them to work
with UNICEF to limit the trauma of children victims
of war.
We have taken note of the statistics in the most
recent report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on children registered in
reception centres and the establishment of Blue Dot
hubs to provide information for families in reception
centres and all the mechanisms that are being deployed
to strengthen the protection of families and children.
It is crucial to limit as much as possible the chance
for mafia networks to benefit from the distress of
these populations.
Alongside the work on the ground to respond to
critical humanitarian emergencies, discussions must
continue in parallel to find a political resolution to the
situation, with the aim of bringing an end to the war.
That is the greatest step that can be taken to help the
children on whose behalf we are meeting today.
The solution can be found only through dialogue.
That is why my country once again calls on the parties
to seize every opportunity to resume dialogue. We call
for firm commitment to the return of peace and security
in Ukraine.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
the briefers from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and UNICEF for their insights
on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine, particularly
on the impact of the conflict on children and education.
We have carefully noted the points made by them.
Children constitute a third of humankind — the
most important third, as they are our future. They
are also the most vulnerable to suffering, particularly
in situations of armed conflict, and therefore need
additional protection and care. The conflict in Ukraine
is no doubt severely affecting the 7.5 million children
across Ukraine.
While the protection of the rights of children,
including their access to education is the primary
responsibility of the national Government, the
international community has the obligation to do its
utmost to provide succour to children affected by this
conflict. India is a signatory to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and appreciates the ongoing efforts,
including those of UNICEF, to alleviate the suffering of
18/25

12/05/2022

the children. We also support UNICEF’s efforts to scale
up its operations.
The conflict has also forced more than 5 million
people to take shelter in the neighbouring countries
and another 7.1 million are displaced within Ukraine.
Out of those, women and children constitute the
majority. We commend the efforts by the neighbouring
countries of Ukraine that have welcomed refugees from
Ukraine, especially for treating women and children
with compassion and dignity. As a country that has
welcomed refugees over centuries, India knows the
importance and value of treating them equally and with
dignity and catering to their needs and requirements.
The impact of the situation on the education of
children has also been severe. It has further aggravated
the pandemic-related challenges that children were
already facing. There are reports that more than 900
education facilities and schools have either been
damaged or destroyed in Ukraine. The efforts of the
Government of Ukraine to protect schools and other
learning spaces, students and teachers to ensure
uninterrupted education for children needs the
unequivocal support of the international community.
Let us not forget that the situation has also affected
foreign students, including those from India. India
facilitated the safe return of 22,500 Indian nationals,
most of them students studying in various universities
in Ukraine. We are exploring options to minimize the
impact on our students’ education. We appreciate the
relaxations made by the Government of Ukraine for
this academic year in respect of medical students.
India has been sending humanitarian supplies to
Ukraine and its neighbours, which include medicines
and other essential relief material. Just last week, a
further tranche of aid, including essential medicines
and medical equipment, were handed over to the
Ukrainian side. We support calls for guarantees of
safe passage to deliver essential humanitarian and
medical supplies, including through the establishment
of humanitarian corridors. We hope the international
community will continue to respond positively to the
evolving humanitarian requirements.
The food security challenges emanating from
the conflict require us to respond by going beyond
constraints that presently bind us. Energy security is
also a serious concern and needs to be addressed through
cooperative efforts. We acknowledge the efforts made
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

by the Secretary-General, particularly the findings of
the Global Crisis Response Group Task Team.
While responding positively to the evolving
humanitarian requirements is an obligation and
responsibility of the international community, it is
in our collective interest to work constructively, both
within the United Nations and outside, towards seeking
an early resolution of the conflict. Since the beginning
of the Ukrainian conflict, India has stood for peace,
dialogue and diplomacy. We believe that no solution
can be arrived at by shedding blood and at the cost of
innocent lives, especially those of women and children.
Allow me to reiterate once again the importance of
the United Nations guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian action must always be guided
by the principles of humanitarian assistance, namely,
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Those measures should not be politicized.
In conclusion, we continue to reiterate that the
global order is anchored in international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Deputy Executive Director Abdi for their very insightful
briefings, which provide the Security Council and the
watching global community an opportunity to hear
of the immense suffering that has resulted from this
unnecessary and brutal war, especially the suffering
Russia is inflicting on children in Ukraine.
Their briefings underscore what all of us — all
of us who do not live in Russia — have seen on our
screens and in the media for the past two and a half
months. Children in Ukraine have been displaced, hurt,
orphaned or killed. Of the nearly 14 million people
forced to flee their homes since the conflict escalated,
approximately half are innocent children — children
who deserve a chance to live, grow and thrive,
but instead are struggling every day to survive in
horrific circumstances.
The danger to children is only increasing. Growing
numbers of hospitals and schools have been destroyed,
as we are hearing. In the first five weeks since the
24 February invasion, an average of 22 schools were
struck every day. Since this war began, there have been
more than 200 attacks on health-care facilities and

S/PV.9032

schools. We heard news this past weekend, as other
members have mentioned, of a bomb hitting a school
in the eastern Ukrainian town of Bilohorivka. It killed
as many as 60 people, including many children. And
reliable reports indicate that when first responders
arrived at the school to assist victims of the bombing,
Russia’s forces opened fire on them.
We have all seen devastating and gruesome images
of mass graves. There are reports of individuals
executed en masse, bodies marked with unequivocal
signs of torture, and now we are hearing more and more
horrific accounts of sexual violence against women
and girls, as well as boys and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and queer persons.
The United States is particularly concerned
about the situation in Kherson, where Russian forces
have reportedly removed local officials and installed
an illegitimate pro-Russian puppet administration.
In recent days, those illegitimate proxies have
increasingly indicated an intention to petition Russia to
annex Kherson. Russia is clearly seeking to assimilate
these regions into its orbit. And for the children of
Kherson, that would have grave consequences. For
example, schools would be forced to adopt the Russian
curriculum, with the goal of trying to erase all signs of
Ukrainian adult identity or Ukrainian culture.
In addition to fearing every waking day for their
lives and safety, displacement poses particular risks
for children. They become increasingly vulnerable to
human trafficking and other forms of exploitation and
abuse. This is even more acute for those children who
are unaccompanied or have been separated from their
parents or caregivers.
Ukrainians — many of them children — have
reportedly been deported to Russia and processed
through so-called filtration camps. Meanwhile, Russia’s
Commissioner for Children’s Rights, Maria LvovaBelova, has touted efforts to fast-track the adoption of
children from Ukraine within Russia.
Children are being exposed to extreme violence,
fear and anxiety. That can have major psychological
effects on children that will have an impact for
generations. Unless appropriate support is provided,
the trauma associated with these experiences can have
serious and enduring negative consequences on their
cognitive development for years to come.

22-3470919/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Many on the Security Council have just now
called for diplomacy to resolve this crisis. We agree
that diplomacy and dialogue are essential to resolve
the crisis, and Russia should show its commitment to
pursing a peaceful resolution by silencing the guns
and withdrawing its forces from Ukraine. We call
again on Russia to end its war on Ukraine and abide
by its obligations under international humanitarian law,
including those regarding taking feasible precautions
to avoid and minimize harm to civilians, including
children. Additionally, all parties to the conflict
should urgently facilitate safe and unhindered access
for medical and humanitarian workers and supplies in
order to ensure the provision of necessary humanitarian
assistance and allow safe passage for those seeking to
flee, including children.
We join others in calling on the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict to add Ukraine as a
situation of concern in the upcoming annual report
on children and armed conflict. Given the scale and
nature of reported violations and abuses committed
by Russia against children in eastern Ukraine between
2014 and 2021 and the evidence of alarming increases
in violations and abuses by Russia across Ukraine
since February 2022, the situation warrants a place in
the report.
As almost all of us around the table have said, the
international community has an obligation to protect
children, the most vulnerable among us. Member
States should work collectively to ensure that innocent
children — regardless of the borders within which
they reside — can live without imminent fear of death,
shelling and lifelong trauma.
Let us do our part. Let us not forget the children
of Ukraine.

12/05/2022

of the Soviet Union, as possible defendants in a future
trial for war crimes and crimes against humanity. They
should consider this meeting as a pretrial hearing.
First of all, I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya and UNICEF Deputy
Executive Director Omar Abdi for their briefings.
Admiration and pain are the sentiments of all
of those who are now watching the Azovstal steel
plant in Mariupol. Courageous defenders are holding
their positions under full blockade, without any
replenishment. Another day, another week, another
month — every day and every night — the Russian
occupiers have been trying to break the resistance of
the Ukrainians in Azovstal. Every day and night, they
drop heavy aerial bombs, shell the facilities with heavy
artillery and multiple-launch rocket systems. Assault
groups of the Russian infantry are attacking non-stop.
The defenders of Mariupol have already done the
impossible: they have stopped the overwhelming force
of the Russian troops for more than three months.
Their contribution to the disruption of the Russian
blitzkrieg plans cannot be overestimated. For that,
Mariupol has paid a heavy price, with the death toll
among its residents over these months — around
20,000 — being double the amount killed there by the
Nazis in the Second World War. That is the reason why
the attackers have shown no restraint in their attempts
to finally crush the resistance. That is the reason why
we are extremely concerned about the destiny of the
defenders of Azovstal should they fall into the hands
of the Russian troops. Even during the evacuation of
civilians from Azovstal on 7 May, the Russian forces
continued to shell the Ukrainian soldiers. As a result,
three Ukrainian servicemen were killed and six were
wounded — in violation of all agreed arrangements.

I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

Many in Azovstal have been heavily wounded and
have no access to the medical treatment they urgently
need. We therefore call for the evacuation operation
to continue. We call on the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to invest further efforts in order to
ensure the evacuation of the sick and wounded from
the Azovstal area, in accordance with international
humanitarian law. They have to be brought to safe
places, where their right to life will be guaranteed.
Russian captivity is not a place for the servicemen from
the Azovstal steel plant.

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representatives of Putin’s regime, in the permanent seat

We are also alarmed that the repressive Russian
practice of using filtration camps for Ukrainians fleeing

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to again draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.

20/25

22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

dangerous areas is being consolidated further. Given
the inhumane conditions and ill treatment, the word
“filtration” can only be considered as a euphemism for
the word “concentration”. It is outrageous that Russia
has applied these filtration practices to civilians who
were evacuated from Azovstal under the facilitation of
the United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross. Some of them were illegally detained.
For instance, during the evacuation on
9 May — ironically Mother’s Day — the Russian
occupiers separated a four-year-old girl, Alice, from
her mother, a medical worker. Only the little child
was allowed to leave the occupied territory, while
her mother was reportedly detained in a filtration
camp. These actions by the Russian forces constitute
a gross violation of a child’s right to life and security,
guaranteed by the Hague Convention on the Civil
Aspects of International Child Abduction, the Geneva
Conventions and the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child. We demand that Russia immediately
and unconditionally release the child’s mother and
ensure that she is reunited with her daughter. We call on
UNICEF to use all possible means to protect the rights
of this child and other children who were separated
from their parents by the Russians.
The presidential statement of 6 May (S/PRST/2022/3))
serves as another example. Immediately after the Russian
Federation joined the members of the Security Council
in recalling the obligation of all Member States to settle
their disputes by peaceful means, it fired rockets on
Ukraine’s Odesa, Mykolaiv, Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhya
regions. Russia continues its missile terror on a daily
basis, primarily targeting civilian infrastructure. Since
24 February, Russia has fired more than 2,100 missiles
on Ukrainian cities and villages. Women and children
throughout Ukraine remain the most vulnerable groups
subjected to the missile terror of Russia.
At least 226 children have been killed and 417
wounded by Russian troops in Ukraine. There is no
doubt that actual statistics are much higher, as occupied
territory remains a no-go zone for any credible
international mechanisms.
Every day of the Russian invasion of Ukraine brings
us new tragedies and new crimes committed by the
Russians. One of the most recent cases occurred in the
village of Bilohorivka, in the Luhansk region, on 7 May,
following a Russian air strike on a local school — the
only building with a shelter. Only 30 civilians out of 90

S/PV.9032

were rescued. The school, once full of joyful children,
was turned by Russian pilots into another mass grave.
Last night, Russia carried out an air strike on
Novhorod-Siverskyi, destroying another school. As of
today, approximately 130 educational institutions have
been entirely destroyed and more than 1,500 have been
damaged. I reiterate that schools must never be attacked
or used for military purposes. The targeting of civilians
and civilian objects, including schools, is a violation of
international humanitarian law.
In violation of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, Russia continues its kidnapping of Ukrainian
children. After forcible transfer to Russia, they are
illegally adopted by Russian citizens without any of
the mandatory procedures envisaged by the legislation
of Ukraine being observed. According to official
Russian sources, on 7 May, to date, more than 1 million
Ukrainians have been transferred to Russia, including
200,000 children. Some 2,000 of them are orphans or
those deprived of parental care. These children’s living
conditions and the state of their health remain unknown.
We call on UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross to demand from Russia
immediate and unhindered access to those children, as
well as to all persons who have been transferred from
the conflict-affected areas of Ukraine to Russia or to
Ukrainian territories under temporary Russian control.
We also call on the Secretary-General to use all the
mechanisms established by the Council to monitor and
report on violations against children in conflict.
According to the World Health Organization, at
least 3,000 people have died in Ukraine during the
period of the invasion, owing to lack of access to
treatment for chronic diseases. The Health Minister
of Ukraine reported that, as of today, Russian troops
have destroyed or damaged approximately 400 healthcare facilities. Given the circumstances of the war, the
treatment of cancer patients in Ukraine has stopped
completely. There are serious problems with access
to insulin and antibiotics. The situation in relation to
access to medical services in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine, in the east and south of the
country, can only be described as a disaster. There is
a shortage of the most basic drugs. The Committee on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities estimates that
Russia’s military attacks against Ukraine are putting
the lives of 2.7 million people with disabilities at risk.

22-3470921/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We welcome the launch of the commission of
inquiry to investigate atrocities related to Russia’s
war on Ukraine. The resolution adopted today in
Geneva mandates the commission to conduct a special
investigation into war crimes committed by Russian
invaders in areas of the Kyiv, Chernihiv, Kharkiv and
Sumy regions. The list includes the arbitrary executions
of more than 1,000 civilians and widespread instances of
sexual violence, torture and other violations. Ukraine,
together with up to 50 partner countries, will ensure
accountability for all perpetrators.
It is symbolic that one of the Russian rockets
launched on 7 May destroyed the museum honouring
Ukrainian philosopher Hryhoriy Skovoroda. In his
doctrine, he promoted humanistic ideas. Indeed, the
current Russia is too far removed from humanism. The
recent sabre-rattling celebration of 9 May served as
another illustration of that. Every year on 8 May, the
entire world honours, with the slogan “Never Again”, the
memory of the victims and those who stopped Nazism
77 years ago. Russia has made 9 May a cornerstone of
its own ideology, which is a combination of propaganda
war, hatred towards neighbours, militarization and the
utmost disregard for agreed rules, norms and values.
We are grateful to all Member States and others
that co-sponsored the joint statement on the occasion
of the seventy-seventh anniversary of the end of the
Second World War in Europe. They demonstrated their
resolute stance to the cynical attempts to appropriate
and exploit the memory of the victory over Nazism and
use it for justifying the full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
Listening to Mr. Putin nowadays, one can hardly
believe that he is the same person who once wrote in
his op-ed for The New York Times, nine years ago, that
“[t]he law is still the law, and we must follow it whether
we like it or not”. He also wrote that “[u]nder current
international law, force is permitted only in selfdefence or by the decision of the Security Council”.
Putin wrote that “[a]nything else is unacceptable under
the United Nations Charter and would constitute an act
of aggression”. The op-ed appeared in the 11 September
2013 edition and was entitled “A Plea for Caution from
Russia”.
Nine years ago, Russian diplomatic vocabulary
still contained the word “caution”. According to
Putin’s op-ed, Russia’s current actions against Ukraine
should be considered as an act of aggression, as no one
attacked Russia and no single decision was adopted
22/25

12/05/2022

by the Security Council in support of Russia’s actions
in Ukraine. Were it not so tragic, it could have been
funnier and much more deepfake than the deepfake
Putin videos on The Daily Show with Trevor Noah. In
fact, they are much closer to reality than statements
made by Putin’s envoy when he speaks in this Chamber.
Not long after Putin’s hypocritical op-ed about the
supremacy of international law, in March 2014, Putin’s
former envoy, the late Mr. Churkin, made an effort, at
least, to keep up appearances in the Security Council,
trying to find some justification for the Russian
invasion of Ukraine. Today’s standards of Russian
diplomacy have gone through the floor, and all masks
are off. Russia is the only beneficiary of the Council’s
inaction on the issue of its war on Ukraine. At the same
time, I doubt that it is in the interest of 14 Security
Council members to tolerate the Russian strategy of
undermining the Council’s credibility.
I urge the Security Council to demonstrate
resoluteness in safeguarding this organ and its
mandate from destructive Russian practices. I do not
apologize for not listening carefully to the drivel of
the Russian Ambassador, but I need to break the news
to his delegation: scientific evidence still suggests
that all modern humans are descendant from African
populations — homo sapiens. They spread out from
Africa approximately 60,000 years ago, and I am proud
to be one of them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I am speaking on behalf
of the Baltic countries — Latvia, Lithuania and my own
country, Estonia.
I thank the briefers for their updates on the alarming
humanitarian situation in Ukraine and the daily work
by UNICEF and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to help those affected by the
brutal Russian military aggression.
We cannot consider this dire situation without
making clear who, by choice, started this war and who
can end it — the Russian Federation, which must put
an end to its aggression and the suffering of children in
Ukraine. The Russian aggression has been accompanied
by killing, torture and terror aimed at civilians, while
demonizing and dehumanizing them in Russia’s war
propaganda. Make no mistake: children have been,
and continue to be, targets for Russia. “For children”,
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

written in Russian on the side of a Russian missile that
struck the Kramatorsk train station, was a cynical but
revealing expression of that fact.
Children have been born in shelters during
bombings, lived through days of air raids and destruction
and stepped onto trains leaving their homes and families
behind. Since 24 February, the United Nations has
recorded 238 children killed and more than 300 injured
in Ukraine, which it admits is a clear underestimate.
Hundreds of schools and educational institutions have
been destroyed or damaged according to the United
Nations, including most recently in Bilohorivka, with
the death of more than 60 people, after a Russian
bomb flattened a school there. Children are suffering
in besieged cities, such as Mariupol, without access to
humanitarian assistance.
In less than three months, 14 million people,
including two thirds of Ukraine’s children, have been
forced to leave their homes. The Ukrainian Parliament
Commissioner for Human Rights asserts that more than
121,000 children have been forcibly deported to Russia.
The forced deportations, together with the Russian steps
towards legislative changes to accelerate the adoption of
children from Ukraine, in violation of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, need to be monitored by the
United Nations and other relevant organizations.
The Russian actions represent violations of
international law amounting to war crimes and crimes
against humanity, as well as grave violations against
children in conflict. That includes killing and maiming,
attacks against schools and hospitals and sexual
violence. Russia’s crimes have been recorded, and it will
be held accountable. We underline and support the role
of the International Criminal Court, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine and
the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in that work.
We call for the full implementation of resolution
1612 (2005), as well as additional resolutions on children
and armed conflict, including resolution 2601 (2021) on
the protection of the right to education. We recall that
Russia, a permanent member of the Security Council,
has endorsed and must comply with them. We underline
the importance of recording, monitoring and reporting
violations against children in Ukraine to the Security
Council, including by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

S/PV.9032

We value the tireless work by UNICEF, other
United Nations agencies and civil society in Ukraine
and beyond to protect children. We welcome the work
of the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross in coordinating their efforts to
ensure the safe passage of civilians, including children
from Mariupol.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania will continue to
support the work of those organizations and provide
financial and in-kind humanitarian assistance to
Ukraine in an amount totalling more than €46 million.
We have welcomed those fleeing the war in Ukraine
and have offered them access to our education and
health systems, as well as online-learning opportunities
and mental-health support for children within and
outside Ukraine.
The Security Council has stood strong in calling
for the protection of children in conflict. It needs to
be strong and absolutely clear in calling on Russia to
end its aggression and the horrors it has brought upon
children in Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): I would like to thank
the United States for organizing this important and
timely briefing and for shedding light on the situation
of children in Ukraine in the aftermath of Russia’s
aggression. I would also like to thank the excellent
briefers, Ms. Joyce Msuya and Mr. Omar Abdi, for
their insights and, more importantly, for all their work
in helping the youngest victims of Russian aggression.
Since the outbreak of the war, as of today, more than
3.3 million people, mostly women and children, have
crossed from Ukraine into Poland to seek refuge. Both
as a State and a society, Poland is making every effort to
meet their needs. Ensuring that children continue their
education is one of our top priorities. While keeping in
mind that the interruption of the educational process,
even for a short period of time, has long-lasting effects
and can prevent students from returning to learning,
we are determined to ensure that each of those affected
by the war can continue their education. Depending
on parents’ preferences, we offer support by enrolling
children in Polish schools or providing them with the
equipment necessary for distance learning within the
Ukrainian educational system. For those who want to
continue their education in Polish schools, we have
organized preparatory classes, which will help them to

22-3470923/25

S/PV.9032

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

12/05/2022

find their way within the Polish educational system and
overcome the language barrier.

humanitarian law and human rights law, must be
held accountable.

Currently, there are almost 200,000 refugee
children from Ukraine in Polish schools. About 20 per
cent of them are attending preparatory classes, and
80 per cent are attending regular classes together with
Polish children. The Ministry of Education has created
an online platform through which various educational
tools are available for free. In addition, the Ministry
has organized special language courses for teachers
from Ukraine who have come to Poland. Courses have
also been set up for Polish teachers, including in the
Ukrainian language, to make it easier for them to
communicate with children coming from Ukraine and
better respond to their educational needs.

More than 2,000 patients from Ukraine, nearly
half of whom are children, are hospitalized in Poland.
A paediatric hub was established in the city of Lublin,
from which young patients are being transferred to
institutions all over the country and abroad.

Additionally, I would like to talk about the project
involving the Polish Centre for International Aid in
coordination with CARE. As part of the cash-for-work
programme, Ukrainian teachers can find employment
in Polish schools and kindergartens as assistants for
refugee children. We also pay particular attention to
the needs of children with disabilities. Children with
special-education needs and their parents can benefit
from psychological and pedagogical assistance in
Polish kindergartens and schools. Students who were
pursuing higher education in Ukraine before the
outbreak of the war can also continue their studies
at Polish universities. Moreover, we have launched
several programmes offering institutional and financial
support for academics from Ukraine to enable them to
continue their research projects.
Schools provide children with education, but they
play a much greater role in children’s lives. In times
of war, classrooms can and should provide children
with a sense of stability and act as a safe space to learn
and process their trauma. However, across Ukraine,
hundreds of schools have been destroyed by Russian
shelling and air strikes. Many classrooms are simply
unusable after having been damaged or destroyed. Even
after the war is over, it will still take a long time to
rebuild schools and other educational facilities.
Attacks on civilian areas, including civilian
infrastructure, are endangering children’s lives and
futures. Poland condemns, in the strongest possible
terms, attacks against civilians and civilian objects such
as schools, hospitals and orphanages. All perpetrators of
violations of international law, especially international
24/25

It must be stressed that Ukrainian children — just
like all children, all around the world — were already
dealing with mental-health challenges as a result
of being isolated for almost two years during the
pandemic. Now that they have left the comforts of
home — not to mention those family and friends who
stayed in Ukraine to fight — any progress towards
pre-pandemic normalcy has been cruelly interrupted.
Poland is offering psychiatric, psychological and
other mental-health social services to help Ukrainian
refugees; however, their needs are growing every day.
Poland is doing the best it can to help Ukrainian
children through such troubled and terrifying times. By
offering them safety among our families in our homes
and a kind of normal life with both its duties and joys in
Poland, we hope that we are able to save at least a part
of their dreams and childhoods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I would like to start by
thanking today’s briefers — Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya and Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF Abdi — for their briefings, which once again
shed light on the devastating impacts of the Russian
war in Ukraine, this time specifically on the issue of
children and their right to education. We have listened
carefully to and appreciate the updates that they have
shared with us, and we will certainly factor in all of
that additional information in our work and activities
going forward.
As UNICEF’s Regional Child Protection Adviser
for Europe and Central Asia said on 6 May in a press
briefing, hospitals, nurseries and schools unfortunately
continue to be affected by strikes. Slovakia categorically
condemns those attacks, including the most recent one
in Bilohorivka in the Luhansk region. That attack,
along with all other attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, constitutes a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and must be thoroughly
investigated. Justice must be served. We also concur
22-34709

12/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

with the Secretary-General that the attack is yet another
reminder that, in a war, civilians — and children in
particular — pay the highest price.
We have also been following those developments
very carefully in our current capacity as Vice-President
of the Executive Board of UNICEF and as a
neighbouring and directly affected country. According
to the most recent reports, including updates from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, as of
11 May, more than 230 children have already lost their
lives, and more than 340 children have been injured.
Approximately two thirds of Ukrainian children have
been forced to flee their homes and all of them have
been negatively affected. That will have a terrible and
devastating impact on the future of this generation,
which is also something we must bear in mind.
Instead of enjoying their childhoods, millions of
Ukraine’s children are witnessing the horrors of war
even though they bear not even the tiniest fraction of
guilt for what is happening. Children are being separated
from their families and friends and are being directly
exposed to blaring sirens, bomb explosions and physical
and, unfortunately, even sexual violence, causing them
physical harm and enormous psychological trauma.
They will need months and years to cope with that — if
they are ever able to.
Children in Ukraine have been stripped of their
fundamental right to access to safe and quality education,
which in many cases has prompted their mothers to
undertake the main responsibility for home-schooling.
That is a so-called special achievement of Russia’s socalled special military operation: a children’s crisis of
unprecedented proportions. It is with a heavy heart that
to be accurate I have to refer to it that way. It is one of
the fastest large-scale displacements of children since
the Second World War, caused by Russia’s unjustified,
unprovoked and senseless aggression against Ukraine,
constituting a blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
Just briefly, I would like to add that Slovakia
has already received more than 136,000 children, of

S/PV.9032

whom more than 30,000 have been granted temporary
protection so far. Children fleeing Ukraine are provided
with as comprehensive care and support as possible,
including psychosocial assistance, medical care and
assistance in connecting or reuniting with their relatives
and families.
We have been able to enrol approximately 10,000
children aged 3 to 17 in Slovak schools, and we are
working hard to increase that number in order to
provide all the refugee children staying in Slovakia
with a proper education. I am pleased that the First
Lady of the United States was able to see those efforts
recently herself a few days ago. She met with teachers
and mothers on Mother’s Day to express her support
and solidarity and compared notes on practical aspects
of life.
Refugee children involved in the educational
process are also entitled to a food subsidy. Together
with our partners from UNICEF and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, we have agreed to
develop a joint child-protection capacity-building plan
for implementing partners and other stakeholders in
child protection, inclusion and education.
Slovakia continues to stand in solidarity with
Ukraine. As a close friend and good neighbour, we will
continue doing our utmost to help alleviate the people’s
suffering. We appreciate the work of international
organizations and institutions aiming to improve the
humanitarian situation, and I am also pleased to add
that the Prime Minister of Slovakia, Mr. Eduard Heger,
recently announced an additional financial contribution
that includes, inter alia, €130,000 for the specific
UNICEF programme and project.
To conclude, Slovakia once again calls on the
Russian Federation to immediately cease hostilities
against Ukraine and unconditionally withdraw all of
its troops from the entire territory of Ukraine. That
is the only way in which we will be able to stop our
children’s suffering.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

22-3470925/25
