S/PV.8576

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8576

th meeting
Wednesday, 17 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Liu Yang
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Fize
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alajmi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Mabhongo
Mrs. Dickson
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Letter dated 20 May 2019 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunal addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2019/417)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22060 (E)
*1922060*

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
Letter dated 20 May 2019 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunal addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/417)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of Justice of Serbia, and
Her Excellency Ms. Zdravka Bušić, State Secretary for
Political Affairs of Croatia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2019/417, which contains a letter dated
20 May 2019 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: I feel deeply honoured to have once
again the privilege of addressing the Security Council,
this time as the new President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I am
fortunate to have assumed the leadership of the
Mechanism when the institution is strong and wellestablished, thanks to the unstinting and outstanding
work of my predecessor, Judge Theodor Meron,
together with that of my colleagues, the Mechanism’s
remarkable Judges, and of course its wonderful staff.
2/27

17/07/2019

This is not to say that my first months have been easy.
The role of Mechanism President is a demanding one,
running an institution spread across two continents, with
Judges and staff coming from numerous legal systems
and diverse backgrounds, working in different time
zones; with our focus split between the residual judicial
matters arising out of two very distinct conflicts and
resulting from the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I already
knew of these unique circumstances before assuming
the presidency, of course, because I have been a Judge
of the Mechanism since it came into operation in 2012
and was a Judge of the ICTY for many years before
that. Nevertheless, I have been surprised and enthralled
by the extent to which the Mechanism differs from its
predecessor institutions.
Despite our unique mandate and the many challenges
that no doubt lie ahead, I remain fully committed, first
and foremost, to the efficient and timely conclusion
of the judicial proceedings at both the Arusha and
The Hague branches of the Mechanism, bearing in
mind due process and fundamental fair trial rights;
secondly, to enhancing inter-branch coordination and
harmonization of practices and procedures; and thirdly,
to doing my utmost to foster a working environment
that encourages high staff morale and performance.
This is in line with the priorities I announced at
the start of my presidency, which are elaborated in
document S/2019/417, being the Mechanism’s progress
report for the period 16 November 2018 to 15 May 2019.
I must add that the report partly reflects the work of
the Mechanism under President Meron’s guidance until
19 January of this year, when I took over the leadership
of that fine institution from him.
As set out in the report before the Council, the
Mechanism continues to work vigorously towards
concluding its residual judicial workload. Notably, most
of this work has been performed by Judges working
remotely, with the assistance of Chambers staff at both
branches, in accordance with the imperative to operate in
a cost-efficient manner. In the Mechanism’s seven years
of existence, its Judges have had only two opportunities
to come together for the purpose of in-person plenary
sessions. The second in-person plenary of Judges, and
the first to be held at the Mechanism’s Arusha branch,
took place earlier this year, in March, offering my
colleagues and me a tremendous opportunity to discuss
practical and substantial matters, familiarize ourselves
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

with the new courtroom and get to know our dedicated
staff in Tanzania. It was a most valuable meeting, which
I hope will be repeated periodically.
Turning to our workload, I am pleased to note
that the appeal judgment in the Karadžić case was
delivered on 20 March, representing a milestone for
the Mechanism in the conclusion of one of its most
significant cases. Remarkably, the timely adjudication
of the case was achieved despite changes in the bench at
a very late stage. I wish to particularly commend Judge
Vagn Joensen, who took over as the presiding Judge,
and Judge Ivo Nelson de Caires Batista Rosa, who, upon
being newly assigned to the case, was able to quickly
take up the complex and significant responsibilities
entrusted to him.
In relation to the other ongoing cases in The Hague,
I am also pleased to report that changes in late 2018
to the bench assigned to the Mladić case have also not
resulted in any delays to the appeal proceedings, which
are progressing smoothly. I am grateful to the presiding
Judge, Judge Prisca Matimba Nyambe, and the other
Judges on the bench, whose diligence, together with that
of the Chambers team, has allowed the case to remain
on track to conclude by the end of 2020. Solid progress
is also being made in the Stanišić and Simatović retrial,
with the defence case underway as of 18 June. Thanks
to the dedication of the Presiding Judge, Judge Burton
Hall, and the rest of the Bench and assigned staff, the
trial judgment in this case also remains on schedule for
delivery by the end of 2020.
In Arusha, the Ngirabatware review proceedings
are currently expected to be heard in September.
As the Council may be aware, the replacement
of Mr. Ngirabatware’s counsel and the disclosure
of voluminous material from a related contempt
case resulted in the postponement of the review
hearing, which had previously been scheduled for
September 2018.
In addition to those proceedings, which relate to
core crimes within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism,
the Mechanism is seized of a number of cases pertaining
to allegations of contempt of court. I refer in particular
to the multi-accused Turinabo et al. case, in which a
single Judge continues to conduct pre-trial proceedings
and to deal with numerous motions filed by the five
accused. It is anticipated that the trial will start in
October and conclude in the first semester of next year.
I would like to add that the Appeals Chamber, which

S/PV. 8576

I preside over, is also seized of several appeals of
pre-trial decisions of the single Judge, and is making
its best efforts to ensure that these are adjudicated as
expeditiously as possible in order to allow the trial to
start on time.
Another contempt case, the case of Petar Jojić and
Vjerica Radeta, is presently back before the Mechanism.
In 2018, this case was referred to the authorities of
Serbia for trial, but was subsequently remanded back
to a single Judge following an appeal by the Amicus
Curiae Prosecutor. In May of this year, the single Judge
revoked the previous referral order and requested Serbia
to transfer the accused to the Mechanism without delay.
While the two accused have not filed an appeal against
this decision, Serbia has, and the matter is currently
pending before the Appeals Chamber.
What the Council has just heard relates to the most
visible aspect of the Mechanism’s mandate, namely,
its residual judicial workload. It is clear that our trials
and appeals, and especially our decisions, orders
and judgments, are followed closely not only by the
countries most affected by our work — Rwanda and
those in the region of the former Yugoslavia — but
also by other States Members of the United Nations
and numerous stakeholders around the world. Less
attention, however, is paid to the Mechanism’s additional
statutory functions, which include protecting victims
and witnesses, monitoring cases referred to national
jurisdictions, preserving the archives of the ICTR, the
ICTY and the Mechanism itself, addressing requests for
assistance from national jurisdictions and supervising
the enforcement of sentences. I would therefore like
to share some of my reflections, since assuming the
presidency, on what it means to manage some of these
residual matters, and will focus my remarks here on
enforcement issues.
My first observation may be an obvious one,
namely, that justice does not end with the delivery
of a judgment. I am referring here to post-conviction
matters, which are a little-understood but crucial part
of the Mechanism’s work. The legal framework of the
Mechanism grants me, as President, broad powers to
supervise the enforcement of sentences, and I do not
take those responsibilities lightly. Determinations
as to where a convicted person will serve his or her
sentence, whether he or she should be transferred to
continue a sentence elsewhere, or whether a person
may be eligible to be considered for early release,
pardon or commutation of sentence, are extremely

19-220603/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

important. There are also very sensitive issues relating,
inter alia, to the rights of detainees and to sentences
imposed as a result of painstaking, often lengthy
trials and appeal proceedings concerning the gravest
violations of international criminal law. My duty
remains to apply the law, and I will continue to do so
responsibly, thoroughly and with as much transparency
as possible. I recall that, pursuant to the Mechanism’s
legal framework, such decisions involve the exercise
of discretionary functions by the President and require
a careful case-by-case assessment and balancing
of factors.
Secondly, as a judicial institution, the Mechanism
is bound to strictly observe its duty to safeguard
the rights of all its detainees, whether subject to
pending or ongoing proceedings or awaiting transfer
to an enforcement State. As of 5 December 2018, the
Mechanism has been implementing a new regulatory
framework on detention matters that I believe can serve
as a model for other institutions. In that regard, the
Mechanism has been guided by the need to harmonize
practices between the Arusha and The Hague detention
facilities, and by standards enunciated by the General
Assembly through its adoption of the Nelson Mandela
Rules. Moreover, it has sought to build upon those
standards through detailed procedures governing
visits, communications, complaints and disciplinary
matters in a detention setting. The Mechanism will
continue to focus on ensuring that its implementation
of this framework is also reflective of best practices in
detention management.
Thirdly, in undertaking its enforcement functions,
the Mechanism will continue to rely on the support of
Member States and other key stakeholders. It is evident
that in order to have an enduring impact on international
peace and justice, we must all remain committed not
only to having trials and appeals and active judicial
processes, but also to what comes afterwards. In my
six months as President, I have come to appreciate even
more how complex the enforcement of sentences can be
and how precious such commitment is. In this regard,
I would like to praise the critical role performed by
Enforcement States that voluntarily assume additional
responsibilities to further the cause of international
justice. In particular, I wish to thank Austria, Benin,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Mali, Norway, Poland, Senegal, Sweden and the United
Kingdom for their generosity and ongoing support with
regard to the Mechanism’s enforcement functions.
4/27

17/07/2019

This exemplary cooperation is not only vital to the
Mechanism’s ability to fulfil its broader mandate; it is
also a sign of the trust and credibility that our institution
enjoys in the eyes of the international community. For
that reason, I am compelled to raise a challenging and
most unfortunate situation under the Mechanism’s
purview. I am referring to the fate of the nine acquitted
and released persons that remain in Arusha, one of them
since 2004, and they remain there in an unacceptable
legal limbo. These persons should be free to start a
new life, having served their sentences or never been
convicted in the first place, and yet they cannot. While
the Mechanism is doing everything it can to find a
long-term solution, the fate of these nine individuals is
a responsibility it shares with the States Members of the
United Nations, as was noted in resolution 2422 (2018).
More can and must be done to resolve this situation.
It is of course a double pleasure for me to appear
before the Security Council on the occasion of the Day
of International Criminal Justice — a day celebrating
the achievements of international criminal courts and
tribunals in delivering justice and holding to account
those responsible for violations of international law.
Today we pay tribute to the vision and the commitment
of all of the individuals, organizations and stakeholders
that have advocated, and continue to advocate, for
justice to be more than an abstract ideal. The underlying
reason for this important day, namely, the adoption of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
would not have been possible without the ICTY and
the ICTR having paved the way for such a remarkable
endeavour. The establishment of the Mechanism as the
successor institution to the two ad hoc Tribunals further
demonstrates the Security Council’s commitment to
principled accountability and its members’ resolve to
ensure that the closure of the Tribunals will not open
the way for impunity to reign once more.
On this day, we are also called upon to remember that
international criminal justice is not the responsibility
of courts alone. All those who are committed to
the rule of law have a vital part to play in the fight
against impunity — and particularly now, when there
is a resurgence in genocide denial and revisionism
in both the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Such
an effort includes defending judicial processes and
pronouncements and speaking out against those who
try to distort the truth as established by international
and domestic courts. Consequently, those who deny the
legitimacy of the findings of the ICTY, the ICTR and
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the Mechanism must be reminded that this body, the
Security Council, mandated these institutions — and
no one else — to investigate, prosecute, adjudicate and
punish the crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. Likewise, they must be reminded that the
domestic courts are entrusted with continuing to carry
out these functions and not politicians or individuals.
I therefore call upon the Council to defend and protect
our judicial legacy, which established time and time
again, beyond a reasonable doubt, that what the world
witnessed both in 1994 and in 1995 was genocide,
together with the gravest and most brutal of other
international crimes.
International criminal justice concerns us all,
because justice is in the service of peace, and peace must
be maintained on a daily basis, as this distinguished
Council knows all too well. The extent of the world’s
yearning for justice was made clear to me this year
when I attended the twenty-fifth commemoration of
the genocide against the Tutsi, in Kigali, and again
last week in Potočari, where I attended the twentyfourth commemoration of the Srebrenica genocide.
These occasions reinforced in me the firm belief
that, while international justice takes time and costs
money, it is always worth it for the victims and affected
communities, offering not only some form of closure
but also a powerful way forward. However, we must
be mindful that justice has enemies as well, who are
constantly seeking to make sure that countless atrocities
throughout the globe remain unanswered.
I am determined to do my utmost to maximize
the Mechanism’s ability to deliver meaningful justice
and to fulfil all aspects of its mandate in an effective
and efficient manner. My colleagues — the other
judges — and the Mechanism’s principals, together
with our exceptional staff, are equally committed to
this task. However, we cannot do it alone. The success
of international justice depends on sustained support
and cooperation, today and every day. I hope and trust
that the Mechanism will continue to find such help in
the esteemed States members of the Security Council.
For their support thus far, I am extremely grateful.
Before concluding, please allow me, Mr. President,
to commend you on your presidency for the month of
July and to thank you in particular for your personal
commitment and outstanding leadership as Chair of the
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. My recognition also goes to the Office of
Legal Affairs and its dedicated team for their invaluable

S/PV. 8576

support. And last but not least, I wish to express my
sincere gratitude for the continuing and excellent
support provided by the two Host Countries of the
Mechanism, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
United Republic of Tanzania.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge
Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
about the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. My written report provides details about
our activities and results during the reporting period
in relation to our three primary priorities (S/2019/417,
annex II). Today, I would like to highlight just a few
important issues.
My Office’s first priority as always is to expeditiously
complete the ad hoc trials and appeals under the
Mechanism’s jurisdiction. During the reporting period,
at The Hague branch, my Office made important
progress towards finalizing the remaining proceedings
transferred from the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Most importantly,
on 20 March, the Appeals Chamber of the Mechanism
affirmed the conviction of Radovan Karadžić for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
Appeals Chamber further granted my Office’s appeal
and entered a sentence of life imprisonment.
As President of the Republika Srpska, Karadžić
stood at the apex of power, which he abused to
manipulate his people and commit atrocities that
shocked our collective conscience. For 13 years, he
was one of the world’s most wanted fugitives. He has
now been held accountable by an international court for
his crimes. This case is a powerful demonstration that
when the international community remains determined,
justice can and will prevail.
In relation to the Stanišić and Simatović retrial,
my Office completed the presentation of its evidence
and the defence cases have now begun. In that regard, I
note the efforts of the Republic of Serbia to ensure full
cooperation with my Office by quickly responding to a
number of important requests for assistance.
Regarding the Mladić appeal, my Office finished
preparation of the written appeals arguments and

19-220605/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

also litigated a number of other matters in this case,
including motions for additional evidence.
At the Arusha branch, on 7 December 2018,
the single Judge decided not to refer the Turinabo et
al. contempt case to Rwanda and ordered that it be
conducted by the Mechanism. Since that time, my
Office has been engaged in intense pre-trial preparation
and litigation, while concurrently litigating the related
review proceedings in the Ngirabatware case.
Serious crimes against the justice process must be
detected and prosecuted, as the Council recognized
in adopting the Mechanism’s statute. My Office is
determined to carry out our mandate by ensuring
that witnesses are protected from interference and by
safeguarding the integrity of our judgments.
As I have previously reported to the Council, my
Office has been taking a number of important measures
to strengthen our activities to locate and arrest the
remaining eight fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Over the past
year, our reforms and renewed efforts have generated
important actionable leads. Critically, my Office
has developed credible intelligence on the current
whereabouts of several fugitives. We accordingly
approached a number of Member States to seek
their cooperation.
Unfortunately, I must report that there are a
number of issues in State cooperation that have
negatively impacted our work. While many Member
States have committed to providing cooperation, more
can be done to ensure that their authorities deliver on
that commitment. In part, the challenges we are facing
are symptomatic of a more general lack of capacity in
terms of inter-State cooperation in criminal matters,
including in the search for transnational fugitives. We
are committed to supporting our partners to overcome
those challenges.
At the same time, it also appears that some
countries do not prioritize cooperation with my
Office in bringing genocide fugitives to justice. Since
August of last year, my Office has been seeking urgent
cooperation from South Africa in relation to the arrest
of a fugitive located on its territory. We have continually
renewed our requests and repeatedly sought to engage
directly with South African authorities. Unfortunately,
until yesterday, we had received only pro forma
responses that our requests had been forwarded to the
appropriate authorities and were being considered.
6/27

17/07/2019

South Africa confirmed yesterday by note verbale that
it is fully committed to cooperating with my Office.
I hope that this time it will actually deliver on that
commitment immediately.
This year marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Rwandan genocide. It is time for the remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR to be brought to justice.
The victims have waited for far too long. It must also be
underlined that this is not just an issue of the past. Some
fugitives remain threats to international peace and
security today by promoting conflict and exploitation.
We will utilize all tools available to us to address
the challenges we face, including formal reports of
non-cooperation to the Security Council, if needed.
In relation to national prosecutions of crimes
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, my
written report provides detailed insight into the current
status and challenges.
It is clear that much more remains to be done to
achieve more justice for more victims. Rwandan
authorities continue to search for more than 500
fugitives. In the former Yugoslavia, thousands of cases
still need to be processed by national courts. Our
national counterparts are unanimous that they need
more support, assistance and advice to successfully
implement national war crimes strategies. Last year,
we received more than 300 requests for assistance
to provide evidence — more than ever before — and
current trends indicate that this year we will again
receive a record number of requests.
Regional cooperation is another area where
strengthened engagement will have an impact. I am
pleased to report that with my Office’s support, at
the recent conference in Belgrade the region’s chief
prosecutors agreed to transfer specific cases involving
mid-level officials from the countries where the crimes
were committed to the countries where suspects
are living now. They further requested my Office to
facilitate that process.
The countries of the former Yugoslavia have made
commitments to increasing the pace of war crimes
prosecutions and significantly reducing the backlog of
unresolved cases. National prosecutors have made clear
that achieving those goals will depend on continued
and strengthened assistance, and the international
community has an important role to play by ensuring
the requested assistance is provided.
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The final topic that I would like to address is the
denial of crimes and the glorification of war criminals.
In relation to Rwanda, genocide denial, in all of
its forms and manifestations, unfortunately continues.
Efforts to minimize the scale of the death and
destruction or point to other factors to detract attention
from the facts of the genocide are unacceptable.
As for the former Yugoslavia, I first reported to the
Council about this topic five years ago. Unfortunately,
since that time the situation has dramatically worsened.
It cannot be tolerated that, just last week, a Government
minister called the Srebrenica genocide false, while a
member of Parliament congratulated Ratko Mladić on
the genocide, which he said was a brilliant military
operation. The truth is that during the conflicts
there was untold human suffering caused by leaders
who used fear, division and hatred. No one emerged
unharmed — not in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Croatia,
in Kosovo or in Serbia — but the denial of the crimes
causes profound pain to the victims. Their suffering
was immense, yet some are determined to insult and
torment them even more.
The glorification of war criminals punishes young
people. What they learn in the classrooms and from
their leaders drives them apart, rather than bringing
them together. The consequence is clear. Denial and
glorification are destabilizing the region and preventing
reconciliation. And so, to begin to move forward,
glorification must stop.
Important lessons can be learned from the
Rwandan example. Every year the Rwandan people join
together for 100 days to commemorate all victims of
the genocide and renew their commitment to ensuring
that such crimes are never repeated. The international
community failed the victims in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia by standing by as the crimes were
committed. We cannot fail them again now by not
speaking out against denial and glorification.
In conclusion, my Office is firmly focused on
completing our remaining functions efficiently and
effectively. In the search for the fugitives, my Office
is generating credible intelligence on the current
whereabouts of several fugitives. However, we are not
yet receiving the cooperation needed to secure arrests,
so we call upon all Member States to adhere to their
international obligations and provide full cooperation
to our efforts.

S/PV. 8576

We also remain committed to providing our support
to the continued implementation of the ICTR and ICTY
completion strategies by national authorities so that
more justice can be achieved for more victims. We are
grateful for the continued support of the Council in all
of our efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Prosecutor Brammertz for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Peru.
I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, for their important presentations.
Today, 17 July, as we are celebrating international
justice, we underscore the significance of the fight
against impunity and the need to provide justice to
the victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. We therefore reaffirm the importance
of access to justice to achieving lasting peace, and
we stress in that context the work of the Residual
Mechanism, the heir to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
In that connection, we welcome the priorities
identified in the report (see S/2019/417) by both the
President of the Residual Mechanism, whom we
welcome, and the Prosecutor of the Mechanism. We
also welcome the rapid, efficient and transparent
manner in which the Residual Mechanism is carrying
out its intense judicial activities, and we encourage it to
continue its efforts to strike a balance between the civil
and common law legal systems.
We must remember that the success of the
Mechanism, including the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor, hinges on the cooperation of States to
implement judgments, respect orders and respond
to requests for assistance. That is why we wish
to highlight the support that several African and
European Governments have been providing so that
convicted persons can serve their sentences in their
respective countries.
On the other hand, we note with special interest
the measures that are beginning to be taken by the
President of the Mechanism in responding to the
concerns raised in resolution 2422 (2018) on the early

19-220607/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

release of convicted persons, some of whom have not
expressed regret for their crimes, which includes not
only systematic consultation with other judges of the
Mechanism, but also with the Governments concerned.
I conclude by underscoring the important support
lent by the Secretariat and the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs, while stressing the need for the
Council to remain united in its support for the Residual
Mechanism and its far-reaching and landmark work.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes the convening of today’s debate
on the progress of work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and commends
Judge Carmel Agius and Mr. Serge Brammertz, in their
respective capacities as President and Prosecutor of the
Mechanism, for their briefings.
My country takes note of the progress of the work
of the Mechanism related to judicial and administrative
activities, the enforcement of sentences, the protection
of victims and witnesses and the management of
archives. It welcomes the commitment of the President
of the Mechanism to undertake expanded consultations
to ensure greater transparency and better examine the
impact of early releases and urges him to consider
establishing conditions for early releases in appropriate
cases, as recommended by paragraph 10 of resolution
2422 (2018).
My delegation also notes with interest the leading
role of national courts in the investigation and
prosecution of the perpetrators of the war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide committed in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. In this regard,
it welcomes the multifaceted assistance, including
capacity-building and the sharing of best practices,
provided by the Mechanism to those jurisdictions to
enable the principle of complementarity to be effective
and national authorities to assume responsibility for
post-conflict accountability.
Stepping up cooperation between States Members
of the United Nations and the Mechanism is necessary
for increasing the effectiveness of this entity in carrying
out its mission. Unfortunately, my country notes with
regret the insufficient judicial cooperation of the
8/27

17/07/2019

countries of the former Yugoslavia, which raises the
risk that perpetrators of the aforementioned crimes will
find refuge in neighbouring States. In this context, my
delegation welcomes the constructive dialogue initiated
by the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism with
the prosecutors and national authorities of the region,
with a view to promoting regional judicial cooperation
in the area of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
crimes of genocide.
It also encourages Serbia’s initiative to organize
a regional conference of prosecutors for those crimes
and urges all countries to participate. In addition,
the Mechanism needs enhanced cooperation from all
Member States in the prosecution of the remaining
fugitives suspected of committing genocide, the
enforcement of sentences and the rehabilitation and
reintegration of acquitted persons.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
for the Mechanism in its quest for optimal effectiveness
and, to that end, urges it to continue to implement the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, contained in its evaluation report of 8 March
2018 and its audit report of 5 March 2019.
Mr. Fize (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II) and their briefings.
I would like to thank President Agius and warmly
commend him on delivering his first briefing to the
Security Council as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. France
reiterates its confidence in him and knows that it can
count on his unwavering commitment to an impartial
and high-quality international criminal justice system,
as President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, until 2017, and now as President of
the Mechanism. He can rest assured that France lends
its full support to the work of the Mechanism.
With regard to the judicial activities of the
Mechanism during the reporting period, France
welcomes the successful outcome of the Prosecutor v.
Radovan Karadžić case. This decision constitutes an
important milestone for justice and the fight against
impunity in the Balkans, as well as for international
criminal justice as a whole. Like the Prosecutor, France
hopes that the facts definitively established in that case
will be accepted unequivocally and that they will serve
as a basis for reconciliation.
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić case will be
another important milestone for the Mechanism and the
fulfilment of its mandate with regard to the countries of
the former Yugoslavia. France hopes that the date of the
hearing in the appeal will be set in the coming months.
With regard to the Rwandan cases, we note that
the single judge decided not to refer the Prosecutor
v. Maximilien Turinabo et al. case to the Rwandan
authorities and ordered that the trial be held before the
Mechanism. In this regard, we note that this is the first
major contempt case brought before the Mechanism.
France also notes that President Agius stated his
desire to see decisions in pending cases rendered
without delay, and to the extent possible, before the end
of 2020. We rely on the professionalism of the judges
and the Office of the Prosecutor to conclude all ongoing
proceedings and trials in a timely manner.
With regard to cooperation, France recalls that
States are required to cooperate with the Mechanism in
the search and arrest of eight fugitives indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
In this regard, we note the recent requests made by
the Prosecutor and call on the States concerned to
cooperate. The crimes committed by those fugitives
cannot go unpunished.
France welcomes the assistance provided by
the Mechanism to national courts responsible for
prosecuting perpetrators of international crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We
call for enhanced inter-State cooperation in the region,
which must make further progress, to complement the
legal assistance offered by the Mechanism, which must
have the means to respond to it.
With regard to Rwanda, the two cases referred
by the ICTR to the French courts have undergone
significant developments during 2018, as mentioned in
the reports presented to the Council and in our previous
statement (see S/PV.8416). France will, of course,
continue to address those cases with all the necessary
diligence and rigour. In this regard, we would like to
inform the Council of President Macron’s decision to
enhance the material and financial resources dedicated
to the prosecution of parties to the genocide who are
present in France. The objective of such reinforcements
is twofold: to quickly initiate proceedings against all
such parties residing in France and to prosecute them
more expeditiously.

S/PV. 8576

We take note of the Prosecutor’s comments with
respect to the cooperation provided to his Office
by the countries of the former Yugoslavia. We are
concerned by its renewed negative assessment of
regional judicial cooperation, which is “at its lowest
level in years” (S/2019/417, annex II, para. 61). For
France and the European Union, the countries of the
former Yugoslavia must both fully cooperate with the
Mechanism and themselves fight against impunity
for crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia that
do not fall within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism.
These are two inseparable and essential dimensions
for reconciliation and regional stability, which are
themselves essential for the future of the Western
Balkan countries. Moreover, during his official visit to
Serbia earlier this week, the President of the Republic
recalled France’s commitment to strengthening the
rule of law and ensuring the lasting stabilization of
the region.
I would also like to echo the concern once again
expressed by Prosecutor Brammertz in his report with
respect to the denial of crimes and responsibility by
some individuals convicted by international criminal
tribunals upon their release. In that regard, we recall that
the denial of genocide is subject to criminal punishment
in France. We will spare no effort to counter the rhetoric
of denial of well-established facts. In that context, on
the occasion of the recent twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Rwandan genocide, the President of the Republic
designated 7 April as an official day of commemoration
of the Tutsi genocide.
With regard to the issue of requests for early
release, resolution 2422 (2018) must be fully respected,
and we note the determination of the President and the
Prosecutor in that regard. We encourage the Mechanism
to continue its discussions and deliberations with a view
to establishing a clear regime under clear conditions,
which will usefully enhance international jurisprudence.
With respect to the Mechanism’s functioning,
France welcomes the willingness shown by the President
and the Prosecutor to promote more than ever a unified
and coordinated working culture among the divisions
and the policy of a single Mechanism and a single
Prosecutor’s Office. That is an essential condition for
its effectiveness and the coherence of its action.
In conclusion, allow me note, like President Agius,
that 17 July is the Day of International Criminal Justice
and marks the anniversary of the adoption of the Rome

19-220609/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Statute. On this occasion, France reiterates its full
support for the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Judge Carmel Agius, in his role as President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
respective reports and insightful briefings on the
ongoing work of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. Our gratitude also goes to you,
Mr. President, for your leadership of the Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
Before I continue, I wish to reiterate Indonesia’s
support for the effective contribution of the Mechanism
to fighting impunity and ensuring accountability for
the most serious crimes under international law. I will
focus on three issues today:
My first point concerns the workload of the
Mechanism. We carefully note that in this reporting
period alone, 225 decisions and orders were issued
by the Mechanism. That is a very impressive
output despite a number of challenges faced by the
Mechanism. We also note with satisfaction that the
working methods implemented by the Mechanism have
enabled the judges to expeditiously render judgments
in the smaller legal proceedings. In that regard, we
fully support those efficient working methods and we
encourage the Mechanism to continue on that path.
We also note that, of those 225 decisions and orders,
142 of them, or approximately three in five, related
not to the adjudication of the core crimes but instead
to the adjudication of requests pertaining to other
residual functions.
One such aspect leads to my second point, which
is on assistance to national jurisdictions. Indonesia
attaches particular importance to capacity-building
programmes to develop the national judicial capacity of
relevant States in order to ensure that all referred cases
are conducted in full compliance with the standards of
due process. As States bear the primary responsibility
for ending impunity and investigating and prosecuting
those responsible for the most serious crimes under
international law, it is important that national judicial
authorities be assisted, supported and advised in
fulfilling their responsibilities. We encourage the
Mechanism to continue those very important activities.
However, it must be done without losing sight of the goal
of fulfilling the mandate of the Mechanism to conclude
the remaining trials in a timely and effective manner.
10/27

17/07/2019

Turning to my last point, which is the trial of
fugitives, we believe that the Mechanism cannot fully
complete its work until it brings the principal indictees
to justice. Justice cannot be fully served as long as
the remaining fugitives are still at large. The system
must be able to bring them to justice, no matter when
or where they are apprehended. Indonesia therefore
stresses the paramount importance of enhancing
cooperation among States in the service of justice. The
Mechanism relies on the Council’s support and political
will of Member States in relation to that vital matter,
and my delegation strongly appeals to Member States
to take that responsibility very seriously.
In that regard, we note the significant challenges
pointed out in the report (S/2019/417, annexes I and
II) regarding national prosecutions of war crimes in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We share the
concern that the victims of the Rwandan genocide are
still waiting for more justice and that all those who
committed crimes in it must be held accountable. In
view of the well-known cliché that justice delayed is
justice denied, we urge Member States to help to ensure
that justice is served soonest.
Finally, I wish to reiterate the firm commitment of
Indonesia to continue to cooperate with the Mechanism
to ensure that their mandates are fully discharged.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
President Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative and insightful
reports and briefings. On International Criminal
Justice Day, it is fitting to commend the President’s
and the Prosecutor’s commitment and contribution to
international criminal justice. Let me express Poland’s
appreciation for their dedicated leadership in efforts
to ensure accountability, reflected by the efficient and
effective functioning of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and its Office of the
Prosecutor, notwithstanding the difficult challenges
they face. Given the fact that today’s briefing is the first
by President Agius in this capacity, allow me also to
warmly welcome him in particular and to assure him
of Poland’s continuing commitment to accountability,
as well as its support for and cooperation with the
Mechanism. Allow me also to praise your efforts and
leadership, Mr. President, as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
Poland is encouraged by the priorities set out by the
President and the Prosecutor. Their focus on the timely
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

completion of judicial proceedings while maintaining
highest international standards of due process and fair
trial are particularly appreciated. The innovative and
efficient solutions adopted to that end are welcome. The
priority attached to increasing the branch coordination
and harmonization of procedures and to fostering a
working environment that encourages high staff morale
and performance also deserves recognition. Moreover,
we commend the efforts to provide protection and
support services to the victims and witnesses as
well as assistance to national jurisdictions. We also
welcome the considerate and careful approach to and
work conducted on the issue of early release. The
significant progress in many other spheres thanks to the
determination and efforts of the International Residual
Mechanism’s President, Prosecutor and staff should
be acknowledged as well. We therefore agree with the
positive assessment of the Mechanism’s functioning
during the reporting period and we look forward to its
further achievements.
We note the challenges that the Mechanism faces,
including those related to resources, fugitives and
acquitted and released persons. In that context, we would
like to recall that the Security Council has repeatedly
urged States, particularly those where fugitives are
suspected to be at large, to intensify cooperation with
and assistance to the Mechanism. We call on all States
to cooperate fully with the Mechanism, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
to render as soon as possible all necessary assistance
to it, in particular with regard to the location, arrest
and surrender of all remaining fugitives indicted by
the Mechanism and the relocation of acquitted and
released persons.
We encourage them also to demonstrate support for
accountability by increasing cooperation among them
on the relevant issues and for international criminal
justice by agreeing to a budget for the International
Residual Mechanism’s commensurate with its needs
and allowing it to carry out its mandated functions in a
timely manner.
International criminal justice institutions, including
the Mechanism, play an important role in fighting
impunity, which can contribute to the deterrence and
prevention of the most serious crimes of international
concern and to the maintenance of an international
rules-based order. Let me reassure the Council of
Poland’s commitment to all of the aforementioned,
continued support for the Mechanism and readiness to

S/PV. 8576

cooperate with it. We reiterate our call on others to take
the same stance.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): I thank our two briefers
for their comprehensive and substantive briefings.
I would also like to welcome the Minister of Justice
of Serbia, Ms. Kuburović, and the State Secretary
for Political Affairs of Croatia, who will both speak
to us later. Their presence shows the importance that
they attach to this meeting. I would also like to thank
President Theodor Meron for his excellent service to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and wish the new President, Judge Carmel
Agius, all the best in his work. We are confident that
President Agius will guide the Mechanism well through
the upcoming tasks with his tremendous experience
and expertise.
We welcome the main priorities that President
Agius just outlined to us, in particular, first, concluding
proceedings in an efficient and timely manner while
ensuring the principles of due process and fair trial
standards; secondly, a unified work culture, better
inter-branch coordination and the harmonization
of practices and procedures; and, thirdly, fostering
a productive work environment. We appreciate the
further development of the Mechanism’s legal and
regulatory framework and the continuous efforts to
implement the recommendations of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services.
The work of the Tribunals is based on the conviction
that there is no peace without justice. Therefore, we want
to remind the international community of the work that
still needs to be done. Based on its own past, Germany
can testify to the crucial importance of the prosecution
of core international crimes: genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and the crime of aggression. A
country or region paralysed by those horrifying crimes
can only start the important reconciliation process and
rebuild the fabric of its society based on the knowledge
that justice will prevail.
We support the Mechanism’s efforts to find the
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. Their whereabouts remain
unknown to the Mechanism. We call on the States in
which fugitives may reside to intensify the activities
of their law enforcement authorities in order to arrest
and surrender all remaining fugitives. Germany
sincerely hopes that all States specifically called upon
by the Prosecutor in his most recent report (S/2019/417,

19-2206011/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

annex II) will follow the requests of the Mechanism to
assist in the apprehension of fugitives for whom arrest
warrants have been issued. We very much appreciate
hearing that South Africa is actively working to that
end in a concrete case, and we encourage all to reach its
speedy conclusion.
We express concern about the lack of progress and
efficiency of the trials under way at the national level in
the countries of the former Republic of Yugoslavia, and
we urge the States of the region to take the necessary
measures to ensure fair and speedy trials. Germany
condemns the glorification of convicted war criminals,
as well as the denial of the fact that war crimes were
committed within the former Republic of Yugoslavia.
In view of last week’s twenty-fourth anniversary of the
genocide committed in Srebrenica, Germany appeals
to the Government institutions in all countries in the
region to actively fight against that bias.
Five persons convicted by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) remain at the United
Nations detention unit in The Hague, awaiting transfer
to enforcement States. Germany decided to lead by
example and has accepted four out of the 18 persons
convicted, and we encourage other Member States to
join us and accept the transfer of ICTY convicts into
their penal systems.
Finally, as we mark the Day of International
Criminal Justice, let me express our appreciation
and gratitude to all those who dedicate their work to
carrying out international criminal justice and reassure
them of Germany’s full support for all international
criminal tribunals and mechanisms that serve the
purpose of international criminal justice.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence of the new
leadership of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals — President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz — to the Chamber and thank them for their
detailed reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II).
Given the particular circumstances, such words
of gratitude for the detailed reports and activities
paradoxically mean that the body that has been
entrusted to them is in a state of permanent breach of
the main purpose of resolution 1966 (2010). Contrary
to the guidelines provided by the Security Council, the
Tribunals, established 25 years ago, show a rare degree
of dynamism under this new arrangement.
12/27

17/07/2019

The symbolism of that juncture has already
been evoked. Some delegations are commemorating
17 July — the date of the adoption of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court — as the Day of
International Criminal Justice. However, we see no
reason for celebration. We believe that, in the context of
the subject of today’s meeting, other events carry much
greater weight. Unfortunately, they are tragic events.
Twenty years ago, NATO air forces launched a
military operation against Yugoslavia, and for several
months they carried out missile and bombs strikes
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
targets of those operations were predominantly civilian
facilities, including residential areas of Belgrade,
bridges and schools. Those attacks claimed the lives of
hundreds of people, including children.
At that time, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) refused to investigate those
criminal attacks. Instead, the ICTY created the myth
about Belgrade’s single-handed responsibility for the
war in the Balkans and brutally punished the Serbs,
while justifying the participation of others in the civil
war. All will recall the appalling acquittals of Lieutenant
General Ante Gotovina, Field Commander Naser Orić
and the Kosovo-Albanian Ramush Haradinaj.
That torch was taken up by the Residual
Mechanism. During the reporting period, contrary
to the first instance judgment, there was a retrial and
an inordinately more severe conviction handed down
to the Serb Radovan Karadžić. Appeals proceedings
are still pending on the verdict involving the life
imprisonment of Ratko Mladić. Such sentences are
always complemented by aggressive media campaigns
and media pressure on judges.
We were surprised by the appearance on the
agenda of the Residual Mechanism of the contempt
case initiated by the ICTY in the context of the trial
of Vojislav Šešelj. We view such measures as yet
another attempt to artificially extend the existence of
that body. Ensuring that the accused receive timely and
appropriate medical care remains a pressing issue. We
are very concerned about the health of Ratko Mladić.
We are unable to confirm from independent sources
that he has been receiving quality care and adequate
treatment in the Mechanism’s penitentiary facilities.
With the change in leadership of the Residual
Mechanism, we expect improvements both within and
beyond that subsidiary body of the Security Council.
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

For the time being, we will not contribute any funding
to the part of the United Nations budget that has been
designated for that structure.
In conclusion, I would like to make a personal
request to Prosecutor Brammertz. In his briefing, he
said the following, and I will quote in English:
(spoke in English)
“No one emerged unharmed — not in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in Croatia, in Kosovo or in Serbia”.
(spoke in Russian)
I would like to ask the Prosecutor explain to his
speechwriters that any reference to Kosovo in the
Chamber must accompanied by the following wellestablished remark, which I will also quote in English:
(spoke in English)
“All references to Kosovo shall be understood
as being in full compliance with resolution 1244
(1999).”
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate Judge Agius on assuming
the presidency of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. We are convinced that the
Mechanism will make further substantial headway in
its work under his leadership. At the same time, I wish
to express gratitude to Judge Meron for his dedicated
and significant leadership of the Mechanism, which
achieved much under his guidance.
I also with to thank the Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
Mr. Serge Brammertz, for his comprehensive briefing
on the work undertaken by his Office.
We welcome the efforts of the Mechanism in terms
of its administration, functioning and activities during
the reporting period, which are indeed commendable.
We wish in particular to emphasize the President’s focus
on addressing gender issues within the Mechanism, as
well as enhancing its efficiency. In relation to gender
parity, we are particularly pleased to see that 50 per
cent of the professional staff members at the Mechanism
are women. We would, of course, like to see the same
percentage reflected in the overall staff numbers. The
increased emphasis on the efficiency of the Mechanism
is indeed positive. We are therefore encouraged by
the innovative strategies presented in the report of the
President (S/2019/417, annex I) to enhance efficiency,

S/PV. 8576

such as increased inter-branch coordination and
harmonized practices and policies.
Turning to the briefing by the Prosecutor, we wish
to thank him for his report (S/2019/417, annex II). We
are particularly impressed with the work carried out
by the Prosecutor and his Office during the reporting
period and their tireless efforts in fulfilling the mandate
of the Mechanism. We note the concerns raised by the
Prosecutor in relation to the challenges experienced,
particularly with regard to cooperation with States.
We believe that States have an international obligation
to cooperate with the Mechanism and the Prosecutor.
South Africa, like other States, takes its international
obligations seriously. We do not support impunity.
Therefore, with regard to the request for assistance that
was made of South Africa, our competent domestic
authorities are actively seized of the matter and have
been in contact with the Office of the Prosecutor with a
view to finding solutions.
South Africa wishes to commend the Prosecutor
and his Office for their efforts beyond prosecutorial
obligations. In particular, we wish to emphasize the
activities undertaken in relation to capacity-building
through the provision of appropriate practical training
on investigative and prosecutorial techniques. Such
capacity-building is instrumental to ensuring that
efforts undertaken now to dispense justice are
sustainable in the future.
In conclusion, we are grateful for the work carried
out by the Mechanism, under circumstances that are
often not ideal, and wish to commend it for its efforts.
We are convinced that the Mechanism will continue to
strive towards the fulfilment of its mandate under its
current effective leadership.
Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I sincerely thank Judge Agius, President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, for his briefing on the progress made in the
work of the Mechanism. It is his first briefing since
he assumed the leadership of the judicial hierarchy
of the Mechanism. We wish him every success in his
new duties.
I thank his predecessor, Mr. Theodor Meron, for
his tireless efforts throughout his term of office at the
helm of the Mechanism. I also thank Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for his valuable briefing today.

19-2206013/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The establishment by the Security Council,
pursuant to its resolution 1966 (2010), of an international
mechanism to continue the work of the former
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda so as to
achieve justice for the victims of war crimes, genocide
and ethnic cleansing, committed on the basis of religion
and race and in violation of international humanitarian
law, is a new dimension in the role of the Security
Council to anchor justice, address impunity and uphold
the rule of law in order to maintain international peace
and security. In our discussion today, I would like to
highlight the following points.
At the outset, we welcome the efforts of the
President of the Mechanism, who, since assuming his
new role, has adopted priorities that will improve its
functioning and ensure the conclusion of the remaining
legal proceedings, while taking into account the factors
of time and efficiency, the promotion of inter-branch
cooperation and the improved professionalism among
the staff. Without prejudice to the mandate of resolution
1966 (2010) and notwithstanding the challenges faced
by the Mechanism, such priorities include the following.
First, there was a surge in judicial activities
concerning requests for reviews of rulings, access to
confidential information and allegations of contempt of
court, as a result of the discontinuation of the support
provided by the two Tribunals when they closed.
Secondly, the General Assembly did not approve
the proposed budget of the Mechanism for 2018-2019.
Therefore, the Mechanism revised and reduced its
budget by laying off several staff members, which
may have an adverse effect on its functioning and the
implementation of its mandate, not to mention on the
morale of its staff. It is therefore important to adopt the
new budget without any revision or reduction so that the
Mechanism can assume its functions, in particular as it
envisages judicial milestones, such as the conclusion of
all remaining cases in 2020.
Thirdly, we commend the speedy measures
implemented by those in charge of the Mechanism,
including the Prosecutor and the Registry, in trials
reviewed by the Mechanism’s judges, which would
expedite rulings against indictees. One example is the
appeals sentence in the case Prosecutor v. Radovan
Karadžić last March. We look forward to the rulings
in other cases considered by the Mechanism within the
time frame set.
14/27

17/07/2019

Fourthly, we commend the efforts of the Mechanism
to transform itself into a small, temporary and efficient
structure whose functions and size will become leaner
over time, in accordance with its founding resolution,
by adopting measures to reduce expenditures without
affecting its functioning.
Fifthly, we commend the efforts of the
Mechanism’s Prosecutor. However, we believe that the
responsibility to locate and detain the eight fugitives
does not lie with the Mechanism alone. There must be
cooperation among States and relevant international
organizations to promote the efforts of the Mechanism,
enabling access to important information regarding the
location and detention of the fugitives.
Sixthly, we reiterate the importance of taking the
measures necessary to address the concerns of Member
States reflected in resolution 2422 (2018) regarding
early release. We also stress the need for the Mechanism
to take into account the observations of Member States
on its functioning in order to achieve the desired goals.
In conclusion, I sincerely thank Peru for its work as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, as well as the Office of Legal Affairs and the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services
for their efforts to implement resolution 1966 (2010).
Ms. Pierce (United States of America): We thank
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
briefings. We appreciate the work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
tireless dedication of its judges, attorneys and staff.
We also thank President Agius for his leadership
over the last six months. His stated priorities of ensuring
timely and efficient proceedings, while ensuring
fair trials for defendants, harmonizing operations at
the Arusha and The Hague branches and fostering
a positive work environment are very welcome. We
particularly commend President Agius’ commitment
to taking action on allegations of sexual harassment
and discrimination at the Mechanism. We are also
encouraged by the announcement of a new approach to
early releases, which will allow for consultation with
stakeholders to increase transparency and allow for
the consideration of the full impact of a decision on
early releases.
The ongoing work of the mechanism includes very
important cases, including the appellate proceedings
in the Mladić case, the ongoing Stanišić and Simatović
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV. 8576

trial, and pre-trial proceedings for Turinabo et al. We
should also take a moment to highlight the ruling of
the Appeals Chamber regarding Radovan Karadžić
in March, upholding his convictions for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, because we
are just one week past the anniversary of the genocide
in Srebrenica.

Since 1998, the United States has offered financial
rewards for information leading to the arrests of
Rwandan indictees and fugitives from the former
Yugoslavia. We continue to offer up to $5 million for
any information leading to the arrests of these eight
individuals. Let this and the Karadžić case be a message
to them. We will not stop looking.

Twenty-four years ago, after 30,000 Bosnian
Muslim women, children and elderly men were forcibly
removed from Srebrenica, more than 8,000 men and
boys were murdered. The Appeals Chamber upheld the
Trial Chamber’s determination that these murders — the
largest mass killing in Europe since the Second World
War — were the direct result of the decision made by
Karadžić and his accomplices to destroy the Bosnian
Muslims of Srebrenica. To accomplish these evil ends,
Karadžić and others first engaged in a propaganda
campaign to depict Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian
Croats as enemies of the Serbs, exploiting distrust
and suspicion to create the kind of climate in which
genocide became possible.

If there is anything all States need to stand behind,
it is justice for victims of genocide. We welcome South
Africa’s stated commitment to cooperating fully with
the Mechanism, but we were disappointed to hear that
it had not yet taken action on the Mechanism’s requests.
We urge the Government to coordinate closely with the
Mechanism in the search for fugitives.

It is because we continue to live in the shadow of that
crime that we are deeply alarmed when we see convicted
war criminals being glorified and unscrupulous leaders
rewriting historical events. Those who deny the truth,
manufacture distrust in the institutions of justice, deny
the common humanity of their neighbours and exploit
the pain of victims for their own purposes must be
condemned. We do a grave injustice to those who lost
their lives when we are silent in the face of the politics
of division and hatred. Although Karadžić hid for over
a decade, the fact that he was found and prosecuted is
a powerful testament to the courage of the victims who
testified and their devotion to justice.
But the burden is not on victims to bring justice to
those who perpetrated crimes against them, but rather
on States. We applaud the Mechanism’s continued
search for the eight Rwandans still wanted for their
roles in the 1994 genocide, twenty-five years ago.
These individuals are accused of being responsible for
some of the most appalling acts of our time: Félicien
Kabuga, who allegedly financed the genocide; Protais
Mpiranya, who led the Presidential Guard battalion and
is accused of being responsible for the killing of many
moderate politicians and United Nations peacekeepers;
and Augustin Bizimana, who led the Ministry of
Defence. These men and five others remain at large and
it is all of our responsibility to bring them to justice.

Finally, this is a transition phase for the Mechanism
as its role ensuring accountability winds down.
The responsibility increasingly lies with national
authorities to finish the task of prosecuting remaining
cases. Just as the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda were pioneers in international criminal
law, the Mechanism is a trailblazer now, showing how
knowledge and skills can be transferred to national
jurisdictions. We also commend the Mechanism’s work
to build capacity in national judiciaries in Africa and in
the former Yugoslavia in order to build new generations
of attorneys able to prosecute atrocity crimes in their
own systems.
As the Prosecutor reported, the Mechanism
has received an unprecedented number of requests
for assistance. This demonstrates its immense and
ongoing value in national systems. The United States
would like to emphasize its continued commitment to
accountability for perpetrators and justice for victims.
We will continue to remember those who lost their
lives in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia and stand
with their families and communities in their efforts to
attain justice.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to thank Judge Carmel
Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their written
reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II) and the briefings
they have just delivered to the Security Council. I
also congratulate Judge Agius on his appointment as
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
Belgium commends the work of the Mechanism,
which of course has been marked over the past six

19-2206015/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

17/07/2019

months by the verdict of the Appeals Chamber in the
Karadžić case, sentencing him to life imprisonment.
Despite a reduced budget, the Mechanism continues
to demonstrate a high level of activity while upholding
the Security Council’s vision of being a small, effective
entity of a temporary nature.

States following the early release of several sentenced
persons. Belgium welcomes the new Chairman’s
intention to consult with other interested parties and
is currently considering appropriate solutions in this
regard. It is indeed essential that the Mechanism be able
to continue its activities in a peaceful atmosphere.

Fighting impunity and ensuring justice for the most
serious crimes under international law are fundamental
obligations that are primarily the responsibility of
the States concerned. The efforts of Member States,
supported by the Mechanism, contribute directly to
the process of intercommunal reconciliation. That
is why it is essential that all the countries concerned
cooperate, not only among themselves but also with
the Mechanism.

The mandate of the Mechanism is unique. In
addition to its judicial activities, it has other residual
functions such as assistance to national courts. The
latter is directly involved in States’ responsibility to
investigate, prosecute and adjudicate the perpetrators
of serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Belgium fully supports the Mechanism in the pursuit
of its mandate, which allows hundreds of victims of
the Balkan wars and genocide in Rwanda to make
their stories heard and to testify about the atrocities
of the 1990s so that they will never be forgotten. The
Mechanism is thus a model that the Security Council is
rightly highlighting today, 17 July, Day of International
Criminal Justice.

In this regard, it is regrettable that eight individuals
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda are still at large. Belgium recalls that all United
Nations Member States have an obligation to cooperate
with the Office of the Prosecutor in its efforts to
locate and prosecute the remaining fugitives. Council
members must, of course, set an example for others
to follow and we are delighted that South Africa has
expressed its willingness to cooperate. We support the
Prosecutor’s appeal for the South African authorities
to now honour that commitment in practice as soon as
possible, which will contribute significantly to the fight
against impunity for the crimes of genocide and crimes
against humanity that were committed in Rwanda.
In the same vein, Belgium is very concerned by
the persistent reports from the Office of the Prosecutor
regarding the denial of crimes and the glorification
of war criminals in some countries of the former
Yugoslavia. The role of the Mechanism in combating
hate speech and any ideology advocating discrimination
is paramount, but it requires the full cooperation of
the States of the region. My country also regrets a
further slowdown in regional judicial cooperation in
the Balkans, without which those responsible for war
crimes will go unpunished. We therefore call on the
States concerned to reverse the current trend and recall,
in particular, the commitments they made in that regard
a year ago at the Western Balkans Summit in London as
part of the Berlin process.
In resolution 2422 (2018), the Council encouraged
the Mechanism to consider the introduction of a
conditional early release scheme. The aim was to
respond to the concerns expressed by some Member
16/27

Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Carmel
Agius, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for
their briefings to the Council today.
At the outset, as this is the first meeting of the
Council which Judge Agius has attended as President
of the Mechanism, I would like to congratulate
him formally, on behalf of the United Kingdom,
on his appointment. We commend the priorities he
has identified for his presidency and welcome the
opportunity to work constructively with him, just as we
did with his predecessor, Judge Theodor Meron, whose
significant contribution as President we recognize.
Today, as has been noted, we mark the Day of
International Criminal Justice. Support for international
criminal justice and international humanitarian law is a
fundamental element of the United Kingdom’s foreign
policy. We believe that justice and accountability for
the most serious crimes of international concern are
crucial to building lasting peace and security and to
ensuring protection of human rights for all.
In January 2018, the Residual Mechanism assumed
fully its responsibilities for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), alongside it
responsibilities for the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). Since then, the Mechanism
has continued to achieve commendable progress in
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

carrying out its mandate. It has delivered continuity in
a wide range of functions, including the trials of the
most senior fugitives from justice, the enforcement
of sentences of those convicted — in this respect, the
United Kingdom was pleased to voluntarily assist the
Mechanism by enforcing one of these sentences — the
protection of victims and the preservation of archives.
In doing so, it has guaranteed the legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR.
Yet, the Mechanism continues to operate under its
revised and significantly reduced budget for the 20182019 biennium. As has been highlighted previously,
that has led to reduced staff numbers and resources, and
utility and service cuts. Nevertheless, the Mechanism
has been determined to continue to fulfil its mandate
effectively and efficiently, and we are pleased that
it continues to take the necessary steps to make
this possible.
We would recall the introduction of the Mechanism’s
expenditure reduction plan and downsizing policy,
both of which the Registry is continuing to develop and
implement so as to ensure that the Mechanism remains
on track to deliver its mandate in a fiscally responsible
way in the face of budgetary constraints. However,
we do need to remind ourselves of the breadth of the
functions the Mechanism properly carries out. Along
with its judicial functions, the importance of its other
functions must also be recognized, and we therefore
must to be mindful of the need to balance cost-savings
with effectiveness. The United Kingdom remains
committed to supporting the Mechanism for the
remainder of its mandate and calls on others to continue
to provide the support the Mechanism needs, whether
financially, logistically or politically.
We are following the developments in the Arusha
branch with interest, including the ongoing contempt
case of Turinabo et al., as well as awaiting the outcome
in the Ngirabatware review. We note that a number of
Rwandan fugitives are still at large, and we call on all
States to cooperate with the Prosecutor in his bid to
have those fugitives transferred to the Mechanism. We
also hope that States will assist with a solution to the
problem of relocating the nine released and acquitted
persons in Arusha.
Turning to The Hague, we welcome the outcome of
the Karadžić appeal earlier this year. The increase in
Karadžić’s sentence for crimes that include genocide,
from 40 years to life in prison, sends a powerful

S/PV. 8576

message that those who carry out such atrocities will
be held accountable for their actions and sentenced
accordingly. We also note the progress made in the
Mladić and Stanišić and Simatović cases, and are
pleased that these are due to conclude by the end of
next year.
While some progress has been made, the limited
regional judicial cooperation between the countries of
the former Yugoslavia still thwarts access to justice for
many victims. The Mechanism can completely fulfil
its mandate and deliver justice to victims only through
the collective efforts of those countries. The joint
declaration on war crimes, signed at prime ministerial
level at the London Western Balkans Summit last year,
underlined the importance of supporting and removing
impediments to effective regional cooperation, while
strengthening cooperation with and seeking the
assistance of the Residual Mechanism. We urge the
countries concerned to work closely with each other
and the Mechanism, in particular the Office of the
Prosecutor, to ensure accountability through effective
cooperation. The United Kingdom is proud to support
that objective with projects in the region.
Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, April marked
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide
and next year will see the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Srebrenica genocide. The anniversaries of these
two devastating atrocities should lead us to reflect on
the great contribution of the ICTY and the ICTR, and
now the Mechanism, to ensuring that the perpetrators
and instigators are held to account. While completing
these trials will not bring back the thousands who were
killed or erase the grief of their families, it sends a clear
message that there will be no impunity for those who
commit such crimes.
Twenty five years on, however, genocide denial for
both atrocities continues. This is unconscionable and
reprehensible. It is a direct threat to the maintenance of
stability in both regions. We therefore hope that Council
members and Member States will join the United
Kingdom in supporting the Mechanism’s measures to
fight genocide ideology and its zero-tolerance approach
to genocide denial in all its forms.
Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank President Carmel Agius and Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz for their briefings on the recent
work of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. During the reporting period, Judge

19-2206017/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Agius assumed the presidency, four new judges were
appointed, Registrar Elias was reappointed for another
term and the work of the Mechanism continued to
make progress.
China takes note of the gradual progress in the
Mechanism’s judicial activities in the past six months
and its projections for the completion of the remaining
cases. The Mechanism should make headway with the
cases concerned in a pragmatic and efficient manner
based on the estimated timelines.
China takes note of the in-person plenary of the
judges hosted by President Agius and the three main
priorities he proposed, including ensuring that the
residual judicial procedures of the Mechanism are
concluded efficiently in a timely manner to enhance
the unique mandate of the Mechanism through better
inter-branch coordination and other means and to foster
a better working environment for its staff. We also
note that the Office of the Prosecutor has continued
its efforts to track down and apprehend the fugitives at
large indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). All these measures have a positive
impact on the advancement of the Mechanism’s work.
China welcomes the measures taken by the
Mechanism to implement resolution 2422 (2018) in
order to take a more prudent approach to addressing
the issue of the early release of persons convicted by
the ICTR. We hope the Mechanism will continue to
take actions to implement the recommendations of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services in its related audit
reports and evaluation reports with a view to continuing
to improve its work.
China wishes to reiterate that, pursuant to resolution
1966 (2010) on this topic, the Mechanism is a small,
temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and
size will diminish over time. We hope the Mechanism
will continue to act in accordance with resolution 1966
(2010) in this regard.
Last but not least, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank Peru, Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs, for their coordination of activities
between the Council and the Mechanism.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to welcome today’s
briefers, President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz,
18/27

17/07/2019

and we thank them for their detailed briefings. We wish
President Agius success in his new and difficult work.
The existence of such bodies as the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is crucial
to achieving societies that are free of impunity. The
work of the Mechanism reaffirms the commitment
of the United Nations to protecting human rights and
world peace.
We commend the progress that the Mechanism
has made in the cases of Prosecutor v. Maximilien
Turinabo et al, Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and
Franko Simatović, Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić
and Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić. We hope to see some
of them concluded by the end of 2020, as indicated by
President Agius in his May 2019 report (S/2019/417,
annex I). We also welcome the work done by the
Mechanism to protect and support the approximately
3,150 witnesses.
The Dominican Republic considers that the
priorities of the new President of the Mechanism to
be timely and valid. We support these priorities with
their special emphasis on unifying and harmonizing
the criteria, working methods and processes of the
Chambers that make up the Mechanism in order to
increase productivity and consistency, and thereby
achieve the goals of the work for 2020. Similarly, we
support the call by President Agius for the international
community to join efforts, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, to cooperate with the relocation of those
who have been released or who have already served
their sentences. These individuals have the right to
receive their documents and to be able to reintegrate
themselves into society.
Furthermore, the States members of the Security
Council have a special commitment to cooperate with
the bodies and offices created through mandates of the
Council. We therefore consider it imperative to support
the budget of the Mechanism at the United Nations.
Despite the cuts and administrative adjustments
carried out by the President, there is no doubt that
proper allocation of funds is essential to the success of
the Mechanism.
On another note, we congratulate the Office of
the Prosecutor on the progress made in the pursuit
of fugitives, as set forth in his May 2019 report
(S/2019/417, annex II). We urge the international
community to demonstrate solidarity and support the
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

identification, investigation and arrest of individuals
sought by the Mechanism.
Lastly, we would like to make reference to the order
for the early release of convicted persons. We express
our concern that those orders are not yet subject to a
specific regime of conditions, despite the provisions of
paragraph 10 of resolution 2422 (2018). We believe it
is essential to create an early-release regime that takes
into account the need for victims and affected States
and communities to participate.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to welcome Judge
Carmel Agius and congratulate him on his appointment
as President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals on 19 January 2019, bearing in
mind that this is the first time that he has appeared to
brief the Security Council. We also welcome Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz. We thank the both of them for their
extensive briefings on the work of the International
Residual Mechanism over the past six months.
Aware of the budgetary challenges facing the
International Residual Mechanism of Criminal Tribunals
as a result of the budgetary reductions approved by the
General Assembly in July 2018, we applaud the efforts
that the Mechanism continues to make in the timely
conclusion of the pending legal work and the fulfilment
of its mandate in the most efficient and effective way
possible, taking into account the need to ensure respect
for due process and the fundamental rights of accused
and convicted persons under its jurisdiction.
In that regard, we applaud the President’s efforts to
improve the dynamics of interaction and cooperation
between the two branches that make up the Mechanism
by seeking to unify their criteria, as well as its records
system, both in Arusha and in The Hague. There is no
doubt that achieving a uniform management approach
will have a positive impact on the operations of
the Mechanism.
My country welcomes the will expressed in the
Mechanism’s new approach, in which it will seek the
opinions of the States concerned, in particular those of
the former Yugoslavia, because the relevant provision
on evaluating the early release of convicted persons
was not included in the mandate of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Convicted persons could be considered for early release
on condition that they have served at least two thirds of
their sentences.

S/PV. 8576

We welcome the momentum with which the
President has begun, with the numerous meetings
he has held with the staff of the Mechanism, thereby
encouraging a spirit of harmony among them, the
plenary sessions with the judges and the large number of
orders issued — all of which are proof of his dedication
and great dynamism. With regard to the commitment
to take action on gender issues, we emphasize that we
do not disagree, but we hope that these actions will be
implemented in a way that ensures that the Mechanism
does not deviate from its initial mandate or require an
increase in the already reduced budget.
We also note that the reporting period was
characterized by an elevated number of judicial
activities that were carried out, even if much more
remains to be done, although we certainly commend
the programmatic efforts to see all the pending cases
concluded by the end of 2020 so as to fully take up the
residual cases in the year 2021.
Bearing in mind that the success of the work
of the Mechanism depends to a large extent on the
full cooperation of States, especially with regard to
operations related to tracking, arresting and surrendering
fugitives and to relocating released persons, we call
on those States Members of the United Nations to
step up their willingness to increase the much-needed
assistance to the Mechanism, as required by resolution
2422 (2018). We take this opportunity to join those who
have preceded us in applauding the commitment of all
those countries that continue to support and cooperate
consistently with the Mechanism, whether in the
enforcement of sentences or in other areas of interest.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reaffirms its strong commitment to strengthening the
rule of law and promoting justice, by supporting the
Mechanism in all aspects of its work as an instrument
of the Security Council for administering justice and
putting an end to impunity, thereby achieving the
desired international peace and security. Finally, we
thank the Mission of Peru for continuing to chair the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals in
a transparent, efficient and dynamic manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister of Justice of Serbia.
Ms. Kuburović (Serbia): I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Republic of Serbia today.

19-2206019/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

As a potential witness to the completion of the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in the foreseeable
future, I take this opportunity to share some of the key
moments in Serbia’s cooperation with these institutions.
I shall shed light on certain tendencies taking shape in
the work of the Mechanism at this juncture, which may
foreshadow future developments.
The provision for the Mechanism to close in June
2020 is at odds with the assessments of the Mechanism’s
officials that some cases will not be completed by
the end of that year. This fact calls into question the
Mechanism’s ability to complete the remaining cases
prior to the projected closure and brings into focus the
question of the institutional framework within which
the issues unresolved at the deadline will be considered.
However, certain assertions contained in the
progress report of the Prosecutor for the period from
16 November 2018 to 15 May 2019 (S/2019/417, annex
II) are unfounded and a cause for concern. In paragraph
29, the report says that the European Union’s policy
of conditionality, linking membership progress to
full cooperation with the ICTY and the Mechanism,
remains a key tool for ensuring cooperation with the
Mechanism. This position seeks to shape the political
context of Serbia’s cooperation with the European
Union, replacing legal arguments with political ones.
The Mechanism is seen as a tool for exercising political
pressure. Neither the Prosecutor nor the Mechanism are
entrusted with such a mandate.
Serbia’s cooperation with the Mechanism has been
successful and received wide acclaim. It has fulfilled
the obligations it assumed and given the Mechanism
free access to all evidence, documents, archives and
witnesses. All the Mechanism’s requests have been
attended to with timely replies, and the documentation
requested from the archives of Serbia’s State organs
have been forwarded to the Mechanism’s Prosecutor,
Chambers and Secretariat. Furthermore, witnesses
have been allowed to testify, waiving their right not to
with respect to State, military or official secrets.
In the last reporting period, Serbia made progress
in its activities related to the so-called legacy of the
Tribunal by responding to the call made for the
establishment of a Belgrade information centre to
house ICTY materials and make them accessible to the
general public. Since the inception of the Tribunal, my
20/27

17/07/2019

country’s cooperation has yielded positive results, and
its own judicial system has been changed and improved
in the process. Making Serbia’s progress to European
integration conditional on extraneous issues would
send a message that all those years of hard work and
exceptional results have not been enough.
Furthermore, the report suggests that higherranking perpetrators have not been prosecuted,
even though the President of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, the President of the Republic of Serbia,
the Vice-President of the Federal Government, the
Vice-President of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia, three former Chiefs of the General Staff of
the Army of Yugoslavia, the former Head of the State
Security Service and many military and police generals
were among the persons transferred to the Tribunal. No
such requests were made of any other country. Others
were spared for political reasons, even if there were
surely legal reasons to prosecute them. This approach
clearly falls outside the international legal order on
which the United Nations is based.
Undoubtedly, the countries of the region need to work
together to achieve mutual understanding, cooperation
and reconciliation. Our future stability and economic
development should be predicated on the normalization
of relations rather than on political conditionality. The
report’s insistence on conditionality, especially against
the backdrop of Serbia’s extensive achievements in
terms of cooperation with the Mechanism, is therefore
unfair and ultimately unacceptable.
Cooperation in our region is on the rise and best
illustrated by the following. Serbia’s cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the field of legal assistance
is at a high level. In the period from 1 November 2018 to
1 July 2019, exchanges of requests for legal assistance
between our countries took place. The Prosecutor’s
Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted 29
requests, 25 of which were fulfilled, while the Office
of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia
submitted 45 requests, 28 of which have received
replies. Serbia’s Prosecutor’s Office has taken over
three indictments from the competent authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is our hope that our cooperation with Croatia
will also improve. Following a meeting of Justice
Ministers between our two countries in March 2018,
two commissions were established to exchange lists
of persons indicted or sentenced for war crimes and to
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

draft a bilateral criminal trials agreement. The first of
the two commissions completed its task, while the other
continues to hold meetings, the last of which took place
in Belgrade last week. In addition, a ministerial meeting
was held in Zagreb in February. These meetings and
the work of the commissions are important steps being
taken by Serbia and Croatia to address outstanding
bilateral issues between our two countries.
Specifically, the State’s Attorney Office of
the Republic of Croatia submitted 21 requests, of
which 9 have been fulfilled, while 11 are still under
consideration. The Office of the War Crime Prosecutor
of the Republic of Serbia submitted 18 requests, of which
6 have received replies, leaving 12 requests without a
reply. These numbers show the progress achieved in
comparison to the previous reporting period, when
we received no reply from Croatia to any request for
evidence and information.
Furthermore, meetings of the War Crimes
Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia with her colleagues
in the region is proof of Serbia’s ongoing efforts aimed
at regional cooperation. The regional prosecutors
conference on cooperation, benchmarks and standards
in the prosecution of war criminals was held in
Belgrade in May. In addition to high-ranking officials
from the War Crimes Prosecutor’s Offices of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia,
the International Residual Mechanism’s Prosecutor,
Mr. Brammertz, took part in the conference. We
therefore find it difficult to subscribe to the report’s
assessment that “regional judicial cooperation in war
crimes matters in not satisfactory” (S/2019/417, annex
II, para. 81). On the contrary, in comparison to the
previous reporting period, regional cooperation today
is much broader than before.
The adoption of the Prosecutorial Strategy for the
Investigation and Prosecution of War Crimes in Serbia
recognized the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor
as the primary organ for improving efficiency and
effectiveness in prosecuting war crimes. Further, the
Serbian Government has provided resources to improve
the Office’s capacities and increase the number of
employees, in particular deputy prosecutors.
The Prosecutor’s Office of the Mechanism also
rendered support to improving the work of the Office
of the War Crimes Prosecutor. The Mechanism’s
prosecutors were invited as instructors to a five-day
training course for deputy and assistant prosecutors

S/PV. 8576

in Belgrade last April. The course was organized by
the Serbian Judicial Academy and provided practical
training on investigating and prosecuting sexual
violence in conflict as an international crime.
The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor sought
six indictments in the period from 1 November 2018 to
1 July 2019. Three of them were taken over from the
competent authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Currently, 20 cases are being tried, while 54 persons
in six cases are being investigated. In the reporting
period, the Higher Court in Belgrade delivered
judgments in five cases, while the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor reached a guilty plea agreement
with one person. All persons involved are Serbs.
Serbia continues its practice of no trial in absentia with
respect to war crimes committed against the Serbian
population. Twenty-seven cases, involving 132 persons,
have been suspended on that basis.
In the light of efforts to make my statement
informative and to bring before the Security Council
my county’s cooperation with the Tribunal and the
Mechanism, which is second to none, I feel disappointed
by the contention in paragraph 83 of the report, in
which it is stated:
“Nonetheless, it is of significant concern that
[as of the present], no senior or mid-level official
has yet been held accountable [...] for the ethnic
cleansing of 800,000 civilians in Kosovo in March
and April 1999.”
The allegations of ethnic cleansing and of 800,000
civilian victims thereof have been made in very
poor taste. The allegations are wrong, while number
games lead to blind alleys of bias and partiality and
are often fraught with far-reaching and unforeseeable
consequences. Those narratives have been churned out
by propaganda mills to vindicate the 78-day bombing
of my country exactly 20 years ago. The brutalization
took place without any reason and was carried out, as
the Council knows very well, without its decision.
No one seems to be held to account for or found
guilty regarding the victims of that monstrous act and
the loss of thousands of human lives, in which evidence
has been collected through the judicial system of
Serbia, except that the highest-ranking Serbian officials
have been sentenced by the very Tribunal for criminal
offences committed in the territory of Kosovo and
Metohija. Their crime was the defence of their country.

19-2206021/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Let me remind the Council that, under resolution
1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, Kosovo and Metohija
have been under the protectorate of the United Nations,
the institution in which we convene today. Due to
the widely known circumstances, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has judicial
competences over this part of Serbia’s territory. Yet
each and every attempt of my country to have the war
crimes committed against its population in Kosovo and
Metohija investigated and their perpetrators brought
to justice has yielded no result. No one has been held
accountable for the persecution and killing of Serbs
and other non-Albanians. Justice for the victims of
war crimes in Kosovo and Metohija continues to
be unattainable.
Since their establishment by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina, the
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
in The Hague have made no progress whatsoever.
Likewise, the European Union’s Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) Prosecutor’s Office in Pristina extended
no request for assistance to the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor in Belgrade in the reporting period.
However, under the mutual legal assistance procedures,
the Serbian Prosecutor’s Office extended 16 requests to
the EULEX Office, out of which only one request has
received a reply. That prevents the crimes committed
against Serbs and other non-Albanians from being
prosecuted and tried and is surely one of the reasons
that no one is called to account for the persecution of
the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija.
Persons who have been sentenced before the
Tribunal and served their sentences cannot be the
topic of the Mechanism Prosecutor’s report to the
Security Council. Upon presentation of an indictment
and, finally, upon the delivery of a judgment, the
Prosecutor’s job is ended. After serving a sentence, no
one can be further sanctioned for whatever reason, nor
can he or she be deprived of a personal or civil right.
Let me bring to the Council’s attention another
very important matter. As I said at the beginning of my
statement, certain tendencies taking shape at the time
the Mechanism is about to end its work may change
the decades-long practice of serving the sentences
handed down by the Tribunal and the Mechanism. It is
my opinion that the issue should be resolved before the
Mechanism completes its mandate.
22/27

17/07/2019

The indications that certain changes will occur in
respect of early release affect, in an indirect way, the
initiative of Serbia, launched more than 10 years ago, to
have its nationals sentenced before the Tribunal serve
their sentences in Serbia. That initiative was motivated
by Serbia’s resolve to assume the responsibility for
the serving of prison sentences handed down to its
nationals by the Tribunal. The purpose of punishment
includes, among other things, the resocialization of the
sentenced persons. I believe that it is difficult to expect
that that purpose will be achieved if the persons serve
their sentences in faraway countries, whose language
they do not speak and in which the possibility for them
to receive visits from, and contact with, relatives is
reduced to a bare minimum.
The situation in Serbia has changed drastically
since the wars in the former Yugoslavia. I highlighted
that fact in my previous statements to the Council
and during the visits of the Mechanism’s officials to
Belgrade. Last November, I was reassured by the then
President of the Mechanism, Judge Meron, that there
were no obstacles to the realization of Serbia’s initiative.
I was advised to refer the issue of the initiative to the
Security Council, which established the Tribunal and
the Mechanism.
In my statements in June and December 2018
(see S/PV.8278 and S/PV.8416), I proposed that the
Secretary-General request the Mechanism to prepare
a comprehensive assessment of the problem in
order to make it possible for the Security Council to
proceed and review the existing practice relative to
the serving of prison sentences and take a decision on
requisite changes.
Serbia is ready to accept strictly defined
international monitoring and to provide clear guarantees
that the sentenced persons will not be released early,
short of an appropriate decision by the Mechanism
or another organ of the United Nations entrusted
with the matter in the future. I once again call on the
Mechanism’s representatives and on the representatives
of the relevant institutions that the Secretary-General
may appoint for the purpose to visit Serbia, tour its
penitentiary institutions and inspect them themselves.
We would welcome it if this esteemed institution
presented its position regarding the serving of sentences
by the persons sentenced before the Tribunal. It would
be a very good sign. I therefore call on the Security
Council to become actively involved. By realizing
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the initiative, a positive message would be sent that
perpetrators can resocialize by serving sentences in
their country of origin.
In conclusion, let me point out that Serbia’s
cooperation with the Mechanism continues to be
successful and that my country has no outstanding
issues with the Mechanism. I continue to believe that
our efforts will be recognized and reflected objectively
in the next reports. I hope that I am not overly optimistic
in that belief.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Ms. Bušić (Croatia): I would like to begin by
acknowledging the work of Peru as Chair of the
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. The honourable President of the International
Residual Mechanism of the Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Agius, as well as its Prosecutor, Mr. Brammertz, and
I thank them for today’s briefings. Allow me to pay
tribute to former President of the Mechanism Judge
Meron, whose leadership ensured important progress
in ending impunity and pivotal achievements in the
proper interpretation and application of international
humanitarian law.
Today we mark the Day of International Criminal
Justice — a powerful reminder of the importance of
international courts and tribunals created to adjudicate
crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide and
other serious offences. Although the Mechanism was
established to carry out the essential functions of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) after their closure, it also plays an important
role in the fight against the culture of impunity and
represents an instrument for ensuring accountability.
As we have said on many occasions, accountability is
a prerequisite for peace, stability, development and the
effective protection of human rights because there is no
lasting peace without justice and no justice as long as
there is impunity.
Both the ICTY and the ICTR represent a milestone
in the development of international criminal law, having
paved the way for the creation of the International
Criminal Court, which Croatia strongly supports.
On this day — the Day of International Criminal
Justice — Croatia takes the opportunity to reiterate its
support for international justice and the prosecution of
the most serious violations of international law before

S/PV. 8576

international and hybrid tribunals, as well as domestic
courts, with full respect for fair trial standards.
The Mechanism has made important headway since
the previous Security Council briefing in December 2018
(see S/PV.8416). The Mechanism’s Appeals Chamber
delivered its judgment by which Radovan Karadžić
was sentenced to life imprisonment for the crime of
genocide, crimes against humanity and violations of
the laws or customs of war. Croatia welcomed the final
judgment of one of the main ideologues and executors of
a policy of brutal aggression and ethnic cleansing, who
did not hesitate to commit genocide or other serious
international crimes against Bosniaks and Croats in
order to create so-called Greater Serbia.
The Appeals Chamber found that crimes of
unprecedented scale were committed through four
joint criminal enterprises aimed at permanently
removing Croats and Bosniaks from certain areas in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are aware that there is
no punishment that will ever fully compensate for the
evil that was done and that nothing can bring back the
lives of innocent victims. Nevertheless, we hope that
assignment of personal responsibility to Karadžić for
some of the most horrific crimes committed after the
Second World War, such as the genocide in Srebrenica,
provide at least a minimum of satisfaction to the victims
and their families.
The verdict is a clear warning to all those who
continue to glorify war criminals that their policies
are utterly unacceptable and that they have been
internationally characterized as criminal. We regret
that the Appeals Chamber has not established the
responsibility of Karadžić as the perpetrator of
genocide in other municipalities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina besides Srebrenica, which we consider
to be an inseparable element of his criminal policy. In
addition, based on the evidence set forth in other ICTY
judgments, we believe that, in the appeals process,
Karadžić’s involvement in a comprehensive joint
criminal enterprise in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
also be linked to the top political and military echelons
of the then-Federal Republic of Yugoslavia under the
leadership of Slobodan Milošević.
With regard to the Mechanism’s ongoing work,
Croatia stresses the importance of the completion of
the case on appeal of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić and
the trial case Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko
Simatović. We also encourage the Mechanism to

19-2206023/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

maximize its efforts in this regard. We note the recent
decision by the Mechanism’s single judge to revoke
the referral order in the contempt of court proceedings
in the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica
Radeta, requesting Serbia to transfer the accused to the
Mechanism without delay.
We underline once again the need for Serbia to
fully cooperate with the Mechanism, including by
fully accepting and implementing all of its rulings and
decisions. That is also clearly stated in the European
Commission’s 2019 report on Serbia, as well as in the
18 June 2019 conclusions of the European Council.
Repeated challenges by Serbia, including at the highest
levels, to the judgments of the ICTY and the Mechanism,
together with the recent rally of the Serbian Radical
Party led by convicted war criminal Vojislav Šešelj
in the town of Hrtkovci — the symbol of suffering of
Croats of Vojvodina — and its overall unwillingness
to prosecute for command responsibility — meaning
those most responsible for crimes — raise the question
of whether the country has the sincere intention of
dealing with the past.
We strongly support the Western Balkans
countries’ perspective on attaining membership in the
European Union. The accession process is based on
clear and well-known criteria, and full cooperation
with the Mechanism is certainly among them. Croatia
places great emphasis on continuing constructive
judicial cooperation in war matters with other States
of the region. Meaningful cooperation is not a one-way
process, and we expect other sides to show their
willingness to actively engage.
As reported earlier by the Serbian Minister of
Justice, last year the Croatian and Serbian Ministers of
Justice agreed to establish two joint commissions. One
would work on a bilateral agreement on cooperation
with regard to the prosecution of war crimes, and the
other on the exchange of lists of persons accused or
convicted of war crimes. We cannot say that we are
overly satisfied with the way things have functioned
over the past year. The commissions did engage in work
but have not yet achieved any significant progress.
Croatia’s position in the matter is clear: the State
on which territory crimes were committed has primacy
in prosecution. For us, Serbia’s position that crimes
committed on the territory of Croatia would fall under
Serbian jurisdiction is unacceptable. Bilateral meetings
24/27

17/07/2019

were also held between the Ministers of Justice of
Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina this year.
The search for missing persons is a humanitarian
imperative to which we attach the utmost priority.
Croatia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2474
(2019) on missing persons in armed conflict last month
as the first Security Council resolution of its kind fully
dedicated to this issue. We commend the Council’s
commitment in this regard.
Today, in Croatia, 1,892 persons remain unaccounted
for from the war period. With the aim of clarifying the
fates of missing persons, steps have been taken with
regard to cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Montenegro, but the key is cooperation with
Serbia. Unfortunately, Serbia still shows no readiness
to open up its full archival records. Cooperation in
addressing this issue is one of the key elements for
further discussion between Croatia and Serbia and is an
important criterion in the context of the negotiations on
Serbia’s accession into the European Union.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Croatia’s
firm support for the remaining work of the Mechanism.
While the conclusion of the appeals proceedings
in the Karadžić case represents an important step
forward in the completion of its mandate, some of the
most accountable have yet to receive a final verdict
to be brought against them. We hope that justice
in the remaining cases, which is long overdue, will
come soon. Croatia stands ready to continue to extend
its full support to the Mechanism, while expecting it to
complete its mandate in time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): First and foremost, I
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and assure you of
my delegation’s full support.
I thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II) and
briefings today. We congratulate Judge Agius on his
recent appointment as the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. That
transition of leadership is an opportune time to
reflect on the legacy of the Mechanism over the past
seven years. From our perspective, that legacy can be
summarized in four points.
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

First, 11 genocide convicts were released before the
end of their sentences. Secondly, none of the remaining
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for crimes committed
during the genocide against the Tutsi has been arrested
or brought before the court. Thirdly, 23 genocide
convicts sentenced by the ICTR have appealed their
sentences and have either been acquitted or seen their
sentences significantly reduced after retrial. Fourthly,
nine genocide convicts released or acquitted by the
court currently live comfortable live in Arusha and
their living allowances and accommodation are paid
from the budget of the Mechanism. That is, in sum, the
appalling legacy of the previous leadership. I wish to
elaborate on some of those points.
With regard to the early release of genocide
convicts, at his sole discretion the former President of
the Mechanism imposed an arbitral set of criteria for
the early release of genocide convicts upon or soon
after having served two-thirds of their sentences. None
of the applications for early release, with the exception
of three cases in 2018, has ever been reported to the
Government of Rwanda, the representatives of genocide
survivors, the communities in which they committed
crimes or witnesses, who provided evidence of the
crimes committed, at great personal risk.
The grounds on which early release applications
were lodged, considered and approved have also been
withheld from the Government of Rwanda, genocide
survivors and other relevant stakeholders. In the future,
we very much expect meaningful cooperation with the
Government of Rwanda and all relevant stakeholders
prior to the consideration of applications for early
release. On that point, we wish to sincerely thank all
members of the Council that have emphasized the
importance of having clear criteria in the spirit and
letter of resolution 2422 (2018).
In all cases of early release but one, decisions
were made without conditions. The only case to which
conditions were attached was that of Mr. Aloys Simba,
a former lieutenant colonel who organized large-scale
killings in the south of Rwanda and whose early
release was sneaked through by the former President
of the Mechanism, a week before the end of his tenure
as President of the court. It is also worth noting that
genocide convicts who were granted early release
never expressed a shred of remorse for the crimes they
committed during the genocide and, since their release,
several of them have joined associations denying the

S/PV. 8576

genocide or promoting the genocide ideology. And yet,
they were considered by the Mechanism on the basis
of reports received from prisons that they had been
rehabilitated because they had demonstrated good
behaviour, such as regularly attending prison mass
services or participating in gardening — none of which,
members will agree, is relevant to the crimes of which
they were convicted.
We expect the President of the Mechanism to
implement the spirit and letter of resolution 2422 (2018),
adopted last year, and put in place clear conditions
to any early release as a matter of agency and the
prerequisite for considering new applications. It is only
in doing so that we can make it costly for those released
if they were to engage in activities promoting genocide
ideology in the future.
With regard to fugitives still at large, the Office
of the Prosecutor has noted in several of its reports
that progress in locating, tracking and arresting the
remaining eight indicted fugitives has been hampered
by the failure of some Member States and other
relevant authorities to cooperate with the requests.
Furthermore, the Prosecutor General of the Republic
of Rwanda has also sent out 1,000 indictments to more
than 34 countries around the world, requesting their
cooperation in arresting and prosecuting individuals
who have been indicted or in transferring them to
Rwanda to face justice.
We echo the call made by the Office of the Prosecutor
to all Members to adhere to their international legal
obligations and provide the assistance needed to locate
and apprehend genocide fugitives. We thank Member
States that have cooperated — in particular Canada,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Germany, Malawi, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden
and the United States of America — in the transfer
to Rwanda or prosecution in their national courts
of genocide convicts. We urge all Member States, in
particular members of the Council, to walk the walk of
commitment to international law, the rule of law and
justice, either by prosecuting the individuals indicted
and living on their territory or by transferring them to
Rwanda to face prosecution.
In particular, we call for the arrest or trial of Dr.
Vincent Bajinya, Emmanuel Nteziryayo, Charles
Munyaneza, Célestin Ugirashebuja and Célestin
Mutabaruka, who are still living freely in the United
Kingdom. We also call for the cooperation of South

19-2206025/27

S/PV.8576

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Africa in arresting Mr. Kayishema Fulgence, who is
still living in South Africa, despite several calls for
cooperation from the Prosecutor. We welcome France’s
efforts in bringing fugitives who took refuge in France to
justice and encourage them to continue those efforts, in
particular, with the cases of Dr. Sosthène Munyemana,
Dr. Eugène Rwamucyo, Dr. Marcel Bivugabagabo and
Dr. Charles Twagira, who are also still living in France.
The Prosecutor reported a very concerning trend of
systematic retrials and appeals, where witnesses have
been pressured or corrupted to change their positions.
A case in point is the multi-accused contempt case
in the Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al. trial.
We commend the Office of the Prosecutor in the case
Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware of genocide
convict Mr. Ngirabatware, where it was established
that witnesses were corrupted in contempt of court.
That, however, is far from being an isolated case. All
previous retrials have been subject to similar practices.
With regard to the release of genocide convicts,
as was mentioned by the President, Judge Agius, nine
convicts released or acquitted by the court still live in
Arusha at the expense of Member States, including
Rwanda, as their living costs and accommodation are
paid through Members’ assessed contributions to the
Mechanism’s budget. That in itself symbolizes the
tragic irony of the international justice system. Some
Member States find it difficult to cooperate with the
Office of the Prosecutor in bringing to book those who
committed the most atrocious crimes, and yet find it
normal that their taxpayers’ money is used to offer
living allowances to those released many years after
their acquittal. In some cases, living expenses and
allowances have been paid by the ICTR — and later, by
the Mechanism — for more than a decade. In one case,
these allowances have been paid for 15 years. Rwanda
believes that they are unjustified and should simply
be stopped.
In conclusion, the four points I have outlined reflect
Rwanda’s assessment of the poor performance of the
Mechanism over the past seven years and its failure to
deliver on its core mission to complete the unfinished
work of the former ICTR and ICTY. Rwanda expects
an improved performance and meaningful cooperation
with the Mechanism under the leadership of Judge
Agius. We are encouraged by his constructive dialogue
and engagement with all stakeholders, including my
Government, since he took office six months ago. We
also call on Member States hosting genocide fugitives
26/27

17/07/2019

to cooperate more effectively with the Office of the
Prosecutor in order to hold them to account for the
crimes committed in the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda.
To end on a more positive note, in today’s Rwanda
genocide survivors and perpetrators live side by side, on
the same hills and in the same communities, in peaceful
coexistence. The delivery of justice in Rwanda has been
central to making this possible by fighting the culture
of impunity, bringing communities back together and
rebuilding the social fabric destroyed in 1994.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for bringing this very important issue before the
Council. I would also like to thank the leaders of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz, for their respective reports (S/2019/417,
annexes I and II) and for today’s comprehensive
briefings. My remarks today will therefore be
rather brief.
We note the continued progress made by the
Mechanism in fulfilling the residual activities of the now
closed International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). In addition, I would like to underline that the
successful conclusion of the Mechanism’s mandate in
an efficient manner and within a reasonable time frame
is of crucial importance for justice and reconciliation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region.
Throughout the years, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
cooperation with the ICTY has been steadfast and
full, as evidenced by the Tribunal’s report. In the same
vein, we remain devoted to actively contributing to
the Mechanism’s efforts to accomplish its mission.
Prosecuting war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious affiliation of the perpetrators or victims, is
of essential importance to long-term stability in the
country and the region.
We would like to highlight our appreciation for
the support of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
United Nations Development Programme in terms of
strengthening the human and material resources of
judicial institutions that are processing war crimes and
19-22060

17/07/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

in terms of general capacity-building. Furthermore,
consistent cooperation among the Office of the
Prosecutor and the relevant authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, in accordance with
the principles of international justice and the rule of law,
is crucial in investigating and prosecuting war crimes.
In closing, I would like to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to investigating,

S/PV. 8576

prosecuting and punishing the persons responsible for
war crimes. We will continue to work on strengthening
the national judicial system. More justice means more
trust and stability within Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Western Balkans region.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

19-2206027/27
