S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9220

th meeting
Wednesday, 14 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ravindran/Mr. Mathur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Burkhardt
Mr. Gong Cheng
Mr. Wavrin
Ms. Betoe Ndojombouet
Ms. Kesse Antwi
Ms. Dowling
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. Sánchez Kiesslich
Ms. Kristmoen
Mr. Suprunenko
Ms. Alshamsi
Ms. O’Kelly
Ms. Hoey

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
New orientation for reformed multilateralism
Letter dated 25 November 2022 from the Permanent Representative of India
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2022/880)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75226 (E)
*2275226*

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): The core issues of this open
debate are at the very heart of the increasing demand
for reforming and strengthening the entire set of
multilateral institutions on which the international
system is based today. The discussion of how to
reform multilateral institutions is urgent and needs
to be inclusive, involving all Member States in the
appropriate negotiating forums.
We strongly believe in a rules-based international
order, with the United Nations at its core, for ensuring
peace and security, human rights and sustainable
development. As stated in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, there can be no peace
without sustainable development and no sustainable
development without peace or human rights. It is
therefore essential that the New Agenda for Peace
be anchored in those principles. In order to do that,
we have to strengthen global cooperation among all
regions and Member States, giving priority to the
needs of the most vulnerable countries and regions
and the means to address the specific challenges they
face. The Secretary-General has already offered his
vision for a reformed multilateralism, as presented
in his report on Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
Member States should actively consider the report’s
key proposals, which deserve our full attention if we
are to build a more effective, efficient, inclusive and
networked multilateralism across all three pillars of the
United Nations.
With the ultimate goal of strengthening
multilateralism, Italy underscores the urgency and
importance of Security Council reform. Italy and the
partners in the Uniting for Consensus group have a
very clear vision of how to achieve that goal, and our
position is well known. We have made it clear in the
intergovernmental negotiations, which remain the only
credible platform for achieving comprehensive reform
of the Security Council and — let me stress — the only
natural forum where reform is to be discussed among
Member States. That said, I want to reiterate here that in
2/43

14/12/2022

our view, a satisfactory reform of the Security Council
is one that will enable it to be more representative,
democratic, efficient, transparent and accountable, and
ultimately more fit to face new global challenges and
today’s realities.
A more transparent Council means that decisions
are taken not by an exclusive few who hold ultimate
power, but by all Security Council members in a
fully inclusive way. A more representative Council
means going beyond a simple increase in the number
of members. It means increasing the opportunities for
all Member States and thereby the role and voices of
those currently underrepresented, in particular Africa
and small island developing States. A more accountable
Council means that every member should answer to the
entire United Nations membership. The vetoes cast in
the Council in recent months in relation to Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine have provided further
confirmation of the paralysing effect of the veto on
the Council’s ability to act. That is why we support
initiatives aimed at self-restraint when it comes to the
exercise of the veto. A more democratic Council simply
means that every new member of a reformed Security
Council must be elected. Democracy as we know it is
based on regular elections. A more effective Council
means one that can act expeditiously, that enjoys more
credibility in the eyes of all Member States and whose
decisions are fully observed and implemented, enabling
it to better deliver on its mandate.
A reformed Security Council is well within
our reach. It is not the absence of a text that is
hampering progress towards a more effective Council.
Unfortunately, to this day, the debate is often derailed
by an insistence on process and procedural matters
instead of a focus on substance and finding true
convergence on the important issues at hand, such as
regional representation within the Council.
Italy will continue to engage in a constructive
and committed manner in the new session of the
intergovernmental negotiations starting in January. We
hope that the rest of the membership will do the same
with a view to reaching further areas of convergence
and moving the reform process forward. Furthermore,
we believe we ought to improve the Council’s working
methods. For that to happen, there is no need to go
through the process of amending the Charter of the
United Nations — it can be done here and now.
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, the serious international crises
under way have highlighted even more dramatically
the need for an effective multilateral system. Italy
will continue to do its part to contribute to advancing
towards a reformed, effective, accountable and
democratic multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank India for organizing this debate and the speakers
for their contributions. We congratulate India on the
successful conclusion of its term on the Council with
its presidency this month. The participation of the
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly in this meeting underlines the importance of
close collaboration between United Nations organs.
“A world gone mad” was the observation shared by
the Chief Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, in this Chamber recently (see S/PV.9208),
underlining the devastating figure of 339 million
people who will need humanitarian assistance in
2023 — equivalent to 1 in 23 people on the planet. Our
world is adrift, marked by record numbers of displaced
people, famine, climate change, armed conflict and
daily violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that are reflected in many contexts
on the Council’s agenda.
That bleak picture calls for common, sustainable
responses anchored in international law and inspired
by the values and principles of this Organization.
Effective multilateralism must translate into tangible
results, with the protection of civilians being one of
its highest priorities. As our President stressed in the
General Assembly, the United Nations offers a unique
framework for joining forces to maintain international
peace and security as partners and not adversaries
(see A/77/PV.4). Responses to complex challenges can
only be collective and require a focused strengthening
of multilateralism, as well as a strong and effective
United Nations. I would like to highlight three aspects.
First, Switzerland joins the calls for reforming
the Security Council to render it more representative,
accountable and effective. We are committed, together
with our partners in the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, to strengthening the
Council’s working methods. Advocacy for a more
responsible and restricted use of the veto is an integral
part of that endeavour. The veto must not prevent

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

the Council from fulfilling its mandate to protect
civilians, prevent conflicts and ensure accountability
for atrocities. We call on all States to adhere to the
code of conduct that the ACT group has developed
with a view to achieving those ends. General Assembly
resolution 76/262 promotes complementarity between
United Nations organs in the event of blockages
created by the use of the veto. Consensus-building that
allows the Council to speak with one voice remains
equally important.
Secondly, effective multilateralism must take into
account the diversity of the actors involved and promote
inclusive approaches while avoiding duplication. The
density and diversity of organizations in Geneva — the
secondary Headquarters of the United Nations and its
operational engine — make it a place of innovation
and anticipation that is open and responsive to
Member States, non-governmental organizations, the
private sector, data science and science diplomacy.
In responding to global challenges, we can further
leverage that centre of global governance and Genevastyle multilateralism.
Thirdly, we will remain committed to the
implementation of Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
We welcome the New Agenda for Peace, of which
the Secretary-General presented a broad outline this
morning. We commend the proposals to strengthen
conflict prevention and foresight, reduce strategic risks
and respond to new threats to peace. In that context, let
us continue to use science, research and technology as
tools for achieving peace.
In the Security Council, Switzerland will work
to foster decisive multilateral action and respect for
international law. We will work for and in partnership
with all Member States. In conclusion, I would like to
thank the outgoing members of the Council — India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and Norway — for their
contribution to international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): Let me commend India
for convening today’s debate, as well as to thank all
the representatives who are here right now instead of
watching the World Cup semi-final in the Delegates’
Lounge.
Sir, I would like to say that the topic you have
chosen for today’s open debate should be at the core

22-752263/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of our efforts: how we can assist the United Nations
to be as credible and effective as possible in order to
deliver on our aspirations for a more peaceful, just and
prosperous world. I also thank you for your concept
note (see S/2022/880), which was very useful. Allow
me now to make some comments regarding the Security
Council, the relevance of the rule of law and the state of
multilateralism at the United Nations in general.
As a staunch supporter of multilateralism and
member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, Austria has consistently
advocated for a more transparent, accountable and
inclusive Security Council. We are guided by our
belief that the Council must better reflect the realities
of the twenty-first century in order to address
today’s challenges. That entails a more representative
membership that reflects today’s world and its diversity.
It is crucial to ensure the full participation of small
and medium-sized States in the work of the Council.
Smaller States make vital contributions to peace and
security precisely because they — like Austria — are
highly aware of their dependence on the international
system for security and for the safety of their citizens.
Smaller States therefore have a keen interest in universal
respect for the Charter of the United Nations — our
Charter — and compliance with international law.
It is indeed hard to overemphasize the role of the
Security Council in defending and upholding the rule of
law and the primacy of international law over unilateral
acts. It is our strong conviction that the Council, in
carrying out its mandate to maintain international peace
and security, has to step up to defend the Charter and
support compliance with international law. That may
seem obvious in view of the Council’s clear mandate
under the Charter. Unfortunately, however, it must be
spelled out clearly, in a year when we have seen Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter violated by one of the
five permanent members of the Council — by Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine. Such acts shake the very
foundation on which our system of collective security
at the United Nations rests. They sow doubt as to the
effectiveness of our international system based on law.
Let me be very clear: there is no lack of
international norms. There is, however, an appalling
disregard for the rules, as well as a lack of compliance
and implementation. We clearly need to seek new
ways to enhance compliance in order to increase the
political and legal costs of violations of the Charter. We
could therefore perhaps look at creating a mechanism
4/43

14/12/2022

whereby massively illegal acts or acts entailing grave
risks for humankind would automatically — or almost
automatically — trigger a clearly defined set of serious
consequences. Such automaticity of consequences could
contribute to the prevention and deterrence of breaches
of international law. That could help the United Nations
react promptly to challenges to the system, enabling the
Organization to stay fit for purpose, as outlined in the
concept note.
Today’s debate seeks a new orientation for
multilateralism. Over the years, many options have
been proposed to render our United Nations more
effective. For example, last month (see S/PV.9181),
Austria emphasized that the Council should foster
stronger links with other parts of the United Nations,
such as the Peacebuilding Commission and specialized
organizations, in order to tackle the interlinked nature
of peace and security and acknowledge the link
between climate and security, poverty, human rights
and development and peace. We also support addressing
the use of the veto, particularly when it is used to halt
action against a member that violates the Charter. We
welcome the impact of the veto initiative on the work
of the Council and continue to support the ACT code of
conduct and the French-Mexican initiative.
Austria also consistently advocates for a Security
Council that acts in recognition of the fact that it
draws its legitimacy from the wider membership of
the United Nations. Whether elected or permanently
mandated through the Charter, Council members
shoulder their responsibilities on behalf of all Member
States. Everyone here around this table serves on
the Council for all of us — not for national interests.
Ultimately, a State deserves to be on the Council not
because of its size, population or power, but because
it contributes to the maintenance of international
peace and security. That — and that only — is the
legitimate reason to be on the Council. That also
means that members of the Council should take clear
positions on issues and act in the best interest of the
United Nations — not out of national interest. They
should demand compliance with the principles and rules
of the Charter and international law, speak out against
violations, condemn wrongdoing, demand compliance
and enforce the law. That is their mandate. That is what
we want all of them to do.
The ability of the United Nations — and other
multilateral institutions — to be effective and deliver
on its mandate ultimately depends on the Member
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

States using the Organization appropriately. The
United Nations was not designed solely as a stage for
political messages. It was established to allow States to
come together to find solutions to challenges together.
At the United Nations, effective multilateralism
requires not only speaking, but also listening; and not
only demanding, but also offering. Multilateralism only
works if there is a willingness to compromise. We live
in a world where individual or national interests often
dominate. Approaches of “my State first”, “take it or
leave it” and “with me or against me” do not permit
multilateralism to work particularly effectively. Of
course, we all have national ambitions and interests that
we pursue. But at the United Nations we must also, in
parallel, pursue the interests of the world and our global
United Nations community.
Let me therefore conclude with a strong appeal
to everyone here, as well as the current and future
members of the Security Council, to let ourselves be
guided by the purposes of the Charter and the interests
of the United Nations as a whole. Austria is fully
committed to acting on those principles when it next
has the honour to serve as a member of the Security
Council, and we of course hope to count on everyone’s
support at the elections in 2026 for a term in 2027–2028.
Austria joined the United Nations 67 years ago
on this day, 14 December 1955. And after 67 years,
we have no regrets. The United Nations is a large and
very diverse family of nations, and like in all large
families, we sometimes disagree, argue and fight,
and sometimes we fail in our efforts and goals. But
the concept of bringing all the nations of our planet
together in one forum to discuss the challenges of our
times, seek solutions together and help and support each
other — that concept remains brilliant. And when we
adhere to the rules, serve the purposes and contribute
constructively to the Organization, we enable our
United Nations to be effective and successful, which
benefits all of us. Austria remains honoured to be a
Member of this family and will continue to abide by the
rules, serve the purposes and contribute constructively
where we can, with mind, heart and soul.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): The Philippines
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

We congratulate India for its twin leadership this
month of the presidency of the Security Council and of
the Group of 20.
We see that the concept note for today’s open debate
(see S/2022/880) refers primarily to the reform of the
Security Council, with the premise that there is a need
for a new orientation for a reformed multilateralism.
While the Security Council has had significant
achievements in maintaining peace and security over
the years, with the current geopolitical environment,
it has to contend with a great deal of setbacks. The
President of the General Assembly stated earlier today
that not a single Council resolution has been adopted
to address the war in Ukraine. There have been no
concrete outcomes achieved so far in the matters that
have been brought to the General Assembly by virtue
of the veto initiative.
In order to instil new life in the discussions on
Security Council reform, it is imperative that we go
beyond what has been practiced for decades in the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform. A number of States are in favour of negotiating
a single text with attribution and timelines that offers a
package of possible agreements on reform. On the other
hand, a number of States prefer that we respect the
passage of time and first build consensus on contentious
issues that require more discussion.
Unfortunately, none of the intergovernmental
negotiations documents produced in the past six
years have led to real and actual progress. There is a
fundamental disagreement on the purpose of Security
Council reform, especially on whether an expansion
of the Council should include new permanent
members and non-permanent members or only
non-permanent members.
As there has been no agreement on how we are
going to orient ourselves, we could look at three
elements that can contribute to the Security Council
becoming reflective of contemporary global realities,
which would make it more effective in discharging its
primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security.
First, a focus on improving the working methods
of the Security Council is crucial. That does not
require amending the Charter of the United Nations.
The Council’s working methods should be aimed at
increasing participation by non-members of the Council
in the Council’s decision-making process and increasing

22-752265/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Council’s transparency and accountability to
non-members. In the intergovernmental negotiations,
the Philippines addressed in some detail the question
of how we might build on the areas of convergence in
the working methods. Specific recommendations to the
Council would in the end, if adopted, lead to greater
transparency and predictability.
Secondly, as an extension of the first element
just referred to, an improved consultation mechanism
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional groups would be beneficial. We highlight the
General Assembly resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, which reaffirmed the commitment
to reinvigorated multilateralism to tackle global
challenges and strengthen United Nations partnership
with regional and subregional organizations. The
Council should recognize the need to consistently and
thoroughly consult regional groups on pressing and
delicate matters that are specific to a particular region.
Thirdly, one of the key elements of a reformed
multilateral system is having an organization in which
all Member States, big and small, respect the rule
of law and comply with the positive obligation at all
times of peacefully resolving disputes in accordance
with international law. Thus, we reaffirm the Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes, which was adopted 40 years ago.
Multilateral reform is two-pronged. Reforming the
Security Council requires us to discharge our respective
responsibilities towards that end as well. The Manila
Declaration presents a way forward. It reaffirms the
role of the Security Council in preventing and settling
disputes and, in recognition of that mandate, also
enumerates important mechanisms with regard to that
role. The Manila Declaration also highlights the role
of the International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations and draws attention
to the facilities offered by the Court, including advisory
opinions on legal questions.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for a new
agenda for peace that seeks to allocate a greater role
to the Security Council in conflict prevention. The
summit of the future in 2024 will be an appropriate
venue for further discussions on the security aspects of
a reformed multilateralism.
The Security Council must not be outpaced by
a global security landscape that has been changing
6/43

14/12/2022

rapidly before our eyes. Now is the moment for change.
At the same time, Member States must ensure that a
reformed Council does not lead to more deadlock.
Instead, it must be agile, responsive and relevant.
The President: I now
representative of Slovenia.

give

the

floor

the

Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this timely debate. I would like to make
three main observations on the topic at hand.
First, adept global governance must mirror the
interconnectedness of the world today. The most recent
crises, such as the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the global food crisis and climate change, are a stark
reminder that today’s complex challenges are not those
of one State or one region but of the entire world.
To effectively tackle those challenges, we need to
overcome the current fragmentation of our multilateral
work, which remains entrenched in the traditional silos
approach. Only by working in synergy will we find
comprehensive and sustainable collective solutions to
ongoing challenges and the challenges of the future.
We are therefore pleased that today the President
of the General Assembly has addressed the Security
Council. We should also use the work that the
Secretary-General has done in his report entitled
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), which provides
good orientation in our search for a reinvigorated and
reformed multilateralism.
Secondly, the world today is not the same as it
was 77 years ago. There is a growing understanding
among the Member States that the multilateral
architecture must remain a living mechanism, able to
adapt to the new realities of our world. In the past two
decades, Member States have already recognized such
opportunities. They have taken steps to adapt parts of
the United Nations system by establishing the Human
Rights Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and,
most recently, the adoption of the landmark resolution
on the veto initiative (General Assembly resolution
76/262).
While there is a need to continue our efforts for
overall reform of the United Nations system, there
is a clear urgency to reform the body that holds the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. Only a more representative
Security Council that reflects the realities and diversity
of the contemporary international community can
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

effectively deliver on its mandate. It needs stronger and
more permanent voices of the regions that have been
overlooked and underrepresented, in particular Africa
and small island States.
We are encouraged by the many speakers who
highlighted the need for a reformed Council during this
year’s general debate and hope we can build on that
momentum, but it is time to go beyond discussions and
deliver concrete results. We need tangible progress. We
are therefore calling for efficient and results-oriented
intergovernmental negotiations.
Thirdly, the failures and successes of multilateralism
are reflective of our joint efforts. We, the Member
States, hold the key to its success. Trust and constructive
dialogue are essential elements of our efforts towards
reformed multilateralism. We have the power and the
tools, but do we also possess the collective political will
to go the distance and deliver on our promises?
In conclusion, as we continue to respond to a
volatile world and concurrent crises, we all depend on a
functional multilateral system with the United Nations
at its core being by far our best bet.
Slovenia celebrated the thirtieth anniversary of
its membership of the United Nations earlier this year.
As a small State, we will do our part to strengthen
the cooperation among Member States and improve
the multilateral rules-based system. We will actively
contribute to ensuring a more peaceful, safer and
greener world.
The President: I now
representative of Singapore.

give

the

floor

the

Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Singapore deeply
appreciates India’s leadership in convening this
timely debate on multilateralism. We wish to thank
Mr. Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, Minister for External
Affairs of the Republic of India, for his opening remarks.
For more than seven decades, the United Nations
and its network of specialized agencies, funds and
programmes have worked hard to keep the peace
and bring about sustainable development. We can be
proud of the many achievements of the United Nations,
and yet we must also acknowledge the many areas of
unfulfilled hopes and ambitions.
We are meeting today in the midst of several violent
conflicts around the world. Approximately 2 billion
people live in conflict-affected areas. At the same time,

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

the world has become more multipolar, with many new
emerging Powers and many centres of economic growth
and technological excellence. The case for reforming
the United Nations and our multilateral system has
never been more urgent.
Singapore supports the need for reform in order
to strengthen the multilateral system based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We also support the need for Security
Council reform, and we look forward to advancing
discussions in the intergovernmental negotiations
process. As this debate seeks to hear members’ views
on new orientations for reformed multilateralism,
Singapore would like to identify some guiding
principles to address the question of reform of the
multilateral system.
First, the foundation of the multilateral system is
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Any reform exercise must strengthen respect for
the Charter and for international law. All members
of the United Nations have a responsibility to respect
the principles of the Charter and international law.
Accordingly, whenever international law and the
principles of the Charter are violated, the international
community must respond swiftly and take a collective
stand. To put it differently, reform must lead to greater
accountability whenever the principles of the Charter
and international law are violated.
Secondly, the Security Council is charged with
the primary responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, and the Council itself must live
up to its responsibilities. The Security Council must
become a platform for open dialogue, active mediation
and preventive diplomacy. In particular, its permanent
members must demonstrate exemplary leadership and
be net contributors to peace and security, rather than
a source of tension and instability. Increasingly, the
very nature of security is changing, and the Security
Council should also address security challenges arising
from non-traditional issues, such as climate change.
As I said earlier, Singapore supports the need
for Security Council reform to reflect contemporary
realities. Equally important is that any reform of the
Council should not marginalize the needs and interests
of small countries, many of which have never served on
the Council.
Thirdly, a robust multilateral system requires a
strengthened role for the General Assembly. In recent

22-752267/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

months, the General Assembly has shown clearly that
it has the capacity and will to act when the Security
Council is unable or unwilling to make decisions.
In that regard, the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 76/262 in April, which stipulated that the
General Assembly would meet whenever a veto is cast
in the Security Council, is a significant decision. It is
precisely that kind of reform and innovation that can
help to strengthen the multilateral system.
Fourthly, we need to consider reform in a
comprehensive manner, rather than piecemeal. We need
to look at reform beyond the United Nations system by
addressing the overall architecture of the multilateral
system. In that regard, there is a clear need to reform
the international financial institutions and ensure that
they work more closely with the United Nations. We
support the idea put forward by the Secretary-General,
calling for a biennial summit between the members
of the Group of 20, the United Nations system and
international financial institutions. Such a summit
would take place with the United Nations as a platform.
We do not need to create new institutions, but we do
need to ensure that existing institutions work better,
coherently and in a coordinated manner.
Singapore also supports the Secretary-General’s
report, Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), which aims
to strengthen global governance across areas such as
climate change and sustainable development beyond
2030, the international financial system and the interests
of future generations. The Summit of the Future, of 2024,
will be a major milestone for multilateralism, and it
gives us the opportunity to address new issues on global
governance. In that regard, the Global Digital Compact
will be an important contribution. We look forward to
receiving the recommendations from the High-level
Advisory Board on Effective Multilateralism, which
was appointed by the Secretary-General, in order to
help build a more effective, networked and inclusive
multilateral system. We also wish to place on record
our support for the Secretary-General’s proposal for a
new agenda for peace.
Finally, any reform exercise should leverage and
empower the good offices of the Secretary-General.
Article 99 of the United Nations Charter states that the
Secretary-General “may bring to the attention of the
Security Council any matter which in his opinion may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security”. We support a greater role for the SecretaryGeneral in mediation and conflict prevention. A recent
8/43

14/12/2022

concrete example of the Secretary-General using his
good offices is the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
has helped ensure food supplies and stabilize food
prices globally.
In conclusion, let me say that the multilateral
system has served us fairly well, but there is much
to be done. The world has changed dramatically, and
we need to adapt the multilateral system to reflect
contemporary realities. As the declaration on the
commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations (General Assembly resolution 75/1)
reminds us, our world is not yet the world that the
founders of the United Nations envisaged. We should
work together to strengthen the multilateral system,
promote respect for international law and make our
multilateral system fit-for-purpose and future-ready.
Singapore will be an active participant in this urgent
and necessary endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation welcomes the good initiative of the
Indian presidency of the Security Council to organize
this debate, and we also welcome the participation of
His Excellency Mr. Jaishankar, Minister for External
Affairs of India, in presiding over this meeting.
At the outset, I would like to stress Egypt’s
adherence to multilateral action, at the heart of which
is the United Nations system as a main tool for ensuring
understanding, peaceful coexistence and brotherhood
among peoples. In that context, Egypt’s delegation
would like to note the following points:
First, the Charter of the United Nations represents
the pillar of multilateral action, including the principles
of sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs,
good neighbourliness, refraining from the use of force
and the resolution of disputes by peaceful means, all
of which are the foundations for stable and peaceful
relations among States. Consequently, we need to
protect and preserve those principles.
Second, talking about reforming the United Nations
is a new and an old issue, brought to the surface by
circumstances and interactions whenever international
crises intensify. That reflects, in Egypt’s opinion, the
failure of current international governance to meet the
aspirations of our countries and peoples, especially
developing countries.
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Third, the reform of the international multilateral
system should be addressed from a comprehensive
perspective. Developing countries demand climate
justice, financial fairness and genuine participation in
decision-making at the international level. That will
only be achieved through reforming the United Nations,
the international financial organizations and the Bretton
Woods institutions while meeting the requirements
of addressing climate change. As the international
community faces interlocking crises, the reform should
also be coordinated. I affirm in that regard Egypt’s
determination to make efforts, during its presidency
of the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to provide the appropriate conditions for
activating the mechanisms of the historic agreement
achieved at the Sharm El-Sheikh conference and
establishing the loss and damage fund.
Fourth, it is important to address the imbalance
in international dealings between the dimensions of
peace and security and the dimension of sustainable
development. Peace and security issues enjoy powerful
mechanisms and tools, such as the Security Council and
a large allocated budget. But when we touch on issues
of sustainable development, of which the vast majority
of the general membership is in dire need, we find that
the matters are voluntary and without specific funding
or clear implementation tools.
Fifth, it is useful to engage with various groups of
society, especially to empower women and support youth
to achieve social inclusion and realize development.
At the same time, Egypt’s delegation is of the view
that heightened unjustified politicization of human
rights issues has transformed international action and
international cooperation into persistent confrontation,
which does not lead to the achievement of the noble
goals of peaceful coexistence or the establishment of
relations based on mutual respect among countries.
Sixth, before considering integrated reform,
the Security Council needs also to discharge its
responsibilities fully. It must address violations of
international resolutions in a decisive manner. It
is incumbent upon the Security Council to tackle
conflicts through an approach that takes into account
the various stages of conflict, beginning with
peacebuilding as the first step in the peace continuum.
It is important to support peacebuilding activities and
allocate the necessary funding for them, including
through the Secretary-General’s proposal to finance

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

the Peacebuilding Fund from the regular budget of the
United Nations.
Seventh, the delegation of Egypt welcomes the
strengthening of the relationship between the Security
Council and regional organizations, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter. The goal is to ensure
harmony between the work of the United Nations and
that of regional frameworks, particularly the League
of Arab States and the African Union, by building
on the comparative advantages of each organization
while having the mother Organization, namely, the
United Nations, shoulder the primary responsibility.
The aim is to support the efforts in favour of conflict
prevention and finance peacekeeping operations,
including African operations, through United Nations
assessed contributions.
Eighth, Security Council reform cannot be
achieved through partial or phased solutions. African
countries can see the historical injustices imposed on
their continent redressed only through the Ezulwini
Consensus which calls, inter alia, for abolishing the
right to veto or granting it to new permanent members
of the Security Council, in order to correct the genuine
imbalance in the work of the Council. Failing to address
the veto, there will be no reform; without such reform,
one or more permanent members of the Security
Council would continue to act to the prejudice of an
entire continent, and Africa cannot forever be sidelined
as a mere observer or spectator.
In conclusion, given the current situation, Egypt
calls for embracing a realistic approach. Adopting
relevant steps guarantees that the United Nations will
continue to provide an organizational context in we all
can participate in maintaining the security and safety
of humankind and in meeting the needs of all citizens
seeking a decent life. In that context, Egypt stresses its
full support for the Secretary-General’s report entitled
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), which notes the need
for a new agenda for peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of India for
convening today’s open debate, the theme of which is
more than relevant for today’s world: “New orientation
for reformed multilateralism”.
We agree with the concept note in that

22-752269/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

“[t]he world is not the same as it was 77 years ago”
and that
“the composition of the Security Council,
responsible for international peace and security,
was last fixed in 1965 and is far from reflecting
the true diversity of the wider membership of the
United Nations” (S/2022/880, annex, para. 3).
Current reality highlights the challenges related
to the full implementation of the Charter of the
United Nations, particularly with respect to Chapter
VII. We are concerned, in particular, that the Charter
itself, a product of the post-Second World War era, is
being substantively undermined because a permanent
member of the Security Council, the Russian Federation,
continues its aggression against Ukraine, violating
all norms of international law and international
humanitarian law. Guatemala reiterates its position
that it is essential that the Security Council respond
adequately to this growing threat, which remains an
ongoing danger to international peace and security.
Guatemala believes that we cannot continue to
postpone responding to the necessity of bringing about
profound changes in the United Nations, particularly
in the Security Council, where the right of veto needs
to be exercised with greater responsibility, thereby
preventing the worsening of international crises.
The Security Council must be more transparent and
represent the interests of the entire membership in
order to make the Organization more agile and better at
serving the most vulnerable countries.
The United Nations is all of our States. Accordingly,
we must redouble our commitment to strengthening the
system so as to regain confidence in it. In doing so, we
would address emerging shared challenges and fulfil the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
To this end, we must work with greater coherence when
implementing the pillars of the Organization and adopt
an integrated approach that recognizes that peace and
security, development and human rights are interrelated
and mutually reinforcing.
We must also strengthen preventive diplomacy.
Conflict prevention should have a long-term perspective
and requires that action on risks be taken before they
become crises. In Guatemala’s view, the Security
Council can and should still work to prevent conflicts
and not wait to react to them.
10/43

14/12/2022

Guatemala strongly supports the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its integrated
approach. We believe that it is necessary to strengthen
environmental action in the Commission’s activities
and ensure that they are sensitive to environmental and
social conflict and humanitarian needs such as food
insecurity and migratory flows. We must also ensure
that its interventions are mindful of natural resources.
Furthermore, given the Council’s primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
it is important that it integrate climate-security
assessments into all situation reports on its agenda and
that it be able to identify vulnerabilities and determine
risks with the help of climate outlooks and robust earlywarning systems.
We must remember that there is an intrinsically
symbiotic relationship between climate change and
security: each threat exacerbates the other. Just as
environmental degradation, climate change and
biodiversity loss can contribute to conflicts, so they can
also play an important role in the resolution of conflicts.
We therefore call for greater efforts to be made in
terms of climate action and sustainable development,
which provide unparalleled opportunities to build more
equitable, resilient and peaceful societies.
Finally, Guatemala will continue to participate
constructively in future discussions on the reform of
the Security Council and take concrete and necessary
steps to achieve a more effective and efficient Council,
and one that is more representative of the international
community. We commend the important role that the
delegation of India is playing in making the Security
Council a body more responsive to our times.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union later this afternoon. I would like to
add just a few words in my national capacity.
We thank India for organizing today’s important
and timely debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly for
their briefings.
Estonia fully supports the rules-based international
multilateral system with the United Nations at its
core, which is a system that has served us well. We
therefore need to strengthen it, as we recognize that the
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

world is not the same today as it was in 1945. There
are numerous global, regional and local challenges in
its way, and these challenges are more complex and
interconnected — from climate change to cybersecurity
to widening inequalities.
The ways in which we respond to those challenges
must also change. The Secretary-General has
outlined his vision for the next 25 years of global
cooperation in his Our Common Agenda report
(A/75/982). We fully support his initiative to agree
on how to reinvigorate multilateralism and achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. We also thank
him for the details shared today on the New Agenda
for Peace. The question, however, is how to reform
multilateralism and strengthen international peace and
security when one country — a permanent member of
the Security Council — has launched an aggression
and is conducting a bloody colonial and imperial war
against its neighbour. Unfortunately, today we are all
witnessing the most brutal violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and its core principles of sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The inability of the Security
Council to take any substantive decisions on Russia’s
unprovoked, unlawful and unjustified aggression
against Ukraine demonstrates the urgency of Security
Council reform more clearly than ever.
It is vital that the Security Council remain relevant
as a place where we can take action against aggressors,
action to strengthen global peace and security and action
to prevent or end wars — the founding idea behind the
Council. We therefore still believe that the Charter in
its entirety should be at the core of any attempt to renew
and revitalize multilateralism, especially on matters of
global peace and security, but also on issues related to
human rights, the rule of law, gender equality, human
dignity and equality among and within nations.
Security Council members, especially permanent
members, have a special responsibility. Any permanent
member of the Council that exercises the veto to defend
its own acts of aggression against another Member
State most seriously undermines the credibility of
the Charter, the United Nations itself and the entire
multilateral international rules-based system, and
should therefore be held fully accountable. As a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group and a supporter of the ACT code of
conduct, Estonia insists that permanent members of
the Security Council should not use their veto power
to block Council actions aimed at preventing or ending

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

mass atrocities. In the spring, Estonia was also a proud
co-sponsor of the initiative that requires the General
Assembly to convene a meeting after any veto has been
cast (resolution 76/262). It was our important decision
that has enabled the General Assembly to take a more
active stance on international peace and security issues
in cases where the Security Council is paralysed,
as well as increasing the Council’s accountability
and transparency.
Estonia continues to advocate for a meaningful,
results-oriented process for reforming the Security
Council. The main goal of the reform endeavours
should be a revitalized United Nations, with increased
transparency and ownership of the Security Council’s
work and greater accountability of the Council to the
United Nations membership. There is a clear need for
enlarging the membership of the Security Council
based on equitable representation.
In conclusion, I want to stress that in our view, one
of the main threats to international peace and security
at the moment is Russia’s full-scale aggression against
its neighbour and Russia’s reckless nuclear blackmail.
We need to stop the aggressor before it is too late
and before the global consequences for us all and for
multilateralism are much worse. That in itself would
be an indispensable and urgent contribution to the
reinforcement of an international rules-based system
with the United Nations at its core. Let me take this
opportunity to assure the Council that Estonia is fully
committed to contributing to a renewed multilateralism
that will make us better able to respond decisively to
today’s numerous threats and challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): My delegation
thanks India for convening today’s open debate on this
overarching topic. We also appreciate the briefings
by the Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly.
Let me begin by congratulating the United Nations
on having endured 77 years, especially considering the
short-lived span of its predecessor, the League of Nations.
The United Nations has indeed played a significant role
in making the world a safer and better place. However,
faced with multidimensional challenges and new threat
multipliers such as the coronavirus disease pandemic
and climate change, people around the world are now
looking to the United Nations to play a bigger role and

22-7522611/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

deliver more effective responses. As the President of the
Republic of Korea stated when he addressed the General
Assembly in September, our priority is to promote peace
and prosperity by defending universal values such as
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law (see A/77/PV.4). We believe that this should also
underpin the new orientation for the United Nations
and multilateralism. Against that backdrop, I would
like to cover the following four points.
First, my delegation believes that the General
Assembly embodies the very essence of multilateralism,
with its convening power able to gather all Member
States on an equal footing on issues across all sectors.
We should redouble our efforts to revitalize the
Assembly, including by streamlining its agenda and
discussions and devising a monitoring and review
mechanism for General Assembly resolutions. In that
regard, my delegation suggests that the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly should focus more on the implementation
aspects of Assembly resolutions and come up with
some pragmatic recommendations.
Secondly, we reiterate our support for the New
Agenda for Peace proposed by the Secretary-General.
United Nations reform, whether organizational or
financial, should continue to be aimed at conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. In that context, we
welcome the ongoing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union.
Thirdly, we envision the United Nations expanding
its role into new areas and taking the lead in a datadriven world. The Republic of Korea will engage
actively in discussions on a global digital compact. Our
focus includes supporting the digital transformation of
developing countries, contributing to global capacitybuilding on data collection, utilization and sharing, and
filling the normative vacuum to ensure that the use of
digital technologies does not undermine human rights.
Lastly, on Security Council reform, our position was
made clear in my statement to the General Assembly
a few weeks ago (see A/77/PV.37). Expanding the
permanent membership, with or without the veto power,
would be a significant obstacle to the United Nations
in adapting to our constantly evolving international
realities. Moreover, it would be made possible only at
the expense of other countries’ opportunities to serve
on the Council.
12/43

14/12/2022

As a result of 30 years of intensive discussions
among Member States, it has been made clear by now that
most of us do not oppose an increase in non-permanent
elected members. However, no meaningful action has
been taken so far, mainly due to some confusion about
the basic concept and terms of permanent membership,
as well as disagreements on who the new permanent
members would be, assuming that permanent members
can never be replaced. My delegation doubts whether
those questions surrounding permanent membership
can be resolved in the coming years, given the acute
national interests at stake for each country or group of
countries. Considering the urgency of Security Council
reform, and being mindful that Security Council
reform efforts should not create further division in the
United Nations, we must strive to proceed with realistic
perceptions and a more reasonable approach.
In addition, the Security Council should work to
modernize its agenda. There are growing threats in new
domains such as cyberspace and outer space. A certain
State Member of the United Nations even trains cyber
warriors to launch cyber attacks on other countries
for the purposes of destroying infrastructure, stealing
information and even generating revenue to fund
nuclear and weapons of mass destruction programmes.
A true reform of the United Nations must have an
actual impact on the ground. With that in mind, the
Republic of Korea will cooperate with other countries
to make the Organization more agile and effective,
while firmly upholding the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency of the
Security Council during the final month of India’s
non-permanent membership of the Council. I would
also like to take this opportunity to commend your
country for its outstanding contribution and your team
for its successful work over the past two years. We also
thank His Excellency the Minister for External Affairs
of India for presiding over the Council during today’s
open debate and the Secretary-General for his briefing
this morning. We believe the topic of today’s meeting
concerns important subject matter with regard to the
current state of multilateralism and how we envision
its betterment.
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

The principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations are timeless. It is incumbent upon
Member States to ensure that those principles are
not eroded by our action or inaction. No regional
groupings or alliances should be allowed to undermine
our principles of sovereignty and sovereign equality,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
the prohibition of the use of force and the peaceful
resolution of disputes.
On the other hand, there are many areas in which
the United Nations has already become a victim of its
own success. The representation of States, especially
African States, in the organs and Organization of the
United Nations, remains lacking. It is high time to revisit
the status quo, which is perpetuating inequality. The
working methods we follow buttress the hegemony of
the few and put the majority of States under undesirable
guardianship. That gaping inequity is discrediting
the United Nations and its decisions. Therefore, our
reform of multilateralism must rectify those vestiges of
colonialism and bring a sense of justice to the system.
Secondly, the political dynamics between the
most powerful countries pose the greatest of dangers
to humankind. Currently, what we consider to be a
world order that consists of ambiguous understanding
and consensus between the powerful States is
unravelling and nearing imminent disintegration. Such
arrangements, which are not inclusive or transparent
for the majority of the community of States, become
apparent when they are violated. Although humankind
faces the brunt of war and arms races as a result of
that fallout, our discussions and decisions at the
United Nations are not being informed by the most
significant underlying causes of tensions and rivalry.
As a result, multilateralism and the United Nations
are viewed as rhetorical and ineffective in addressing
core issues in global politics. In that context, we need
arrangements between States and blocs of States to be
able to prevent wars that are forming in the shadows. This
is a situation in which we have no option but to rely on
the goodwill of the most powerful to choose adherence
to international law, and the rest of the community
of States must persistently work to bring sense to the
prevailing Power-oriented multilateral system.
As an African country and a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Ethiopia
believes that the great majority of the community of
States can and must assert our norms and unite towards
maintaining our United Nations Charter-based global

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

order. In that connection, the role of the United Nations,
which ought to be at the centre of multilateralism, is
indispensable. The United Nations must overcome the
influence of Power blocs and groupings that are based
on national and selective interests. The Organization
should not appear to be partial or discredited as to
its neutrality or its capability to provide a safe and
trusted convening platform with respect to contentious
issues. The reform of multilateralism therefore entails
ensuring the political independence, impartiality and
practical capability of the United Nations to preside
over global affairs.
My final point has to do with non-State groupings,
including commercial entities and extraterritorial
spaces, which have proven consequential in international
relations. Those actors influence economic and trade
policies and measures, exercise control over public
goods, affect the movement of wealth and distributive
justice and play a growing role in questions of national
and international security. Moreover, we have a fully
formed cyberspace, in which a great deal of economic,
political and social interplay occurs, in which States play
the most nominal role. In that context, non-State entities
and extraterritorial spaces can use their capabilities to
help correct inequality and the misguided foundation
of the international economic order. Conversely, they
can also serve as tools of exploitation, hostility and
zero-sum global interaction. That, we believe, depends
on whether States are able to regulate the conduct of
those actors to ensure that they are a force for good.
The reform of the multilateral order must put forth
a clear path for the place of non-State actors and the
regulation of their conduct, in full compliance with
national sovereignty.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our belief
in the cause of equal representation, recognition of
cultural and civilizational diversity, solidarity, good
faith cooperation and respect for national sovereignty,
and a credible and capable United Nations that must
form the core of reformed multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank India for convening
today’s open debate on an issue of vital importance
for the Organization and global governance. I also
take this opportunity to commend India for its work
as President of the Security Council during the month

22-7522613/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of December. As this is my delegation’s final formal
opportunity to address the Council this year, I also
wish to commend India, Norway, Ireland, Kenya and
Mexico, which will soon complete their Council terms,
for the substantial contributions they have made. I
would also like to highlight the briefings delivered this
morning by the Secretary-General and the President of
the General Assembly.
Ecuador will continue to infuse new life in the
processes aimed at reform of the Organization, including
the Security Council. We are not starting from scratch.
The reforms undertaken by Secretary-General António
Guterres are taking us in the right direction. We have
also made great progress in revitalizing the work of
the General Assembly and other organs of the system.
However, as an Organization, we have unfinished
business, precisely with respect to the reform of the
Council. Owing to the delay in the enlargement of the
Council, we remain anchored to the institutional format
that has been in place since 1966. In just three days, we
will mark 59 years since the General Assembly decided
to increase the number of members of the Council from
11 to 15.
Ecuador will continue to support the urgent reform
of the Council so that it can reflect the contemporary
world, both in terms of composition and values. To
achieve that, we support a realistic reform. Today,
however, I would like to focus on five points concerning
what the Council can indeed do to contribute to the
reformed multilateralism we seek, without being
subject to the challenges posed by Article 108 of the
Charter of the United Nations, concerning amendments
to the Charter.
First, the members of the Security Council must
lead by example and respect the Charter, the document
by which they act on behalf of the other members of
the Organization in their primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security. It is vital to ensure
the full implementation of the provisions of the Charter,
including paragraph 3 of Article 27, whereby parties to
a dispute must abstain from voting. Moreover, Security
Council members must refrain from the threat or use
of force in any manner that violates the precepts of the
Charter and international law.
Secondly, Council members should encourage
and promote a genuine modernization of the Council’s
working methods in order to achieve a more inclusive,
transparent and effective body. The 10 elected members
14/43

14/12/2022

continue to play a special role in constructively
advancing such changes. We must continue to work
to achieve a fair distribution of responsibilities with
regard to the subsidiary bodies and to those who take
the leadership role in facilitating resolutions, also
known as penholders.
Thirdly, we should continue to strengthen
the Council’s synergy with every entity in the
United Nations system, including the General
Assembly. Resolution 76/262 of the General Assembly
has revitalized the dynamics of the Assembly’s efforts
in that area by enabling a discussion among Member
States every time a veto is cast in the Council. Those
General Assembly debates should not be considered a
final step but rather a message of guidance from the
international community.
Fourthly, there should be greater support for the
French-Mexican initiative to suspend the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocities, as well as for the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct with regard to the Council’s response
in cases of genocide and crimes against humanity.
Fifthly and lastly, the Council should support the
Secretary-General’s efforts to promote a preventive
approach that addresses the root causes of conflict and
prioritizes peacebuilding, accelerating disarmament
and strengthening non-proliferation, as well as
countering corrosive anti-institutional narratives which
contribute to violent extremism.
In 2023 and 2024, Ecuador will support joint
efforts to usher in the New Agenda for Peace, with the
full participation of women, reflected in a renewed
multilateralism in which Member States practice
tolerance and live side by side as good neighbours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): At the outset, I would like
to thank India for organizing this very timely and
important open debate.
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union, and I would like to
make a few additional remarks in our national capacity.
Today is a special day for Bulgaria. We are celebrating
the sixty-seventh anniversary of our membership of the
United Nations. Having the opportunity to reflect on
reforming multilateralism makes it even more special.
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today’s discussion is happening against a backdrop
of multiple crises and challenges, and one thing is
clear — none of them can be successfully addressed by
unilateral actions or military means.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine, which
began almost nine months ago, constitutes the gravest
and most blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, and yet the Council is unable to perform
its duties. All too often the Security Council has been
unable to rise to the occasion, and we have collectively
expressed regret, shrugged our shoulders and ultimately
accepted it as a fact of life. The aggression of the Russian
Federation in Ukraine, however, has demonstrated that
we cannot continue to be complacent, and that reform
of the Security Council really cannot wait. And not just
any reform, but a reform that can make the Security
Council fit for purpose — a reform that would enable
it to exercise its primary responsibility, namely, the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Bulgaria was among the initial sponsors of General
Assembly resolution 76/262 on the use of the veto, also
known as the veto initiative. The resolution provides
us all with the opportunity to hold a Security Council
member that casts a veto more accountable for the
reasons why it has chosen to prevent the Council from
acting. It empowers us all to be more responsible
members of the United Nations, and it strengthens
multilateralism and the international rules-based
order. It is a step in the right direction, but it is not
nearly enough.
A reformed multilateralism starts at home. The
strength of our democracies lies in their inclusiveness,
and they will thrive as long as human beings have
the freedom to choose their personal happiness and
as long as political leaders believe in majority rule,
minority rights, respect for human rights for all and
transparent decision-making, in line with the principle
of the rule of law. At home, we must also honour our
international obligations and therefore promote and
uphold a rules-based order that is built on the solid
foundation of international law. While upholding
international law, we must also address its weakest
point — how to effectively address violations and the
lack of accountability. The war in Ukraine has brought a
renewed and urgent focus to numerous and well-known
legal challenges such as the immunity of perpetrators
holding leadership positions from criminal jurisdiction,
for example. А reformed, representative and effective
Security Council should pursue accountability for

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

serious violations of international humanitarian law
and other international crimes and should ensure that
those crimes do not go unpunished.
A commitment to peace is a commitment to
development and to saving the planet. The expectations
for multilateralism are highest in the area of
socioeconomic development. A new orientation for a
reformed multilateralism would therefore begin with a
change of perspective and with a mobilization of the
instruments of multilateral diplomacy for solutions in
the areas of disaster risk reduction, climate change,
food insecurity and infrastructure resilience. Such an
approach would foster a situation where we would have
a Security Council that does not shy away from looking
beyond hard security issues, a General Assembly whose
members engage more in dialogue with one another
and a United Nations development system that delivers
for all.
Reform is at the centre of the Secretary-General’s
agenda. We all need the United Nations — our
United Nations — to be more productive, more efficient
and better funded. Multilateral institutions must be
reformed and must work in synergy with one another,
and the Security Council is no exception. They should
be equipped to adapt to an evolving international
environment and to fulfil their mandates in a responsive
manner on a basis of equality and inclusiveness in
which no one is left behind.
Today we are entering a conversation about the
future with the resolve that the future should not
resemble the past. It should be a future that is anchored
in a sound social contract and responsible citizenship of
this planet and is deeply rooted in the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations in its entirety.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
United Nations is at the heart of the international
system. The fact that the world has united to create
an organization that seeks to resolve international
disputes through multilateralism is extraordinary in
and of itself. However, even more astonishing is that the
Organization, despite its challenges and shortcomings,
has stood the test of time. It has demonstrated that the
path to a better, more peaceful and sustainable future
can be achieved only through more multilateralism.
However, the classic multilateral system was built
primarily to resolve inter-State challenges, not

22-7522615/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

problems that cross boundaries, such as financial crises,
pandemics, terrorism, organized crime and climate
change. We must therefore modernize our multilateral
institutions and make them fit for purpose and better
equipped to address the global and intergenerational
challenges that we are facing.
We have learned from the coronavirus disease
pandemic that we must strengthen our collective
capacity to anticipate, prevent and manage complex
risks. The pandemic laid bare the reality that renewed
multilateralism continues to be an urgent moral,
political and existential imperative, but it must also
be anchored in the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which are the pillars of the multilateral
architecture agreed on in 1945 and today are more
relevant than ever.
One of the central functions of the multilateral
system is avoiding disputes and, when that is not
possible, resolving them. The only way to resolve
conflicts in today’s world is amicably, through dialogue,
diplomacy and other participatory approaches.
Unilateral or coercive methods are illegal. Any
deviation from these universally accepted norms,
wherever and by whomever committed, seriously
undermines the ideals of multilateralism enshrined in
the United Nations Charter.
The United Nations, and particularly the Security
Council, has a unique legitimacy for the maintenance
of international peace and security. There is a great
expectation that the Security Council will deliver on
bringing stability, peace and security to the world.
At the same time, there is a growing demand for the
Council to adapt to new political realities and improve
its working methods. In this regard, Argentina continues
to advocate a reform of the Security Council to make it
more democratic, transparent and effective.
Enlarging the Security Council seems to be one of
the most reasonable ways to improve its representative
nature and thereby strengthen its legitimacy.
Enlargement of the Security Council is necessary, but
it is only an increase in non-permanent members that
could foster a new working dynamic and give elected
members greater influence within the Council and
greater participation in the decision-making process.
This is what we mean by a reform of the Security
Council that is focused on non-permanent elected
seats, and which enhances rather than diminishes the
16/43

14/12/2022

democratic character, accountability and effectiveness
of the Council.
Council reform, however, is part of a broader
reform of the multilateral system as a whole. In this
regard, Argentina reiterates its commitment to a
stronger, reformed and revitalized multilateralism,
with a United Nations at its core that is more agile,
effective and better able to serve those most in need
on the ground. The survival of humankind depends
on us working together. We need cooperation and
not confrontation.
Argentina has been and will continue to be a
strong supporter of multilateralism and an advocate
for the use of diplomacy for peace. To this end, we
remain committed to upholding the rule of law and
the rules-based international order and to supporting
international cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely open debate.
We congratulate India for its able stewardship of and
work in the Security Council this month. South Africa
expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly for their insightful
briefings this morning.
South Africa remains firmly committed to the
rules-based multilateral system rooted in international
law as the most sustainable and effective approach to
managing international relations and addressing the
common challenges confronting the world today. We
can acknowledge that the international political and
economic system remains unequal, unfair and unjust,
representing the world created in the aftermath of
the Second World War. Current global developments,
such as the resurgence of geopolitical rivalries, which
had not been experienced since the cold war era, the
climate crisis, the triple challenges of finance, energy
and food security, the multiplication of conflict, the
governance to avoid the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, health emergencies and the global
refugee-protection regime are deeply concerning.
These issues have huge implications for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
general, and for the herculean task with which the
Security Council is charged. There is therefore an urgent
need to reform the basis on which we are engaged to
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

achieve the peace to which we aspire. Multilateralism
must be at the heart of the engagement between Member
States, including in reform of the Security Council,
which is limited in its ability to respond to current
security challenges by the nature of its perceived lack
of accountability, structure and composition, which is
outdated and does not reflect global realities.
Consequently, the Council is suffering from a
crisis of credibility and legitimacy. We fully agree with
India when Foreign Minister Jaishankar highlighted
in his statement this morning that we need a new
reorientation, a new momentum and political will to
transform the United Nations into a global tool fit for
purpose, effective, agile, action-oriented, forwardlooking and representative of current geopolitical
relations and the membership of the United Nations.
These ideas are immanent in the Secretary-General’s
proposal for his New Agenda for Peace, to which all
Member States have an opportunity to contribute.
South Africa believes that, to address challenges
to multilateralism, we need innovative and proactive
approaches through collaborative efforts by all
relevant entities of the United Nations, including the
Security Council. We need to strengthen the rulesbased international system and move with speed to
transform other multilateral institutions and global
governance structures to be in line with the current
realities of the twenty-first century. We believe that
there is an opportunity for world leaders, international
organizations and civil society to work together to
restore the primacy and relevance of multilateralism.
The United Nations remains the most relevant
global and international platform for tackling challenges
and threats to peace and security, addressing poverty
and underdevelopment and ensuring the protection of
human rights. Similarly, in acknowledging the need
to reform the Organization, especially the Security
Council, we recognize that the Organization has
contributed immensely to progress in these three
important areas. However, the importance and priority
given to development must be equal to that given to
peace and security, as the nexus between the two has
been well established.
In conclusion, South Africa wishes to emphasize that
to reform and transform the existing global institutions
of governance, paying attention to preventive diplomacy,
enhanced coordination and partnerships between
the United Nations and such regional organizations

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

as the African Union, and strengthening the rulesbased international system with networked, inclusive
and fit-for-purpose multilateralism is fundamental
to achieving one of the key principles set forth in the
United Nations Charter: to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank India for
convening today’s high-level open debate, as it gives
us the opportunity to reiterate the importance of
multilateralism. It is our duty — and it is also in our
interest — to make sure that institutions remain relevant
and that they are given the necessary flexibility to adapt
to a rapidly changing world. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly for
enriching this discussion with their views and insights.
For multilateralism to remain effective, reform is
paramount. We need to equip the United Nations with
the right tools to address and react to a transformative
global agenda. Multilateralism is not static, and new
powerful international actors have to be recognized
as such. It is a living system, which should be allowed
to grow to adjust and renovate itself to ensure that the
principles and values of the United Nations that we hold
dear are respected and held in due regard.
The independence and sovereignty of States
underpins the international legal order as a whole and
clearly defines the interaction of States within the
multilateral system. In this context, the violation of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity remains
a flagrant breach of the United Nations Charter and is
illegal under international law. We call for a return to
Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders and the
universal upholding of the United Nations Charter.
Violations of the United Nations Charter and
international law not only affect the parties to the
conflict or their region, but they also have far-reaching
negative effects, as we are seeing with the food and
energy crises. The lasting humanitarian consequences
of conflict must not be underestimated, either.
While peace, security, sustainable development
and human rights are mutually reinforcing, peace must
be relentlessly pursued, along with expanding the scope
of prevention, conflict resolution and peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and long-term development.
Furthermore, the proliferation of conflicts shows

22-7522617/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

that we must rethink our approach and make greater
investment in prevention and in addressing root
causes. The international community must also
tackle new and evolving existential threats such as
climate change, terrorism, and cybersecurity. The
principles enshrined in the Charter must serve as the
cornerstone of our work on the New Agenda for Peace.
It must promote the peaceful resolution of disputes and
ensure accountability.
Specifically on Security Council reform, Malta has
always been clear in its position that the composition
of the Security Council does not reflect today’s world.
Current circumstances and dynamics underline the need
for a Council that is more inclusive, and which gives all
Member States more space to contribute to solutions
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
In this regard, we urge all delegations to engage in the
work of the intergovernmental negotiations, which
remains a legitimate platform for our discussions. As
part of the group Uniting for Consensus, Malta remains
committed to this endeavour.
Accordingly, we welcome the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 76/262, which provides a standing
mandate for a General Assembly debate when a veto
is cast in the Security Council. As part of the core
group since the origin of the initiative, Malta is firm
in its belief that this new mechanism strengthens the
link between the General Assembly and the Security
Council and brings more transparency, accountability
and relevance on veto use to the wider United Nations
membership. Malta also fully subscribes to the FrenchMexican initiative, which calls for restrictions on the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities.
We fundamentally believe that multilateralism
will remain indispensable to addressing major global
challenges. But, more broadly, we must seek to ensure
to the greatest possible extent — and despite all the
difficulties — that multilateral cooperation prevails
over unilateral action to prevent escalation into violence
and military conflicts.
I conclude by emphasizing Malta’s belief that
cooperation through effective multilateralism remains
the best way to advance our collective efforts towards
responding to today’s global realities and preventing
tomorrow’s global challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Lucia.
18/43

14/12/2022

Ms. Rambally (Saint Lucia): I have the honour to
deliver today’s statement on behalf of the following
like-minded States: Bahamas, Barbados, Bhutan,
Brazil, Cabo Verde, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica,
Malawi, Mauritius, Micronesia, Mongolia, Nauru,
Nigeria, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, South Africa, the Gambia, TimorLeste and Vanuatu. We wish to thank India in its capacity
as President of the Security Council for convening
today’s open debate and welcome the remarks made by
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly.
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations sets
out the purposes of the Organization, which capture
the objectives of multilateralism. However, a fractured
Security Council at the helm of the peace and security
pillar challenges the ability of the Organization to
discharge its mandate. The United Nations nevertheless
remains our best chance at peace. Its existence still
represents our greatest multilateral feat.
Today’s meeting is convened at a time when our
world is assailed by traditional threats to international
peace and security and rapidly evolving risks that
have transcended our original understanding of peace
and security. The only way to address these common
challenges is through strengthened and enduring
multilateralism. We therefore welcome the notion of a
new orientation for reformed multilateralism, which we
believe requires three key elements.
First, we need to rebuild trust among States. Today
the fissures in our multilateral architecture have been
entrenched through division and mistrust. We must
revert to the peaceful settlement of disputes based on
the principles of sovereignty and equality, recognizing
the need for mutual respect for differences while
refraining from unilateralism.
Secondly, we need to make progress on the issue
of Security Council reform. This is a sentiment that
was expressed by over 70 world leaders at this year’s
general debate at the General Assembly. It is impossible
to safeguard multilateralism when the voices of peoples
from regions across the globe are being excluded from
decisions on their futures and deliberations on shared
challenges. Additionally, in order for the Security
Council to be fit for purpose, it is imperative that,
through periodic evaluation, its working methods
remain relevant. Council members must therefore
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

continue to engage constructively within the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to secure an efficient effective
and transparent Council.
Finally, we need political will. Exceptionalism of
States comes not from subterfuge or their ability to wage
wars, including proxy wars, but from their willingness
to prioritize multilateralism in the most harrowing
of times. The necessity of this commitment was
recognized in the Declaration on the Commemoration
of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations.
At the margins of the seventy-seventh session
of the General Assembly, 35 like-minded Member
States issued a call to action for reform of the Security
Council in which they renewed their commitment
to effective multilateralism and recognized the need
for comprehensive reform of the Security Council,
including through its enhanced representativeness and
legitimacy. This call to action was echoed at the general
debate of the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly by one of the leaders of our Caribbean
region, Prime Minister Ralph E. Gonsalves of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, who profoundly captured
our raison d’être:
“we must construct the best possible partnership
between all nations, whatever our differences, to
take care of yesterday’s heritage, to accommodate
and reasonably address today’s interests and
to pursue effectively, in peace and security,
tomorrow’s hopes.” (A/77/PV.12, p.13)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The State
of Qatar highly appreciates India’s holding of today’s
important open debate. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly for their important briefings this morning.
The State of Qatar stresses that multilateralism
needs to be enhanced and adapted to be able to
address the current issues and challenges threatening
international peace and security. In the Declaration on
the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary
of the United Nations, Member States acknowledged
that global challenges are interconnected and can
only be addressed through active multilateralism.
Multilateralism is therefore not an option; rather, it is
necessary for building a more equitable, resilient and

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

sustainable world, with the United Nations playing a
central and leading role. In that regard, Member States
agreed to support the Secretary-General’s ongoing
reform efforts, instilling a new spirit in the discussions
on Security Council reform, moving forward with the
revitalization of the General Assembly and reforming
and strengthening the Economic and Social Council.
The State of Qatar affirms that the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development is the most inclusive vision
and strategy so far to eliminate abject poverty, limit
inequality and protect our planet. We believe that the
new vision of future global cooperation developed by
those main and reference documents is strengthened by
the Secretary-General’s report, Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which advocates effective multilateralism
to better address the more urgent challenges
facing humanity.
Regarding the United Nations collective security
reform in particular, we would like to make the following
points. The New Agenda for Peace calls for investing in
preventive efforts and peacebuilding at the domestic,
regional and international levels. It is important to
invest smartly and preventively to address the root
causes of conflicts now more than ever before. That
means we need an effective, well-staffed Peacebuilding
Commission that enjoys adequate, sustainable and
predictable funding. There is an urgent need to uphold
the values of justice, the rule of law, equality, human
rights, sustainable development, environmental
conservation and international cooperation.
We are greatly encouraged by an effective role
for the Security Council. Thus, the Council reform is
more urgent than ever before. A successful and holistic
United Nations reform fundamentally depends on
Security Council reform as one of the main pillars of
the international Organization.
The intergovernmental negotiation process on
Security Council reform, which I was honoured to
co-facilitate over the past two years, is one of the
most significant United Nations intergovernmental
negotiation processes. We managed, notwithstanding
the difficulties on that track, with the support of
Member States, to achieve progress by reducing areas
of divergence and promoting areas of convergence.
There is no doubt, however, that the delayed Security
Council reform, which is long overdue, requires a new
way of thinking to accelerate the achievement of the
goal to which we aspire and to reach consensus on the

22-7522619/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

package of proposals that strikes the desired balance in
the new Security Council. Having said that, any attempt
to reform the Security Council will fail if it focuses on
one factor only while overlooking other factors, as all
five reform factors are interlinked, pursuant to General
Assembly decision 62/557, and the reform will not
succeed if the principle of equality among all Member
States is not taken into account in the Security Council’s
decisions. We look forward to achieving positive results
in the upcoming intergovernmental negotiation round,
which will be co-facilitated by Kuwait and Slovakia.
In conclusion, effective multilateral efforts are the
only way to achieve the success that is long-awaited
by present and future generations, for the benefit
of humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog: I speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Montenegro, Albania and the Republic of Moldova, as
well as Bosnia and Herzegovina align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to thank India for convening this
important meeting and for giving us the opportunity to
speak. I think there is a sense that the level of energy has
gone down a little bit since this morning, on this very
important topic, but I do think it is very important that
everyone has the opportunity to speak. I will therefore
abbreviate my statement a little bit and ensure that the
full statement is circulated by other means.
This is a very timely debate amid the multiple
conflicts and the accumulation of challenges we face
across the globe, from Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine to the situation in the Sahel and Haiti, the
climate emergency and the growing debt crisis and
widening inequalities, to name just a few. Those crises,
as has been repeated again and again, can only be
addressed and resolved collectively.
We also need to be aware that if we do not take the
collective responsibility to address the vulnerabilities
and inequalities that have been exacerbated since the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, this will
inevitably fuel new crises. Hence the need to build a
fairer, more inclusive and sustainable world, a world
in which the interests of all nations and people are
adequately represented. This is our perception of
20/43

14/12/2022

multilateralism and why we remain heavily invested,
politically and financially, in the United Nations. It is
also why we support an African seat in the Group of 20,
as an example of a global system which is fair, effective
and more legitimate.
First of all, we need to go back to the basics, which is
a well-functioning, rules-based international order, with
an effective United Nations at the core. The SecretaryGeneral laid bare the shortcomings of the current
system in his report entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) 15 months ago, providing a sober analysis of
what is holding us back from delivering on our agreed
priorities, including on the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Failing on their implementation means
failing our people. As he said this morning, our toolbox
needs upgrading.
At the core of a renewed multilateralism remain
the basic principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations: a commitment to maintaining
international peace and security, upholding international
law, promoting sustainable development, defending and
promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all, and respecting obligations arising from mutually
agreed commitments and treaties. The defence of the
Charter is therefore the sine qua non.
The notion of conflict prevention is at the very core
of the Charter and must be brought back as a priority.
Unfortunately, we are currently witnessing what
happens when some decide to pick and choose among
those principles and norms and to abuse their powers
and the United Nations system as a whole. The Security
Council must reflect contemporary realities and be more
effective. The EU backs the comprehensive reform of the
Security Council to make it more effective, transparent,
democratic, representative and accountable.
Security Council members must fulfil the highest
standards of conduct by upholding international
law, including international humanitarian law. For
permanent members, this means refraining from using
the veto when there is a risk of mass atrocity crimes
and not abusing veto power when they are party to
a conflict.
The adoption last April of a “standing mandate”
for a General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in
the Security Council has contributed to the efforts
aimed at revitalizing and empowering the General
Assembly, ensuring that the United Nations is not
voiceless when the Council — as the primary organ
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

charged with the maintenance of international peace
and security — is deadlocked.
But this is not enough. We have a responsibility
to improve the functioning of the Council. The EU
fully supports the French and Mexican initiative on
veto restraint in cases of mass atrocities, as well as
the Code of Conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, calling upon all members of the Security
Council — elected and permanent — not to vote against
any credible draft resolution intended to prevent or halt
mass atrocities.
On the ground, challenges to peace and security
have also evolved. We live in an increasingly violent
environment, in which traditional threats and risks
coexist with new types of threats such as climate change,
cyberattacks, information manipulation, new types of
weapons and new or newly emboldened actors such as
terrorist groups or mercenaries, to name a few. In such
a context, the United Nations tools aimed at responding
to crises, including peacekeeping operations, are under
severe strain, and they need to be fit for the twentyfirst century.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for a
new agenda for peace, and we recall that regional
organizations can also play a key role in preventing and
addressing crises. The European Union is committed
to continuing its support to African-led peace support
operations and to the ongoing discussions to use
United Nations assessed contributions for operations
authorized by the Security Council. The European
Union is also funding the African Union compliance
and accountability framework to that end.
Global issues are today so complex that they
require all stakeholders to be around the table and
think outside of the box, in order to be able to identify
innovative solutions. The COVID-19 pandemic, for
instance, has shown us that no efficient response
would have been possible without a dialogue involving
non-traditional actors such as manufacturers, scientists
and philanthropists, as the Access to COVID-19 Tools
(ACT) Accelerator did. No crisis in the world can
seriously be addressed today without the immense
contribution of civil society organizations, including
women and youth.
The EU and its member States, as major donors,
know that we also need to do better to ensure the
complementarity of our own efforts. The EU Global

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Gateway initiative is being rolled out as we speak. It
offers strategic autonomy to partners for investments in
infrastructure, health, education, and digital and energy
transitions, thus accelerating the implementation of the
SDGs and bridging funding gaps. It is a sustainable
offer for the environment, for financing and with regard
to debt. We are also strong promoters of multilateral
initiatives on global finance, including to enhance and
improve debt treatment and transparency, reallocation
of International Monetary Fund special drawing rights
and implementation of minimum tax standards.
To conclude, let me assure the Council that the
EU is fully committed to contributing to renewed
and reinvigorated multilateralism and to get there by
working closely with the Council members and the
wider United Nations membership, but also with civil
society, academia and other interested stakeholders
to address the pressing challenges of the present and
the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr.
Wenaweser
(Liechtenstein):
Effective
multilateralism, with the United Nations at its centre, is
indispensable to addressing the defining crises of our
time, from climate change to pandemic preparedness.
The Security Council has a central role in that respect, as
it is mandated to be guardian of international peace and
security on behalf of the United Nations membership as
a whole. A prerequisite for that is certainly full respect
for the Charter of the United Nations and effective
action when its provisions are violated, especially its
core provisions on the use of force. The prevention of
the scourge of war is the reason why the peoples of
the world created the United Nations in 1945, and to
this day it is the place where people all over the globe
expect to see effective action when the international
order is under attack.
At its core, the United Nations is a peace and
security organization, and, as we meet today, its
ability to carry out that function is being severely
jeopardized. The New Agenda for Peace set out in Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) offers us an opportunity
to address that challenge urgently. We welcomed the
presence of Secretary-General Guterres at this debate
and the comments he made earlier. We therefore
wholeheartedly agree that the Security Council must be
made more effective. It should not just reflect today’s
geopolitical realities but should function in a way that

22-7522621/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

upholds its primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and security. That certainly includes the ability
to respond to the complex ways in which peace and
security are threatened today and the need to embrace
a comprehensive concept of peace and security that
includes human security.
With regard to the world’s most brutal conflicts, we
see the Council often unable to act as innocent civilians
are killed — including in Ukraine, as the result of the
aggression of one of its permanent members — which
is very often owing to the ability of the veto-wielding
members to prevent the Council from taking action
or even from putting products forward. We were
proud to have adopted General Assembly resolution
76/262, on the veto initiative, which has resonated so
strongly in this debate today. It is an essential step
towards addressing the challenges that the use of the
veto poses to the effectiveness of the Council and the
public perception of the United Nations as a whole. It
is a key measure for recalibrating the balance between
the Security Council and the General Assembly and a
prompt to empower the Assembly to make full use of
the authority conferred on it by the Charter and to step
in when the Council is unable to act.
We are also gratified to see that the veto initiative
is already having an impact on the use of the veto in
practice. We must ensure that the right of the veto is
no longer exercised in a way that is at odds with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. We are keen
to examine in particular the application of paragraph
3 of Article 27 of the Charter, which stipulates that “a
party to a dispute shall abstain from voting”, which is
contrary to what we have seen in this Chamber in the
context of decision-making on Ukraine in particular.
We will also continue asking for the implementation of
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, which to date commits its
124 signatories, who as of 1 January 2023 include 11
members of the Council, to taking effective action
to prevent and address atrocity crimes. And we look
forward to further statements from permanent members
on how they interpret their role in the Security Council,
their future use of the veto and additional wide-ranging
self-declarations with respect to their principles and
commitments — something we believe States aspiring
to be granted the right to the veto should also do. We
believe that in the meantime, adding more members to
those who hold veto power in the Council is counterintuitive, given the vast negative impact that the use of
22/43

14/12/2022

the veto already has on the effectiveness of the Council
and its decision-making.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate. Indonesia aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the representative
of Vietnam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Our discussion today is taking place against a
backdrop of a geopolitical situation marked by multiple
crises and challenges. At a time when we most need
solidarity and cooperation, we are unfortunately seeing
increasing self-interest, division and mistrust. Against
that backdrop, we must renew our commitment to
multilateralism and build anew. In that context, allow
me to share three points.
First,
we
need
a
new
multilateral
paradigm — a paradigm of win-win, not zero sum; of
engagement and dialogue, not containment or a take-itor-leave-it approach; of collaboration and solidarity,
not competition; and a paradigm where respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
is consistently upheld, including the fundamental
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
peaceful settlement of conflicts.
Secondly, we need a United Nations that is fit for
its time and purpose. Today’s world was unimaginable
77 years ago. The United Nations must always be
able to adapt to the latest developments, including in
technology, science and work culture. United Nations
reform, including the Secretariat, must be a continuous
work in progress and be undertaken in a holistic manner.
In that regard, Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) provides
an important blueprint for a strong and effective
United Nations. We also see the Summit of the Future
as an opportunity to make concrete progress on reform
and make the United Nations system relevant. The
Security Council desperately needs to adapt to our new
global realities. It should be more inclusive, transparent
and democratic in discharging its mandate. In order
to make progress, the political will to achieve reform
on the part of all States, including the five permanent
members of the Security Council, is a prerequisite. We
need a clear timeline and practical targets for reforming
the Council. Meanwhile, the Council must continue to
deliver. We cannot let the “uniting for peace” process
become a new normal; unity must be embedded within
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

the Council itself. After all, membership on the Security
Council is not a right but a responsibility, particularly
where those in the permanent seats are concerned.

strengthened to meet the challenges we face in the
twenty-first century. Allow me to highlight a few points
in that regard.

Thirdly, we need to promote partnerships,
particularly with regional organizations. They serve
an important role in bridging regional perspectives
and best practices. Furthermore, regional architectures
can serve as building blocks and foundations for
strong global stability. It is therefore relevant for the
United Nations to nurture synergy with regional
organizations, including ASEAN. As the representative
of a total population of more than 650 million people,
ASEAN is among the key prominent partners of the
United Nations in the areas of peace, stability and
sustainable development. That partnership must be
fostered to ensure that multilateral and regional efforts
are mutually reinforcing.

First, we have repeated time and again that the
time is right to reform the most powerful organ of the
United Nations — the Security Council. We all agree
that the Council’s membership and structure are not
in tune with the current realities on the ground. The
most recent reform of the Council took place 57 years
ago. In order for it to be fully representative, relevant,
effective, democratic, transparent and fit for purpose, it
must be reformed.

In conclusion, Indonesia believe that multilateralism
remains the best pathway to solving our current
and future global challenges. Guided by the spirit of
multilateralism, we look forward to collaborating
and working together with all States in achieving our
common goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to the Permanent Mission of India
for convening this open debate of the Security Council
on a new orientation for reformed multilateralism. In
the light of the ongoing global challenges, it is indeed
very timely. We thank the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly for their insightful
briefings this morning.
The world today is confronting multidimensional
challenges such as climate change, the coronavirus
disease, conflict and the food, energy and financial crises,
among others. Those challenges, and the conflict in
Ukraine in particular, have shaken the very foundations
of international peace and security. Our common hope
for peace and development is in serious jeopardy. As
an ardent supporter of multilateralism, Bangladesh
considers the United Nations to be the centre of people’s
hopes and aspirations at this crossroads in history. We
believe that today’s interconnected challenges can be
addressed only through reinvigorated multilateralism.
As the most representative multilateral forum
in the world, the United Nations needs to be further

Unfortunately, we have spent far too long on the
question of Security Council reform. We must do
something that is concrete, and we must do it now.
We believe that there should be enlargement in both
categories of membership of the Council. As for its
size, anything in the region of the mid-twenties would
perhaps do justice to the larger membership. Due
representation of all regions and groups of membership,
the question of the judicious use of the veto and the call
for text-based negotiations warrant due consideration.
In that regard, we also note the necessity of inclusivity
and in-depth dialogue among Member States.
Secondly, the General Assembly is a symbol and
demonstration of multilateralism. Its work better
reflects the will of the world’s peoples than does the
Security Council. We stress the need for a much bolder
and more decisive approach in order to bring the
General Assembly closer to the people. In that regard,
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
remains an integral part of the wider efforts to reform
the United Nations as a whole.
We must all do our part to preserve the inclusive,
consultative and democratic intergovernmental nature
of the General Assembly. It is important to bridge the
power gap between the General Assembly and the
Security Council as a matter of priority. Member States
need to devise an effective mechanism to assess the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions. We
need to seek more innovations to ensure the central role
of the United Nations and to ensure that the voice of the
general membership is heard on important and urgent
global issues.
Thirdly, we subscribe to the initiative aimed at
ensuring the proper implementation of the Charter
of the United Nations with respect to the functional
relationship between its main organs, in particular

22-7522623/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

14/12/2022

the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. It is imperative to enhance synergy, coherence
and complementarity among the agendas of the
Assembly and its Committees and the Economic and
Social Council and its subsidiary bodies. Interaction
with the Security Council must also be improved.

levels and the establishment of appropriate governance,
managerial and funding mechanisms to ensure such
consolidation is the main guiding element. With regard
to human rights, we need to prevent any impression of
politicization or double standards. We must ensure that
our actions are in line with our words.

Finally, there is no reason more significant than
the current global realities to dictate the urgency of the
reform of the United Nations, including the Security
Council, so that we can best deliver for those we serve.
If we cannot achieve those much-needed reforms now,
we may not be able to do so in the near or distant future.

As for the Security Council, the question tends to
focus on two intertwined issues, namely, the veto and
membership. We ought to remind ourselves that we
must not make the same mistake twice and claim that
all members are equal when, indeed, some are more
equal than others. What we need is a more democratic,
representative, effective, transparent, legitimate and
accountable Council. In addition, other key issues that
are identified by General Assembly decision 62/557
must receive due consideration.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Kayalar (Türkiye): The international rulesbased system is experiencing perhaps its gravest crisis
since its emergence after the Second World War. For
some, multilateralism is no longer considered the
best way to work for global security and prosperity.
Consensus-building and compromise are viewed not
as virtues of strength, but as signs of weakness. Longstanding legal norms have been eroded. As a result,
people are losing faith in international institutions,
including the United Nations. Indeed, the United Nations
is hardly the perfect institution, it is structurally flawed
and operationally cumbersome. While it might serve as
a source of excellent ideas, it often lacks the means for
their effective implementation. Its various bodies and
mechanisms frequently duplicate work, hence the need
for a reform of the United Nations.
Although the concept note (see S/2022/880) focuses
only on one aspect of United Nations reform, some other
major elements of the matter should not be overlooked
in today’s debate. The process of the revitalization of
the General Assembly has gained traction throughout
the past decade with the commendable work of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly. There are, however, many
avenues remaining for the General Assembly to explore
in order to fulfil its mandate.
Furthermore, the United Nations and the
membership should work on improving and supporting
more peace operations. In terms of development, there
has been much progress in recent decades to reform the
United Nations development system and ensure that
United Nations activities in that field are more coherent
and consolidated. We ought to continue in that direction
in line with the principle of country ownership at all
24/43

I support the remarks made by the Permanent
Representative of Italy regarding the approach of the
Uniting for Consensus group, which Türkiye is part
of. We believe that the group has outlined points of
convergence with potential for consensus. We look
forward to engaging in a constructive manner in the
next round of intergovernmental negotiations. We trust
that the membership will overcome the obstructions
created by maximalist demands, especially those of an
individual nature. The Security Council needs to fulfil
its mission as the primary United Nations organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council must serve all of humankind, not the interests
of a few Member States.
We must take up the multilateral agenda with
a renewed commitment, relaunch the narrative of
multilateralism and show the added value of international
cooperation. That effort must be centred upon the letter
and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Charter is resilient and remains visionary. Through its
articulation of universal values, it is grounded in peace,
development, human rights and the rule of law, with
a vision of countries living as good neighbours and
sharing a common fate and future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Jimenez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The world today faces a number of interconnected
challenges, including pandemic recovery; the
accelerating effects of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine on the food, energy and financial security
crises; and climate change and an increase in armed
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflict, which have driven more than 100 million
people into forced displacement, with humanitarian
needs on the rise. If we are to address those common
challenges with confidence, we need a stronger,
more effective and more balanced multilateralism.
Strengthening multilateralism and the rules-based
international order underpinning it necessarily requires
a stronger United Nations.
The Declaration on the Commemoration of the
Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations and
the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda report
(A/75/982) point the way towards a more effective,
sustainable, transparent and coherent United Nations.
Dimensions such as prevention and mediation,
digitization, synergies and partnerships with regional
organizations and other multilateral initiatives, as
well as a greater role for women and girls, must be an
integral part of the future of multilateralism.
My country has contributed on several fronts
to the Secretary-General’s proposals, ranging from
our support for mediation initiatives such as the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations to our
commitment to digitization as host of the United Nations
Information and Communications Technology Facility,
Valencia and our promotion of a feminist foreign
policy. We also actively support the Leaders’ Network
Reinforcing Multilateralism Together, through which
we have launched urgent and necessary initiatives such
as the Leaders’ Summit on Global Food Security, which
took place in September.
Strengthening multilateralism must involve
a greater integration of the three pillars of the
United Nations, consolidating the triple nexus between
peace and security, development and humanitarian
action. Beyond that, it is important to approach the
reform of multilateralism taking all its elements, not
just some of them, into account.
With regard to the reform of United Nations organs,
recent months have shown that we need a Security
Council adapted to today’s world, one that is more
representative, transparent, effective and with greater
legitimacy. Council action cannot be paralysed by the
use of the veto, as in the case of mass atrocities or
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
We must seek consensus solutions through possible
and realistic reform if it is to take effect. In that context,
Uniting for Consensus has made proposals for more
Member States to opt to serve on the Security Council,

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

with the possibility of longer or successive terms and
greater weight for elected members. “Elected” is a
key word in the Uniting for Consensus proposal, since
elections provide a greater degree of legitimacy to
Security Council members and allow for scrutiny of
their work. Elections also enable the Council to better
adapt to change.
Without prejudice to our participation in this open
debate, we believe that the natural venue for the debate
on Security Council reform is the intergovernmental
negotiations established by the General Assembly. The
past three years show that we must be prepared for the
unthinkable. Security Council reform must, on the one
hand, respond to current realities and, on the other
hand, provide flexibility and adaptability so that the
organ in charge of maintaining international peace and
security is prepared to respond to the challenges ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I thank India for
organizing today’s meeting on this highly relevant
topic, which is very close to our heart.
Germany strongly believes that multilateralism is
the best framework to guarantee peace and stability.
It is the best tool to discuss and find joint solutions
for challenges to humankind and to settle disputes
peacefully. We take pride in investing not only money
but also significant personnel and political capacities
into multilateral organizations.
However, we cannot ignore that multilateralism
is under pressure. And we do not deny that there are
questions that we need to answer urgently. Does
multilateralism deliver? How do we adapt the existing
international organizations to an ever-changing world?
And how do we deal with Member States like Russia,
which, as a permanent member of the Council bears a
special responsibility but flagrantly violates the Charter
of the United Nations?
All of this calls for reform.
First, on peace and security, we see a reform of the
Council as long overdue. It is untenable that one of the
Organization’s central pillars mirrors the geopolitical
situation of 80 years ago and is not representative of
the present. A future Security Council should include
additional permanent and non-permanent members.
That is our shared Group of Four position, together with

22-7522625/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Brazil, India and Japan. It is also clear that Africa must
be permanently represented in the Council.
This year’s general debate showed that a large
majority of Member States is in favour of reforming
the Security Council. However, a formal negotiation
process, as is practised almost everywhere else in
the United Nations, is still not in place. That must be
changed, and it is urgent that we start negotiating a
text now. We also consider the veto to be an instrument
prone to abuse and urge Council members to restrict its
use as much as possible.
Secondly, many global commons are under
immense pressure — climate, global health and others.
The implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) is stalling. Food and energy security are
strained, and humanitarian needs are ever-growing.
Technology outpaces regulation, threatening the
cohesion of societies.
The Secretary-General, in putting forward his Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), outlined his vision on
how to shape a peaceful, just and sustainable future.
By doing so, he mobilized the wider United Nations
membership. We agree with the Secretary-General,
and we will support him. Mahatma Gandhi said: “The
future depends on what you do today.” We expect the
Summit of the Future, in 2024, to be a crucial milestone
to advance multilateralism and boost the SDGs. Having
the honour of co-facilitating that process, together
with my colleague Ambassador Neville Melvin Gertze
from Namibia, I want to assure everyone that the two
of us will conduct the process in an open, inclusive,
transparent and consultative manner. I would like to
ask all Member States to contribute in good faith.
Much-needed reforms and adjustments are within
reach if there is collective political will. Now is the
time to embark on United Nations reform. Let us make
this our New Year’s resolution for next year. There is
no time to lose.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I wish to take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important open debate on a “New orientation for
reformed multilateralism”, an issue that will continue
to have important ramifications for the United Nations
and its Member States now and in future. We wish to
commend India for its leadership as President of the
26/43

14/12/2022

Security Council during this month and for its fruitful
contributions to the Council’s work during the past
two years.
Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
and the President of the General Assembly for sharing
their views and important insights on how to further
strengthen multilateralism in these trying times.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and I wish
to make the following statement in my national capacity.
Time and time again, the past has shown that at
critical points in human history when humankind is
confronted with existential crises and challenges, they
are ultimately addressed through either large-scale
conflict, with all its destructive force and consequences
or, hopefully, through unprecedented international
cooperation and joint endeavours, with all its implications
for continued progress. The United Nations, and indeed
the entire multilateral system, was established to help
ensure that humankind would choose the latter rather
than the former as it seeks to address and ultimately
overcome such crises and challenges.
So it is on the coming together of nations, large
and small, in a collective effort, based on the principles
that underpin multilateralism, on the architecture
provided by the United Nations and on the rules that
govern peaceful inter-State relations that humankind
has pinned its hopes as the best way to find sustainable
and effective solutions to the crises and challenges of
our times. From the pandemic to poverty, from armed
conflict to global tensions, from planetary crises to food
and energy crises, the multilateral system anchored
on the United Nations and international law has no
small role to play in helping find the best possible path
forward for humankind as a whole, while serving to
guarantee that all voices are heard and that the interests
of the smallest States and the smallest stakeholders are
taken into account.
But there has been a crisis in trust and confidence
in whether the United Nations, and indeed the entire
multilateral system, can deliver when it matters most.
The perfect-storm scenario that we have all witnessed
in the past 12 months has put the United Nations and
the multilateral system to its ultimate test. The verdict
is still out. But rather than to passively wait for such a
verdict, it is far better for us to proactively take steps
now in order to help ensure that the United Nations
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the multilateral system will continue to find
relevance — today and in the years to come. And that is
why today’s meeting assumes such great significance.
To that end, there are three points that we should
seriously consider as we seek to pursue reformed
multilateralism and develop a more effective
United Nations to better confront the crises and
challenges of our times.
First, the United Nations must put its full attention to
its core missions. Ultimately, that is how to use peaceful
means to solve the myriad crises and challenges that test
humankind’s resolve. The United Nations is all about
diplomacy. And that is where the United Nations should
refocus its efforts: on putting peaceful means at the front
and centre of multilateralism in addressing problems,
including conflict — whether through diplomacy,
dialogue, negotiation or other means — rather than
confrontation. The United Nations must seek to build
bridges of understanding among dissenting and even
conflicting parties, against the backdrop of trends of
polarization and fragmentation in the international
community and must strive to become an even
stronger and more respected platform for nations to
come together peacefully in order to find shared and
mutually beneficial sustainable solutions and, in so
doing, exercise the Organization’s inherent strength in
its convening power to the fullest.
That is what the United Nations is about. That is
what multilateralism is all about. And that is where
reformed multilateralism should be heading. That
should be one of the critical elements in the ongoing
discussions for a new agenda for peace and other ideas
under the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982).
Secondly, reformed multilateralism and a reformed
United Nations must be able to address effectively and
in an integrated and holistic manner the holy trinity
of key strategic goals — maintaining international
peace, security and stability, promoting sustainable
development and growth and preventing the violation,
abuse and disregard of universal human rights, while
reinforcing human security for all. To achieve that
trinity, it is absolutely essential that the United Nations
work across organizations and silos, linking the work
of the Security Council with that of the Economic
and Social Council, the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission, and all specialized
agencies and other bodies within the United Nations

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

system. Neither peace and security nor stability will
be sustainable if there is poverty and social discord,
or vice versa. If we do not have the timely attainment
of the Sustainable Development Goals, it will not be
practical to talk about attaining sustainable peace,
security or stability.
Added to that is the need to more effectively
integrate the ideas of key organizations and institutions
outside the United Nations system, especially the
international financial institutions and the Group of 20,
for example, as well as initiatives of key stakeholders,
including civil-society organizations, and the input and
participation of women and young people. All those
ideas should be incorporated into ongoing discussions
of a more networked United Nations system, along
with greater early-warning capabilities and strategic
foresight for the United Nations, including within the
context of the Summit of the Future, to be held in 2024.
Thirdly, and finally, our reform of multilateralism
and the United Nations must increasingly strengthen
the all-important global-regional interface and
partnership, whether in dealing with key global
challenges that have specific regional consequences,
such as global agreements related to climate financing
and development financing, or with regional problems
that may have spillover effects in the global arena.
That is because the voices of regions and their peoples,
States and organizations matter. That is also why the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations is represented
among today’s speakers. That is why it continues to
promote a close partnership with the United Nations
and why we hope that a more robust engagement
between the United Nations and regional organizations
will be realized so that regional and local wisdom
can be accessed and utilized as part of a body of best
practices that could be useful for other regions or even
the international community as a whole. It is our hope
that as the United Nations engages in multiple tracks
at international conferences over the next couple of
years, from universal health coverage to sustainable
development and from climate change to disaster relief,
the expertise of regional organizations and institutions
will be fully utilized. Such a global regional interface
will make solutions more sustainable and ensure that
they enjoy wider support, especially at the regional level.
In conclusion, an effective multilateral system,
with the United Nations at its core, is more essential
than ever and deserves our support more than ever. As
Thailand celebrates its seventy-sixth anniversary of its

22-7522627/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations membership and more than a century
of engagement in multilateral diplomacy, from the
Universal Postal Union of the nineteenth century to The
Hague conferences of the twentieth, our long-standing
commitment and support to multilateralism remain as
strong now as they were then, because multilateralism
and its most recent reincarnation in the United Nations
system remain important guarantors of the rights of
small States and a vital framework giving all States the
requisite diplomatic space to peacefully advance their
constructive interests in a mutually beneficial manner.
Is that not in the interests of humankind as a whole?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow us to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting to discuss
an issue of enormous importance, given the current
international situation.
We also thank your delegation for its efforts in
drafting the concept note circulated beforehand to
guide today’s discussion (see S/2022/880).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela firmly
believes that the world needs more multilateralism
and diplomacy, not less, and the United Nations has
a central and indisputable role to play in such efforts.
We understand multilateralism to be cooperative
action — the sum of all efforts made by each and
every member of the international community, without
exception or exclusion of any kind, to together address
our multiple, emerging and complex challenges, many
of which are common to all of us.
Among other things, the coronavirus disease
pandemic confirmed that we live in an increasingly
interconnected world, which means that we must
come together to bridge gaps, not widen or deepen
them. We must come together to strengthen solidarity,
expand international cooperation and recognize
that even amid the differences that might exist, only
through multilateralism will we be able to forge the
necessary consensus to together take the decisions and
champion the reforms that will enable us to overcome
the multifaceted crises we are dealing with and the
challenges that may arise in the future. Isolationism,
exceptionalism and unilateralism have no place
whatsoever in the twenty-first century. The United
Nations is an intergovernmental organization that
prioritizes the principle of the legal equality of States
28/43

14/12/2022

above all. The United Nations is not a mere club of friends
with similar ideologies. If that principle is understood,
embraced and practised in line with the diversity that
underpins our Organization, each national contribution
then becomes essential to achieving the goals that
prompted the establishment of the United Nations in
1945. Today the maintenance of international peace
and security must be a priority on our agenda. We
understand that there can be no development until
genuine and lasting peace is achieved in the world.
The crisis facing humankind affects every area of
life. It can be seen in issues related to the environment,
health, food, economics, finance and energy, and it has
significantly rolled back development gains. What is
even more serious is that today we are facing a crisis
of trust, leadership and values, which is weakening
multilateralism and threatening the very survival
of the human species. Solving that problem means
eliminating unilateralism. Instead, we must strengthen
and revitalize a genuinely effective, representative,
inclusive and participatory multilateralism. That will
not be possible without democratizing international
relations and strengthening the multipolar system,
grounded in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We therefore affirm with absolute
certainty that this is the path to a more peaceful and
prosperous world, in which all our peoples can live a
decent life and enjoy a future of peace and development.
We acknowledge that to make genuine progress that
benefits our peoples, we must correct the imbalances in
the global financial architecture and reform the Bretton
Woods institutions.
Perhaps the upcoming fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations Declaration for the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order can provide a unique
opportunity to improve coherence and consistency
within the international monetary, financial and
trade system. It might also enable us to put an end to
prevailing asymmetries that over time have perpetuated
the underdevelopment and dependency of our countries
in the South, especially at what is a critical moment
in our ability to achieve the timely realization of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals.
The United Nations is called on to play a crucial
role. It provides a platform with the greatest legitimacy
and representativeness for jointly addressing pressing
challenges and threats in a coordinated and determined
manner, using dialogue, understanding, mutual
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

respect, cooperation and solidarity. We want to take
this opportunity to reaffirm our full commitment to
the revitalization and strengthening of the role of the
United Nations in today’s world.
We agree with many of the statements made by
your delegation, Mr. President, in the concept note for
today’s important open debate. Indeed, today’s world is
not the same as it was 77 years ago. However, many of
the challenges we had back then still exist today. The
decolonization process has not been completed. Peace,
sustainable development and the full enjoyment of
human rights, as key pillars of our Organization, also
continue to evade the peoples of the United Nations.
Considering that, we believe that any proposal aimed
at making progress on challenges common to us all
must not only propose a holistic vision but also ensure
full and ongoing compliance with and respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter. They are the
basis of international law, and they are shields that
guard against the aggressions of those who have not
only created a systemic crisis in international relations
but have also deliberately undermined multilateralism,
the United Nations and everything they represent.
That is why we are sounding the alarm about the
continuing efforts of a handful of countries to impose
group unilateralism and a so-called international
rules-based order. Those rules are in fact unknown,
and therefore do not enjoy consensus or form part of
international law. Nor can they be seen as substitutes
for the genuine multilateralism that humankind needs.
In conclusion, we emphasize that it is up to us,
as representatives of our peoples and Governments,
to preserve the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the commitments undertaken
therein, to realize our peoples’ aspirations for peace,
security, sustainable development and human rights
and to ensure that the United Nations continues to be a
beacon of light in our shared efforts to make the world
better for all. For our part, we have the political will
and firm commitment to work actively, purposefully
and constructively to that end, in order to ensure that
the Organization will be able to adapt to the realities of
today’s world and to fulfil the commitments contained
in the preamble to its founding Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks India for convening this timely

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

debate on the theme of reformed multilateralism at
a time when it is clear that, despite its merit, our
system has fallen woefully short in responding to the
enormous threats facing us. These threats include
climate change, which especially affects those who are
most vulnerable; the area of health, given the pandemic
that has underscored the unequal distribution of our
resources; the uneven and insufficient progress towards
the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals,
with clear setbacks, as seen in Latin America and the
Caribbean; and a war that could not be prevented and
that we have failed to end, as we mourn its devastating
humanitarian consequences, the suffering it has caused
and the repercussions it has had, which extend far
beyond the invaded country of Ukraine.
Sadly, the aforementioned factors translate into a
decline in the confidence of the people of the world
in multilateralism. When the United Nations recently
commemorated its seventy-fifth anniversary, they
were still expressing through the voices of their youth
their hopes in the mission of the United Nations and
our work, but that is now spilling over into a dangerous
level of scepticism with regard to the goals that have
been set, a weakening of the principles and norms of the
Charter of the United Nations, democracy and human
rights, and damage to the collective will to cooperate
as a community and to come together as a majority to
achieve development. Faced with this, we cannot idly or
indifferently stand by.
In that context, the questions guiding this debate
(see S/2022/880) highlight the central issues that we
must address at this critical juncture for humankind so
that we can transform it into a time of achievements
and progress, not of collapse, as the SecretaryGeneral judiciously warns us in Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982).
Chile certainly does not have all the answers.
We listened very closely to members of the Security
Council, briefers and colleagues, but we would also like
to offer up several ideas.
Although it is hard to believe, beyond the crises
we are facing, particularly with regard to the peace
and security pillar, together with the necessary reform
process, we will have to reaffirm and uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter — international
law, human rights and international humanitarian
law — as the basis for additional efforts to respond to

22-7522629/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

new arising global challenges. That can no longer be
taken for granted and applies especially to countries
with greater stature and power, which lead by example.
The legitimacy of our system depends on it.
Security must be addressed in a multidimensional
manner, with the appropriate mechanisms, while
acknowledging, for example, that phenomena such as
climate change and extreme inequality and poverty
create or increase vulnerabilities that affect livelihoods
and weaken social cohesion and trust in institutions.
Therefore, the three pillars of the Organization are
important and mutually influence one another.
With regard to the role played by regional
mechanisms, we have seen in the Security Council
itself useful experiences of cooperation between
regional organizations, such as the African Union, with
the Council’s establishment of peacekeeping missions
in the region. Regional bodies can create an effective
environment for fostering prevention, peacebuilding
and agreements by providing greater knowledge of the
realities on the ground and valuable input for the work
of a global body.
Inclusion is a critical key to multilateral work today.
In maintaining the intergovernmental nature of the
Organization, the participation of stakeholders — for
example, members of civil society, the private sector
and academia — in our debates to provide information
and share their experiences is a must. It is critical to
involve youth more closely in our work, delegations
and processes in order to take advantage of their
perspectives and expertise. They are the ones who
will live in the future that we are struggling to build,
improve and even imagine. The cost of not doing so
will be to remain locked in our ivory towers, speaking
in incomprehensible jargon and having little knowledge
or understanding of those who will have to live and
deal with our legacy, which should be to ensure that our
Organization is vigorously relevant when it turns 100.
Accountability for serious crimes must be an
enshrined mechanism of the multilateral system
that applies to all so as to avoid the perpetration and
repetition of Charter violations that are encouraged
by impunity.
The Organization is the multilateral body par
excellence, and we are concerned that, for various
reasons, generally owing to budgetary limitations,
Member States cannot count on significant participation
or greater representation in it, which has a direct effect
30/43

14/12/2022

on the legitimacy of its discussions and decisions. That
is particularly the case concerning the composition
of the Security Council, the reform of which we have
been working towards for years, with practically no
progress. We know that we need a more representative,
responsible and democratic Council. Therefore, as part
of reformed multilateralism, Chile advocates for the
comprehensive reform of this organ, while updating its
working methods in order to make it more transparent
and accountable in its decision-making. That is key
to fostering confidence in the system, ownership of
its decisions and cooperation among all in the face of
common challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Ahmadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
India for convening this meeting. This is a timely open
debate because multilateralism is under threat at a time
when it is most needed.
Multilateralism continues to be the most successful
approach for tackling the challenges facing the
international community today. However, genuine
multilateralism must be founded on inclusiveness rather
than exclusion, collaboration rather than confrontation
and the rule of law instead of the rule of power. The
effective application of international law and strict
adherence to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations are two main pillars of multilateralism.
Yet the international community is plagued today by
double standards in the application of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
The United Nations authority and powers have been
repeatedly abused by certain Member States that regard
the United Nations system as their preferred tool for
exerting pressure on independent countries in pursuit
of their own illegitimate political agendas. While
the United States representative made a statement in
support of multilateralism and in defence of the Charter
in this Chamber, we saw the unmasked and true face of
the United States at the Economic and Social Council
meeting that took place right next door. In hypocritical
behaviour, the United States has launched a propaganda
and misinformation campaign against my country
and pursued an illegal request to deprive Iran of its
membership privileges as an elected member of the
Commission on the Status of Women, which Iran joined
via a transparent and democratic election process.
Regrettably, such a politically motivated decision
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

was carried out unlawfully by lawless and bullying
United Nations members who resorted to the rule of
power and placed maximum political pressure on the
Economic and Social Council’s independent members
to agree with and further its political agenda.

of the Charter of the United Nations, including respect
for the sovereign equality of States, non-interference
in their internal affairs, settling disputes by political
and diplomatic means and rejecting the threat or use
of force.

The exclusion of Iran from the Commission was yet
another stark indication of the return to unilateralism.
The United States action today was a blatant attack
on the rules-based foundation of the United Nations
system and a mockery of multilateralism. It has
breached the Charter, including the essential concept
of the sovereign equality of States in membership, with
meaningful and equal participation in all multilateral
forums, which has been regarded as the key foundation
of multilateralism and the United Nations system.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.

This is not the first time the United States has insulted
the United Nations system and multilateralism. Indeed,
the United States is well known for such violations of
the Charter and international law. Another detrimental
practice that demonstrates how the United States has
fought multilateralism is its withdrawal from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action in 2018. That deal was
a remarkable outcome of multilateralism, endorsed
by resolution 2231 (2015) and widely acknowledged
as a collaborative diplomatic achievement by the
international community. Furthermore, the United
States has openly avoided implementing the unanimous
judgment of the International Court of Justice
requesting the immediate removal of its sanctions. We
believe that when such illegal and aggressive unilateral
actions threaten multilateralism, we must defend it,
confront its challenges and promote its relevance and
effectiveness, as required by a rules-based international
order. The United Nations must take strong measures to
protect and promote multilateralism. It should not allow
the United States to pursue its unilateral, arrogant and
egocentric agenda indefinitely or take advantage of
loopholes in the norms and procedures of United Nations
organs. The international community should not allow
Member States to succumb to pressure from the United
States. Such resolve will provide multilateralism and
international law with essential support.
We continue to believe that the United Nations must
act as the main centre for the coordination of activities
because it is the foundation of the contemporary world
order and represents all sovereign Governments. Its
distinctive validity and exceptional capabilities are
needed more than ever. We call on all Member States
to adhere unwaveringly to the principles and purposes

Ms. Gohiwar Aryal (Nepal): I would like to begin
by thanking the Indian presidency for convening this
very timely debate. I also thank the briefers for their
comprehensive and insightful briefings this morning.
We are living through one of the most perilous
periods the world has seen since the end of the Second
World War. The peace and progress achieved since the
creation of the United Nations are in jeopardy due to the
complex interplay of geopolitics and parochial national
interests. The world is facing alarming common
challenges. Poorer and conflict-affected countries
have suffered the most, and the impacts are vastly
disproportionate. Addressing those problems requires
collective action by the international community in a
spirit of multilateralism.
If world history has taught us anything, it is that
rules-based multilateralism is crucial to addressing the
complex challenges of today’s interdependent world. We
therefore have no option other than to promote rulesbased, equitable and inclusive multilateralism to make
this world peaceful and prosperous. While there can be
no doubt that national interests are the top priority for
every nation, we must remember that pursuing national
interests to the detriment of our common global cause
does not pay.
Multilateralism, with the United Nations at its
core, is central to Nepal’s foreign policy and to our
efforts to maintain international peace and stability and
tackle global challenges. For small nations like ours,
the United Nations is a bulwark of sovereignty and a
driver of peace, progress and justice in the realm of
the international community. The United Nations must
prepare itself to remain relevant through a process of
continued reform that reflects the current landscapes
of geopolitics and geo-economics. That reform should
promote fairness, equality, inclusivity and justice
for all States, big or small, powerful or weak, rich or
poor. We need a strong and effective multilateralism
that promotes peace and security, human rights and
sustainable development alike, because they are
mutually reinforcing.

22-7522631/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nepal supports the ongoing efforts for
United Nations reform, including reform of the
Security Council and revitalization of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. It is
essential for all countries to show strong political will
in forging consensus on Security Council reform. We
need a broadly representative, democratic, transparent
and accountable Council to enhance the effectiveness
and legitimacy of the work of the United Nations.
However, we should prioritize enhancing the role of
the United Nations in the area of economic and social
development, with a view to achieving the Goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
mitigating the climate crisis, which are critical to
current as well as future generations.
In conclusion, whenever we have diverged from
rules-based multilateralism, we have been ravaged
by unprecedented perils and catastrophes. Reform
of the current multilateral system is indispensable to
strengthening global partnerships for international
peace, security and development. Let us unite for
a reform process that can lead to a multilateralism
capable of delivering enduring solutions to the global
problems of our time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I thank the briefers
for their presentations and the Indian presidency for
convening this meeting.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union.
Russia’s military aggression against a sovereign
neighbouring country has shaken the very foundations
on which the current international system stands. That
system is a hard-won achievement and the result of
two world wars, after which the world decided that a
“might makes right” attitude is in no one’s interests.
While aggressors like Russia are attempting to throw
the rules-based international order into disarray, Latvia
remains a strong supporter of effective multilateralism,
with the United Nations at its core. The international
community has taken concrete steps towards upholding
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and supporting the right of Ukraine to defend itself,
including through General Assembly resolutions.
The strong global response to that flagrant breach of
international norms sends a powerful message that
multilateralism and the international rules-based order
32/43

14/12/2022

must prevail. We created it together and we must defend
it together. The changing of borders by force has no
place in our twenty-first-century world.
Recent shocks such as Russia’s aggression and the
coronavirus disease pandemic have demonstrated that
certain aspects of the multilateral system urgently need
revisiting. When the United Nations was established,
world leaders conferred a particular responsibility
on five major global players for the preservation and
advancement of international peace and security.
Most regrettably, it is one of those five countries
that has chosen to utterly disregard the most basic
principles of the international system that it helped
to create. The current situation whereby one of the
permanent members of the Council is committing mass
atrocities in a neighbouring country and is able to veto
resolutions that would allow the Council to take action
is an oxymoron.
People all over the globe are watching as the
Security Council fails to act decisively. We cannot
expect faith in the United Nations system to last if the
Security Council’s hands are tied and its voices silenced.
Russia’s aggression proves that reform of the Security
Council is not just long overdue but more essential than
ever if we are to respond adequately to our current
and future challenges. We fully support the FrenchMexican initiative on veto restraint in cases of mass
atrocities, as well as the Accountability, Coherency
and Transparency (ACT) group’s code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The adoption
of the so-called veto initiative (resolution 76/262) has
contributed to efforts aimed at empowering the General
Assembly and ensuring that the United Nations is not
voiceless when the Council appears deadlocked. As
a member of the ACT group, Latvia believes that the
Council would better represent the interests of the
United Nations membership if we could demand more
accountability, legitimacy and transparency, including
regarding its working methods.
Furthermore, as a co-founder of the Group of Friends
of Accountability, Latvia is dedicated to strengthening
accountability, fighting impunity and gathering the
support of the international community for establishing
a special tribunal that will bring justice to Ukraine.
We are currently witnessing the most serious crimes
of international concern being committed in Ukraine,
with unimaginable consequences that should horrify
the international community. While the investigation
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

opened by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court regarding alleged atrocity crimes in Ukraine
proves the Court’s commitment to supporting the rulesbased international order, the Court is unable to exercise
jurisdiction over the crime of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine. To prevent impunity, that accountability gap
must be closed. We therefore believe that an ad hoc
special tribunal would be the most appropriate tool for
complementing the Court’s jurisdiction.
While making our strong contribution to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we
also need to address key areas such as gender equality,
climate change and the fight against disinformation as
crucial parts of effective multilateralism.
First, it is necessary to take a multi-stakeholder
approach. Latvia recognizes the strong link between
the equal participation of women and global security
and remains steadfast in its support for the women and
peace and security agenda. As a current member of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
Commission on the Status of Women and its Bureau and
a member-elect of the UN-Women Executive Board,
Latvia has been an active participant in international
efforts to promote gender equality.
Secondly, climate change is increasingly
becoming an international peace and security issue
that multilateralism has to address in order to remain
effective. Therefore, combating climate change will
continue to be a strategic priority in diplomacy for the
coming decades. We regret that in 2021 the Security
Council, with two votes against, failed to adopt a
draft resolution (S/2021/990) that would have been a
historic achievement (see S/PV.8926) by integrating
climate‑related security risk as a central component of
United Nations conflict‑prevention strategies.

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

view, multilateralism is — first and foremost — about
collective good faith efforts to achieve concrete goals.
It is possible only when actors are credible and their
words match their deeds.
The task ahead of us might seem daunting at times,
but respecting the Charter of the United Nations means
that we step up to defend it during times of instability.
We must reject any attempt to erase sovereign States
from the map or to use threats to bully the international
community. Our discussion today is an opportunity for
us to look deeper into our common interests deriving
from our common appreciation of the multilateral
system. In that regard, Latvia is presenting its candidacy
for a 2026–2027 term on the Security Council. It our
collective task and duty to strengthen the effectiveness
of our multilateral system so that it is ready to address
various security challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We thank India for convening this debate at a
precarious time for multilateralism. The establishment
and development of the United Nations system since
1945, through its ups and downs, have shown the critical
role of multilateralism. The achievements that the
international community has made in the past 77 years
on peace and security, development, human rights and
the rule of law could not have been possible without the
continued strengthening of multilateralism. History has
also taught us another lesson: whenever multilateralism
was ignored and unilateralism was allowed to take over,
the world witnessed more conflicts and instability.

Thirdly, the information space is increasingly
becoming a part of global peace and security.
Disinformation has become a global phenomenon used
to undermine a scientific approach to information, but
also to question the validity of the current international
order. Building resilience to disinformation by
supporting independent and pluralistic media, as well
as fostering media literacy, becomes increasingly
important in international peace and security efforts.

Indeed, our world today is facing increasingly
complex and cross-cutting challenges arising
from geopolitical tension, protectionism, complex
transnational threats, regional conflicts, climate change,
cybersecurity and rapid technological change. In that
context, the need for concerted global cooperation has
never been greater. There is no other way forward than
to uphold the inclusive and rules-based multilateral
system that we have today and transform it to respond
better to the current and emerging challenges.

We strongly believe that effective multilateralism
is about more than just interaction among States and
stakeholders. While dialogue has value in itself, in our

In ASEAN there is a strong consensus among
our members that multilateralism is not an option
but a necessity. On the occasion of the thirty-eighth

22-7522633/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

ASEAN Summit, held in Brunei Darussalam in
October 2021, our leaders issued a declaration on
upholding multilateralism. We are committed to
upholding the principles stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations and those of international law, which
is the indispensable foundation of a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. We continue to emphasize
the need for a committed multilateral approach in order
to respond to emerging opportunities and challenges
and to actively shape a rules-based regional architecture
that is capable of tackling pressing common regional
and global issues.
ASEAN members also share a commitment to
maintaining and promoting peace, security and stability
in our region, with the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
in Southeast Asia as one of the bedrocks, as well as to
the peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with
the universally recognized principles of international
law. In that regard, we welcome the fortieth anniversary
of the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes.
We also recognize the importance of building
and strengthening ASEAN’s partnerships with other
external partners, including regional and international
organizations, such as the United Nations, in order
to address global concerns, pursue shared goals and
complementary initiatives, narrow the development
gap, enhance subregional development and promote
sustainable development and inclusive growth for the
benefit of our peoples.
In that regard, we stress the importance of
the effective realization of the complementarities
between the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and
the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development
and
advancing
the
ASEANUnited Nations comprehensive partnership based on
the 2021–2025 Plan of Action to Implement the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations.
In order to do so and in the face of the challenges
I referred to, multilateralism today should be
re-energized. In that regard, we would like to emphasize
the following.
First, a reformed multilateralism must go hand in
hand with renewed commitment by the States Members
of the United Nations and the entire international
community to a multilateral approach, in accordance
with international law, including the United Nations
34/43

14/12/2022

Charter, in seeking collective solutions to our
common challenges.
Secondly, the multilateral system must be further
reformed, with concrete results. Many components of
the existing multilateral system are not sufficiently
equipped to meet the complex challenges of the
twenty-first century. They no longer reflect the new
global context.
With regard to the Security Council, we fully
support the reform of this United Nations organ in order
to make it more equitable, representative, democratic,
transparent, effective and efficient, with a view to better
responding to current and future global challenges.
Thirdly, the voice of relevant parties should be
adequately reflected in such a reformed multilateral
system. Developing countries should be better
represented and take greater part in the global
decision-making process. Regional organizations,
including ASEAN, can and should be inherent partners
in collective efforts to address global challenges. At a
broader level, it is important to promote an effective
multilateral-regional interface for cooperation on global
issues, particularly those that have implications for
regions, that will make best use of regional initiatives
and approaches.
Fourthly, our approach to multilateral issues
should be based on common principles that are
conducive to dialogue, cooperation and development.
Those include upholding international law, promoting
areas of mutual interest and avoiding actions that may
aggravate tensions.
The ASEAN way of consensus-building, sustained
constructive engagement, respect for the views of all
parties concerned and the fundamental principles of
international law, including respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, non-interference in
internal affairs and peaceful settlement of disputes, is
the best way to address common challenges.
Let me conclude by reiterating ASEAN’s
commitment to working closely together with other
Member States in preparing for successful outcomes in
the time to come on a number of important summits that
may help lay the foundation for a new era of successful
and reinvigorated multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Indian presidency
of the Security Council during this month for having
organized this open debate on the theme “A new
orientation for the reform of multilateralism.” I would
like to express the Kingdom of Morocco’s great
appreciation for the active and positive contribution of
India towards the maintenance of international peace
and security during its term on the Security Council in
2021 and 2022.
Today more than ever before, humankind is at a
turning point for its future. The challenges faced by
the international community require greater solidarity,
cooperation, justice and equality — the very principles
of multilateralism, to which Morocco remains
firmly committed.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development
Goals was a milestone for multilateralism and the
United Nations. Their implementation and realization
must continue to benefit from the continuing renewal
and revitalization of multilateralism, which is part and
parcel of the United Nations system, especially in order
to respond to the devastating effects of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and other current crises, such as
those in the areas of climate, energy, food and security.
In his report on Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
the Secretary-General discussed his vision and five-year
plan for renewed global cooperation and inclusive,
networked and effective multilateralism. Morocco
affirms its full support for Our Common Agenda,
which is a road map for revitalizing our Organization
so that it can continue to be ready to meet our current
challenges. We must all take the opportunity provided
by Our Common Agenda, in particular the Summit of
the Future, to reaffirm our tireless commitment to the
United Nations, as the global centre of multilateralism,
and to respect its founding principles, including the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Needless to say, reforming our Organization must
remain a priority so that it can continue to play its role
in a way that addresses the changes that this century
has brought and meets their challenges. It is therefore
unacceptable that 77 years after the establishment of
our Organization, Africa is the only continent that is
not represented among the permanent members of
the Security Council and yet is overrepresented in its
non-permanent category. It is in that context that we

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

call for a reformed Security Council that can enable
Africa to take its rightful place. In that regard, I want
to reiterate that Morocco fully supports the Common
African Position, the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration. We call for Africa’s fair and equitable
representation in both categories of seats, with at least
two permanent seats and five non-permanent seats,
in order to do justice to our continent. It would then
be up to Africa to select its representatives within a
reformed Security Council. In addition, we reaffirm
our support for the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly and for strengthening the Economic
and Social Council.
Multilateralism, collective action and shared
responsibility are key elements in the debate on
reforming the United Nations. To that end, Morocco
supports effective, inclusive, preventive and cooperative
multilateralism, which would promote greater solidarity
among Member States in order to implement the three
pillars of our Organization — peace and security,
development and human rights. Morocco advocates
for greater international and regional cooperation,
as well as effective multilateralism, to address the
multifaceted crises facing the international community.
Similarly, South-South cooperation, in particular
with our brother African countries, is a major pillar
of the foreign policy of the Kingdom of Morocco,
in accordance with the leadership of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI. We support multilateralism
that also promotes mutual respect and interreligious,
intercultural, intercivilizational, intergenerational and
intercontinental dialogue. At the ninth Global Forum
of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, which
took place in Fez, Morocco, on 22 and 23 November,
King Mohammed said,
“At this special time in history, as we fight
climate change and terrorism; as we seek to
promote sustainable development and ensure water,
energy and food security — indeed, development
in general — we must go back to that which is
paramount, that is, living together. There is really
no point in carrying out major projects if we cannot
go beyond this first link in the chain of living
together, for the sake of a single humankind, which
restores human beings to the centre of its concerns”.
Lastly, I would like to underscore that Morocco will
remain a strong partner in implementing the common
objectives outlined in the Charter of the United Nations
and for strengthening multilateralism. We also believe

22-7522635/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

that is the best way to chart a present and a future that
benefit us and future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Ms. Bakytbekkyzy (Kazakhstan): I commend the
presidency of India for focusing on a new orientation for
reformed multilateralism in order to address traditional
and unprecedented multifaceted crises, which are
further threat multipliers confronting us today.
In his statement to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session, in 2020, President Tokayev of
Kazakhstan stated that Member States have a moral
obligation to reflect on the paradigm of building a
new world, as we are at a make-or-break moment
for humankind (see A/75/PV.6). We must therefore
rally around a modern and reformed United Nations.
In the light of the shifting political and global
security landscape, we must endeavour to resolve
the critical questions of membership categories and
size, geographical representation, working methods,
transparency and the relationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Demonstrating
political will, finding common ground despite
differences and achieving momentum are therefore
essential if we are to move ahead. Multilateralism means
that individual and collective responsibility for people
and for the planet must take precedence over narrow
national perspectives, in accordance with international
treaties and obligations.
All our current crises are increasingly transnational.
A new orientation for multilateralism also implies
holistic, multidimensional and intersectoral action
across countries both by the United Nations and its
Member States, together with regional organizations
and all stakeholders, with their special expertise.
Their efforts should underscore the centrality of the
peace-security-development nexus, with the United
Nations delivering as one, in order to ensure coherence
and consistency in our operations and response. The
engagement of the private sector and civil society,
especially women, young people and other vulnerable
groups, is imperative for greater impact. Such
accountability also calls for greater global cooperation
in early-warning efforts, mediation, peaceful
negotiations, rapid-response mechanisms, peace
operations with clear mandates, qualified personnel,
the use of new technologies and predictable funding
under the umbrella of the United Nations.
36/43

14/12/2022

Efforts at the global level must be reinforced
nationally. In Kazakhstan, multilateralism has been
relevant and diverse on many fronts — nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation; the Astana
process on Syria reinforcing the United Nations
process in Geneva; humanitarian aid for and human
capacity-building in Afghanistan and support for
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action process.
The code of conduct in combating terrorism, the
proposed establishment of an international agency
for biological safety, advocacy for primary health
care as the foundation for World Health Organization
universal health coverage and the founding of the
Kazakhstan Agency for International Development are
further initiatives.
Kazakhstan is committed to strong political and
economic integration in Central Asia for greater regional
and global stability. To promote the regional approach
in ensuring multilateralism, my country has proposed
setting up a United Nations regional centre in Almaty
for the Sustainable Development Goals in Central Asia
and Afghanistan. The Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, initiated by
Kazakhstan, is turning into a full-fledged international
organization that contributes to global mediation and
peacemaking with the support of its 28 member States.
To support United Nations peacekeeping, we plan to
develop the Kazakhstan Peacekeeping Training Centre
and turn it into Central Asia’s regional training hub.
We are now ready to deploy quick-reaction forces and
unmanned aerial vehicle units next year, followed by
field hospital, military police and explosive ordnance
detection units in 2024.
The Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions, which has been held triennially in Astana since
2003 and is attended by the heads and representatives
of major faiths, has been promoting interfaith harmony,
globally as well as regionally. The seventh Congress,
held in September, saw the presence of His Holiness
Pope Francis, Sheikh Ahmad Muhammad Al-Tayyeb,
the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, Israel’s Ashkenazi Chief
Rabbi David Lau and other eminent spiritual leaders,
who gave messages focused on finding answers to our
current challenges.
In conclusion, my country pledges to strengthen
regional and global multilateralism to keep pace with
the changing geopolitical, social and economic realities,
at present and in the future.
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Grade Zacarias (Portugal): I would like
to commend India for convening this timely debate
and congratulate you, Sir, on your able presidency of
the Security Council. I would also like to extend our
gratitude to the President of the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General for their insightful statements
this morning.
Portugal strongly supports effective multilateralism.
We align ourselves with the statement made earlier on
behalf of the European Union, and we consider this
debate as a timely occasion for a thorough overview
of the challenges that multilateralism faces and for
acknowledging the need of reviewed impetus to our
common approach to global issues. The scope of the
challenges and the scale of the need have seldom been
greater, in a context that remains marked by the illegal
and unjustified aggression of Russia against Ukraine.
The path towards a reformed, more participatory
and inclusive multilateralism, which accelerates
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, is the very objective that underpins the report
of the Secretary-General, Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which we support. A new orientation for
a reformed multilateral system will profit from the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report, such as the enhancement of United Nations
engagement with non-State stakeholders, from regional
organizations to international financial institutions,
regional development banks, Parliaments, subnational
authorities, civil society and the private sector. That
would contribute to prioritizing and strengthening
the focus on prevention. More voices and perspectives
around the table increase the capacity to anticipate and
tackle global risks.
A global vision of security is essential, and the New
Agenda for Peace advocated by the Secretary-General
may be an important step in that direction — an agenda
focused on conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, addressing new and emerging risks
through holistic approaches. Furthermore, that would
also contribute to ensuring that a reformed multilateral
system would maintain human rights at its core, namely
by upholding their universality. And the Security
Council is one of the main stages where that approach
to multilateralism must be brought about. The Council
can do more and better, be more effective in its working

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

methods and systematically engage with a broader
range of actors, such as regional and subregional
organizations, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission.
As many have said before, Portugal agrees that
the current Council composition does not adequately
reflect the international community’s diversity or
today’s geopolitical reality. We have argued for the
increase of the number of both non-permanent and
permanent members, including, but not limited to,
India and Brazil, with better representation for Africa
in both categories. Other regions and specific groups
of countries also require better and more stable
representation. More opportunities must be given for
the participation of small- and medium-sized countries,
considering the principle of geographic balance. In
our view, the Council needs increased balance and
representation, which would boost its ability to face
the growing threats to international peace and security.
Portugal stands ready to participate in a constructive
way in this debate.
In conclusion, allow me to express my thanks for
the commitment of and remarkable work done by the
five outgoing non-permanent members of the Council:
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and Norway.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Hitti (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I should
like to congratulate India on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for December, and
I also commend Ghana on its active presidency last
month. On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this debate on a central
theme at a time when the rules-based multilateral
system continues to be put to the test.
Yet, despite its imperfections, it must remain the
framework of choice, as no country alone can deal
with the multitude of global, and often existential,
challenges facing us — armed conflicts, pandemics,
food insecurity, human rights violations and the climate
emergency, among many others. As the SecretaryGeneral reminded us in 2020 while we were in the
middle of the coronavirus disease pandemic, “It is not
enough to proclaim the virtues of multilateralism; we
must continue to show its added value. International
cooperation must adapt to changing times”.
Such international cooperation must be more agile,
effective and inclusive so that we can be better prepared

22-7522637/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

to respond to the global challenges that affect the
people of the world and ultimately prevent many more.
In that regard, the Charter of the United Nations must
remain the cornerstone of multilateralism. Lebanon
therefore advocates all forms of institutional reform
to increase the credibility of the United Nations and
reduce the often-legitimate feeling of mistrust vis-à-vis
international institutions. In that regard, I reaffirm
Lebanon’s support for the work of the SecretaryGeneral, as set out in his report, Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), as well as the New Agenda for Peace, to
adapt the United Nations to the new era.
As we have begun living in a multipolar world,
institutions of governance must be more representative
and democratic, which, of course, applies to the Security
Council. Lebanon therefore continues to support
reform for a balanced and more equitable Security
Council within the intergovernmental negotiations and
reaffirms its support for the position of the Group of
Arab States.
Lebanon has also endorsed several initiatives
aimed at strengthening transparency and accountability
with regard to the use of the veto. In that context, we
have supported two complementary initiatives — the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, which calls for not voting against
any credible draft resolution intended to prevent or
halt atrocity crimes, and the initiative by France and
Mexico on limiting the right of the veto in case of mass
atrocity crimes. This year, Lebanon also co-sponsored
General Assembly resolution 76/262, which establishes
a standing mandate for a General Assembly debate
when a veto is cast in the Security Council.
Finally, we must always ensure the harmonious
and consistent implementation of our international
obligations and to reject selective approaches. For
Lebanon, a small State and founding member of the
United Nations, multilateralism is a protective shield.
It was a lifeline for my country as it experienced past
conflicts and remains vital in the face of today’s crises.
An international order based on the primacy of the
rule of law cannot be optional but is necessary as a
vehicle for international peace, stability and security.
The time for lessons learned has passed. It is time to
act decisively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
38/43

14/12/2022

Mr. Fifield (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this debate on a topic, which has been
highlighted by recent events, on how to make
the Organization stronger, more effective and
more representative.
We can only solve our biggest problems together.
No one here needs reminding of the challenges that we
all face — climate change, food insecurity, sustainable
development and economic headwinds — all of which
is against the backdrop of increased geostrategic
competition and Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion
of Ukraine, which is causing immense human
suffering and has exacerbated existing fragilities in the
global economy.
We need a United Nations and other international
institutions that are fit for purpose and equipped to
address those challenges, as well as challenges yet
to emerge. The multilateral system must protect the
sovereign equality and the rights of small- and mediumsized countries like Australia. All countries must uphold
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Australia is in favour of reforming the Security
Council, which is central to preserving international
peace and security. Member States must have
confidence that the Council can respond effectively
to threats to and breaches of international peace and
security. The Council’s inability to respond to Russia’s
attack on Ukraine is a stark reminder of the need for
Security Council reform. The Council needs to be more
reflective of the world today, not the world of 1945.
We need greater representation from Asia, Africa and
Latin America.
The United Nations must be accountable to
Members, transparent, inclusive and led by high quality
individuals representative of all peoples and groups.
While we recognize that United Nations agencies
have made efforts to address and prevent sexual
exploitation, abuse and harassment, there is also room
for reforms to make United Nations workplaces safer
and more inclusive.
Central to Australia’s reform agenda and to any
refreshed multilateral system are the protection and
promotion of universal human rights and upholding the
multilateral human rights system. We must strengthen
accountability and transparency mechanisms if we
are to realize that key purpose of the United Nations.
Australia was an early proponent of United Nations
development system reform. We need a United Nations
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

development system that is fit for purpose, transparent,
accountable, effective, results-oriented and modern in
order to deliver on the commitments we all made under
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. There
have been some commendable gains, for example,
in providing more tailored support to emerging
economies — including small island developing
States, like those across the Pacific — through the
reinvigorated resident coordinator system.
The Summit of the Future in 2024 represents an
opportunity to work together towards a multilateral
system that ensures no one is left behind. It is an
opportunity we must take.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We congratulate India on its presidency of the Security
Council and wish it every success during its mandate.
We thank you, Sir, for convening this opening debate,
which is all the more pertinent in the light of the serious
and growing threats to international peace and security
and the progressive erosion of multilateralism.
The prevailing international order is unjust and
unsustainable and has caused multidimensional crises
to impact our planet, aggravated by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. It has deepened inequalities, social
exclusion and poverty. It has exacerbated regional
and international conflicts and worsened the crises
and challenges with which humankind was already
confronted. We are witnessing the proliferation of
acts of aggression and non-conventional wars, the
implementation of regime change policies and attempts
to re-impose a unipolar world order emanating from a
lack of knowledge or understanding of international
treaties, as well as the multiplication of unilateral
sanctions and many other frequent violations of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The use of unilateral coercive measures and punitive
actions against developing countries runs counter
to multilateralism itself. Such measures contravene
international law and should cease immediately.
Multilateralism and full respect for the principles
and norms of international law are the bases upon which
we can advance towards a democratic, fair and equitable
world where the sovereignty of States is respected. They
serve as a path to guarantee peaceful co-existence, to
preserve international peace and security and to find
sustainable solutions to systemic problems.

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

We reaffirm the importance of the role of the
United Nations as the principal bulwark against the
global threats that attempt to undermine multilateralism.
A profound reform of the Organization is urgently
needed. The General Assembly must be revitalized
and strengthened. It should be able to fully exercise
all functions conferred upon it by the Charter of the
United Nations without the interference of the Security
Council in its work or any of its Committees. There
needs to be a comprehensive reform of the Security
Council, with greater transparency and inclusiveness in
its work. The Council should be more democratic and
representative and should act without double standards
so as to preserve the credibility of the Organization.
The world needs solidarity, cooperation and
mutual respect, not embargoes or sanctions, if we
are to overcome the current crises. We need an
international order that is fair, democratic and equal
and that responds to the calls for peace of the peoples
of the United Nations. We reiterate Cuba’s commitment
to upholding multilateralism and the maintenance
of international peace and security on the basis of
unhindered respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Ms. Mocanu (Romania): My delegation echoes
previous speakers in thanking you, Sir, for convening
today’s debate.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of the European Union.
We deem it necessary to comment in our national
capacity, considering this debate to be most timely as
we approach the end of 2022. Not long after we seemed
to be on track to recover from the coronavirus disease
pandemic, it is now high time to take stock of what
needs to be reformed in the United Nations system,
given the wide range of challenges around the world.
We are witnessing a worsening security situation in
the Sahel region; the triple planetary crisis of climate
change, pollution and biodiversity loss; the shrinking
of space for the exercise of human rights and the
enjoyment of fundamental freedoms at the global level;
the unresolved Middle East peace process; the energy,
climate and financial crises; the increased use of new
technologies and weapons in conflict; and Russia’s
unjustified and illegal war against Ukraine and its
worldwide consequences.

22-7522639/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The maintenance of international peace and
security, the promotion of sustainable development
and the promotion and defence of human rights
and obligations to respect international treaties and
mutually agreed commitments based on international
law have been challenged throughout the entire year.
More important, we have become increasingly aware of
that fact and cannot walk away from the responsibility
to support the pillars of multilateral action.
The Charter of the United Nations is the basis of
our actions. The United Nations community has always
taken a firm stance in defending the Charter and its
principles whenever necessary. Unfortunately, there
are States that do not see the value of lessons learned.
Misusing the platform of the Security Council, the
General Assembly or any United Nations forum in
order to promote a false narrative is incompatible with
the principles of multilateralism and the international
rules-based order. We cannot allow impunity when
Russia has persistently promoted its narrative over
the past nine months with regard to its illegal brutal
invasion of Ukraine. On the contrary, accountability
should be in place.
In that vein, Romania supports an effective,
transparent, democratically anchored, representative
and accountable Security Council to respond to the
current realities and challenges. For those reasons,
Romania co-sponsored and strongly supported the socalled veto initiative resolution in the General Assembly
in April (resolution 76/262).
Both the intergovernmental negotiations and
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) provide us with
the opportunity to act now. We cannot afford to
give even an inch in our defence of the Charter of
the United Nations and the democratic values and
principles of multilateralism. Let me assure the Council
that Romania will do its utmost to actively contribute
to those debates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I would like to thank
India for convening this timely debate, as well as the
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly for their briefings.
We subscribe to the statement delivered by the
delegation of the European Union (EU) on behalf of the
EU and its member States earlier today.
40/43

14/12/2022

Meaningful multilateralism is the only credible
answer to the multiple multifaceted and interconnected
challenges of the contemporary world. It is also key
to maintaining the integrity of the Charter of the
United Nations — the backbone of the rules-based
international order. Acting collectively, we are better
equipped to work towards maintaining peace and
security, preventing war and resolving conflicts, as
well as promoting and protecting human rights. That
is also true with regard to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and providing development
assistance and humanitarian aid. Collective decisions
and coordinated actions are key in addressing new
and emerging challenges, including climate change,
health emergencies, food insecurity and hybrid threats
such as instrumentalized migration or information
manipulation and disinformation. In that light,
Lithuania strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
report, Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), including the
New Agenda for Peace, which aims at reinvigorating
multilateralism and enhancing the Organization’s
existing toolbox. We also welcome the ongoing work
towards more effective and adept peacekeeping, which
has been one of the concrete examples of successful
collective action by the United Nations.
Many today mentioned the need for new and
reformed multilateralism and multilateral institutions
that reflect the changed geopolitical realities, are
more transparent, legitimate and effective. Lithuania
maintains its long-standing position that we must work,
collectively, on Security Council reform in order to
make it reflect modern global challenges, and we must
act upon them more effectively, without further delay.
The unprovoked and brutal war against Ukraine
waged by Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, exposed clearly the structural and
procedural weaknesses of this organ mandated to
maintain international peace and security. With this
war, Russia not only cynically disregards its duties as
a permanent membership and flagrantly violates the
United Nations Charter, but also continues to block
the Security Council, as a whole, from implementing
its responsibilities.
The Council’s failure to live up to its own decisions
and to act swiftly and firmly in response to illegal
programmes of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
also raises concerns among many Member States.
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

The current structure of the Council must reflect
today’s geopolitical realities. Its membership must
include underrepresented regions, in particular Africa,
Asia, Latin America and the Eastern European regional
group in permanent and non-permanent categories. We
need more transparency and accountability. We need to
put a stop to abuse of veto power, in particular, in cases
of mass atrocities, as well as when a permanent member
is a party to a conflict.
Lithuania remains a strong believer in the
transformative power of collective action. We stand
ready to continue working together and maintain our
support and contributions towards more effective
multilateralism based on the principles of democracy,
human rights and the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): We thank the presidency
of India for convening today’s open debate.
The Security Council has the primary
responsibility, under the Charter of the United Nations,
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, the dramatic developments of the current year
have put in question the ability of the Security Council
to effectively fulfil its primary purpose by failing in
its attempts to pass Council resolutions to stop Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine, owing to the destructive
actions by the Russian Federation.
Today, as never before, it has become obvious that
there is a need for reinvigorated action to make sure
that the Council lives up to its raison d’être — the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
discussion in the framework of the intergovernmental
negotiations has run long, and Georgia has been
actively engaged in it. Without going into details on
the elements of Security Council reform, let me once
again underline the necessity of upholding the principle
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations in
general, and in Article 27 in particular, stating that in
a series of specific important decisions “a party to a
dispute shall abstain from voting”.
Back in 2008, Georgia also experienced the
inability of the Security Council to adequately address
Russia’s aggression against Georgia. In 2009, the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia was brazenly terminated by the veto cast by the
permanent member of the Security Council and a party

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

to the conflict, the Russian Federation, thus creating a
total vacuum of any international security presence in
the Russia-occupied territories of Georgia when it was
most needed. After years, Ukraine also fell victim to
the very same aggressor.
These blatant violations of fundamental norms
and principles of international law and this disregard
for the territorial integrity of sovereign States have
been a massive blow to European security and the
entire international order. Now, almost 15 years after
Russia’s full-scale military aggression against Georgia,
Russia is not fulfilling its international commitments
and continues to violate the European Union-mediated
12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement. Russia’s illegal
occupation of the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions
of Georgia continues to have a severe impact on the
population living therein and in areas adjacent to
the occupation line. Both regions remain heavily
militarized, with full-fledged Russian military bases.
Russia’s ongoing steps towards the de facto annexation
of those Georgian regions through gradually dragging
them into its military, political, economic, social and
legal system further aggravate the situation. Let me
also underline that to this very day, even international
human rights mechanisms are not allowed to enter the
occupied regions.
Let me recall the decision of the European Court
of Human Rights, which legally attested Russia’s
occupation and effective control over the Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia and found Russia
responsible for violations on the grounds of the norms
of international law, including a number of articles of
the European Convention on Human Rights.
Multilateralism works when the members of the
international community abide by common rules
and principles. In our view, a new orientation for
multilateralism means recommitting to ensuring a
peaceful world based on international law, with the
United Nations Charter at its core, better protection
of human rights and the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Only
by upholding the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law can we deliver
on our pledge to maintain peace and security and
pave the way for the realization of human rights and
sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.

22-7522641/43

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Nze (Nigeria): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important open
debate on the theme ‘‘New orientation for reformed
multilateralism’’ and to thank His Excellency
Mr. Jaishankar, India’s Minister for External Affairs, for
chairing the debate. We also thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, for their briefings.
Nigeria remains fully committed to a comprehensive
reform of the United Nations system that upholds the
principles, objectives and ideals of the Charter of the
United Nations for a fairer world based on justice,
equity and regional balance. It is pertinent to recall
that, over four decades after the inclusion on the
General Assembly agenda of equitable representation
in the Security Council, no meaningful progress has
been achieved, considering the current composition
of the Council, which has yet to reflect the current
geopolitical realities and emerging challenges, as well
as the interests of all constituent regions.
Despite calls by world leaders at various forums for
the urgent and comprehensive reform of the multilateral
structure, including the Security Council, nothing has
been done. During the high-level general debate at the
seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, more
than 70 world leaders again reiterated the urgent need
for Security Council reform.
Equitable regional representation is a desideratum
for a more functional and representative Council
that will reflect our current geopolitical realties. We
therefore remain unequivocal in reiterating Africa’s
demand for reform that will ensure Africa’s legitimate
right to fair and equitable representation in the Security
Council. African States offered a coherent, practical
and persuasive Council reform blueprint, which asserts
the right of our long-marginalized continent. We also
support the legitimate aspirations of other regions to be
fully represented in the Council.
Africa’s demand is legitimate, as espoused in the
Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration, which
call for the expansion in both the permanent and
non-permanent seats of the Security Council through
the allocation of no fewer than two permanent seats,
with all the concomitant privileges, including the right
of veto and two additional non-permanent seats. Africa
strongly believes that the veto should be abolished,
but so long as it exists, it should be extended to all
42/43

14/12/2022

members of the expanded permanent category of the
Security Council.
We are hopeful that the current realities will propel
Member States to review the process so as to rectify the
historical injustice done to the African continent. I am
persuaded that Member States wish to strengthen the
voice of underrepresented regions and groups in order
to ensure a fair, equitable and geographic distribution in
the Council. It is important that developing countries,
including African countries, be better represented on
the Security Council, bearing in mind that almost three
quarters of the Council’s agenda is devoted to African
issues. The African demand for full representation not
only is legitimate, but will also instil much-needed
values, restore confidence, enhance the legitimacy of
the work of the Security Council and contribute to the
promotion of international peace and security globally.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate two key
points. First, there is an urgent and growing need for the
negotiation process to be open, inclusive and transparent,
with webcasting, record-keeping and the application
of the rules of procedure. Secondly, we advocate for
a single consolidated text, preferably with attributions,
for the launch of text-based negotiations. That is
undoubtedly the best way to get to real negotiations and
avoid the simple repetition of statements in every set of
negotiations on the reform process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): Ukraine greatly
appreciates the initiative by India’s presidency to hold
today’s important debate, and we have taken note of
the briefings.
As is rightly pointed out in the concept note for
today’s debate (see S/2022/880), the world is not the
same as it was 77 years ago. It has changed dramatically,
as has the nature of its threats and challenges. In that
regard, we want to particularly underscore attempts
to undermine the credibility and efficacy of key
multilateral institutions from inside. I refer, first of
all, to the Security Council. One can hardly disagree
with another statement in the concept note, which is
that the composition of the Security Council is far from
reflecting the true diversity of the wider membership of
the United Nations. We can go even further and say that
the composition of the Council does not even reflect
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. The defunct entity of the Soviet Union is still
22-75226

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

present in the Charter despite being a thing of the past.
However, that does not mean that another entity can
occupy the permanent Soviet seat by circumventing the
necessary legal procedures. I would like to highlight
several points in that regard.
First, 77 years ago, it was agreed to vest five
Powers with a special status in return for their special
responsibility in maintaining international peace and
security. Events this year have made it crystal clear
that a system with five mutually dependent permanent
members does not work if one of the seats is occupied
by a violator that disrespects norms and neglects its
responsibility. Moreover, the aggression in question
started even earlier, in July 2014, but eight years
were not enough for the current multilateral system
to prevent an escalation to the level of a full-fledged
invasion. Many interesting ideas on the reform of
multilateralism that we heard today are worthy of
serious consideration. Special attention should be paid
to reform of the Security Council, and that brings me to
my second point.
A higher level of inclusivity should be coupled with
a stronger perception of responsibility. We are very
sympathetic to the aspirations of democratic and lawabiding nations for a specific position on a reformed
Council. Regional underrepresentation must also be

S/PV.9220 (Resumption 1)

overcome. At the same time, to cope with cases such as
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, the factors
that are immobilizing the Council must be removed.
We should take every possible political and legal action
to fix the situation whereby an aggressor misuses a
permanent seat. We also expect all members to remain
resolute in clearly differentiating between taking sides
and defending the Charter.
Thirdly, there must be zero tolerance for violations
and abuse. Let us call a spade a spade. Those who
deliberately create problems for the global security
order can never be part of the solution anywhere else.
They use their presence among decent and responsible
democratic nations only as an opportunity to legitimize
their violations and introduce new kinds of conditionality
as bargaining chips. That is why we are convinced that
we need strong multilateral institutions more than ever.
We need a strong and inclusive Security Council, where
all members are legitimate and responsible and reliable
contributors to safeguarding the rules- and valuesbased international order.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. Before adjourning the meeting, I
would especially like to thank the interpreters.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

22-7522643/43
