S/PV.7540

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7540th meeting

Thursday, 22 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. García Margallo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Judeh
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Marican
Mr. McCully
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-32892 (E)
*1532892*

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Ministers and
other distinguished representatives here today. Their
presence here is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Botswana, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, Guatemala,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Maldives,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sweden, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine
and Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite His Excellency
Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations,
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Nabil
Elaraby, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States; His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations; and Her Excellency Mrs. María
Rubiales de Chamorro, Vice-Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.

2/31

22/10/2015

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General.
The Deputy Secretary-General: The IsraeliPalestinian conflict has once again entered a dangerous
phase. The eruption of violence gripping the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as Israel
and Gaza, shows no signs of abating. Between 1 and
21 October, 47 Palestinians and 7 Israelis have been
killed, and more than 5,000 Palestinians and about
70 Israelis have been injured. We condemn all attacks
against Israelis and Palestinians alike in the strongest
terms. The recent wave of knife attacks and shootings
is particularly appalling. There can be no justification
for such despicable acts.
As he reported to the Council yesterday, the
Secretary-General travelled to Israel, Palestine and
Jordan, where he met with senior Israeli and Palestinian
officials and King Abdullah II. In all his exchanges,
he condemned and conveyed alarm about the upsurge
in attacks and violence over the past two weeks and
offered his deep condolences to the people of Israel
and Palestine. He also had moving meetings with
victims and their families on both sides. The SecretaryGeneral’s visit had a clear goal — to support collective
efforts to stop the violence, reduce the tensions and
incitement and begin to outline a political horizon that
can lead to lasting peace and security. President Abbas
and Prime Minister Netanyahu assured the SecretaryGeneral that they are working to curb the violence,
particularly through continued security coordination.
Yet while they are important, security measures alone
will not suffice.
Let us be clear. There is never any justification
whatsoever for murder. That should not stop us from
asking why the situation has deteriorated. I suggest
that this crisis would not have erupted if the Palestinian
people had any perception of hope of a viable Palestinian
State, if they had an economy that provided jobs and
opportunities, or if they had more control over their
security and the legal and administrative processes that
define their daily existence — in short, if they did not
still live under a stifling and humiliating occupation
that has lasted almost half a century. Instead, they
see the growth of illegal settlements in the occupied
West Bank, which undermine the very possibility of
a two-State solution and pose growing security risks
to all. They see the emergence of a parallel de facto

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settler community, with better infrastructure, services
and security than in Palestinian-populated areas. With
every passing day, their dream of real statehood is
becoming more elusive. Nowhere is the frustration and
anger at the current situation more evident than among
young people.
The current situation also understandably sharpens
a sense of fear among the Israeli population. Israeli
civilians see the recurrence of violence as a serious
threat to their personal security and that of their country.
They are also alarmed about signs that anti-Semitism
is on the rise globally. We must understand these
Israeli concerns. Israelis see growing attempts in the
international community at what they believe is aimed
at delegitimizing the State of Israel. When confronted
with a climate of terror, Israelis rightly expect their
authorities to enforce security.
Taken together, the failed peace initiatives and
the reluctance of leaders on both sides to take the bold
steps necessary to make progress will create a highly
combustible reality in which Israel’s security concerns
remain unmet and the Palestinian national struggle
risks taking on an ever-more violent dimension — and
this, in a region already plagued by violent religious
extremism.
The Secretary-General condemned the setting
ablaze of Joseph’s Tomb last week in the West Bank by
hundreds of Palestinians. This was a shocking act of
violence with the potential to lead to reprisals affecting
other holy sites. The sanctity of all holy sites must be
respected, especially so as to deny extremist elements
any opportunity to transform the current situation into
a religious conflict.
Tensions at the holy sites in the Old City of
Jerusalem continue to be a dangerous driver of the
current wave of violence. This year, during the holy
month of Ramadan — the most quiet in 10 years, by
the way — Jerusalem welcomed some 3 million visits
by Muslim worshippers from the West Bank, Gaza
and Jerusalem. However, extremists on all sides have
sought to disturb the historic status quo. Concerns
among Muslims that this is under threat have been
exacerbated by irresponsible incendiary statements.
These have come from a number of sources and
directions, reaching the point that many have become
convinced that the Israeli Government plans to violate
the historic status quo.

S/PV.7540

The Secretary-General welcomes Prime Minister
Netanyahu’s repeated assurances that Israel has no
intention of changing the historic status quo at the
Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount. But that message will
resonate only if swift action is taken on the ground that
demonstrates this public commitment. In this regard, we
welcome the Prime Minister’s decision to ban ministers
and Knesset members from visiting the Holy Sites. The
Secretary-General encourages Israel and Jordan, in
view of its special role as Custodian of the holy sites,
to act jointly and coordinate the necessary steps. This
would be in line with their previous understandings to
ensure that the historic status quo is preserved.
The shocking murders of the Dawabsha family in
July and the lack of progress in arresting the perpetrators
were another critical trigger of the current escalation.
This incident reflects an increasing sense of critical
exposure among Palestinians in the face of settler
violence and reinforces their feeling of injustice. It is
imperative that Israel take action to empower Palestinian
institutions to protect vulnerable communities. It must
vigorously address the perceived impunity for settler
violence by expediting investigations and prosecutions
of the Dawabsha family’s killers.
The third factor perpetuating the fragile situation
is the level of force used by Israeli security forces in
countering some of the violence. A number of incidents,
many caught on video and widely disseminated, call into
question the degree of response, including the apparent
disproportionate use of lethal force as a first resort. The
Secretary-General has reminded Israeli authorities that
live fire should be used only as a last resort in situations
of imminent threat of death or serious injury. It is their
duty to ensure a prompt and independent investigation
into incidents where use of force has resulted in death
or injury, and to ensure accountability where there is
evidence of wrongdoing. The Secretary-General is also
concerned that Israeli authorities have resumed punitive
demolitions, targeting the homes of perpetrators or
alleged perpetrators of attacks against Israeli civilians
and security forces.
Incitement is another factor significantly fueling
the situation. While leaders on both sides have tempered
their rhetoric of late, misleading and inflammatory
public statements continue to surface from all sides.
The vitriolic nature of the public discourse is alarming.
Every incident that takes place evokes impassioned
narratives and counter-narratives that feed a vicious
cycle of hatred and division.

15-328923/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Contrary to the shameful boasts by militant
Palestinian groups, including members of Hamas, there
is nothing “heroic” about the killing of an innocent man
and the serious injury of his wife and 2-year-old child
as they walked through Jerusalem’s Old City; or the
stabbing of a 65-year-old woman near a bus station in
Tel Aviv; or the killing of an Israeli couple while driving
with their four children. This is murder, full stop. Crimes
like these risk perpetuating the current climate of fear
and mistrust. We call on all stakeholders, including
the Palestinian leadership, to unequivocally condemn
the violence and stand up publicly to extremism and
incitement. Failure to do so on the part of both sides
leaves the door open for extremists to aggressively
promote their destructive agendas.
The first priority for all of us must be the
de-escalation of violence. Let me emphasize again, as
the Secretary-General did yesterday, that the violence
is rooted mainly in the absence of a genuine political
narrative and horizon. Each month we have conveyed to
the Council the reality on the ground that is the setting
of this latest outbreak. Efforts from all quarters must be
intensified to restore Palestinian and Israeli hope that
peace is still possible. We must urgently achieve real
progress towards a negotiated two-State solution.
To do so, we must see significant change of policies,
consistent with prior agreements, that will strengthen
the Palestinian institutions, economy and security. That
would help create the conditions for the parties to return
to meaningful negotiations. We need to hear Palestinian
leaders address sincerely Israelis’ legitimate security
concerns and see them take steps to end incitement. To
this end, the Middle East Quartet envoys must continue
their outreach to regional and international partners to
examine how they may contribute to a comprehensive
resolution of the conflict. The envoys are planning
visits to Israel and Palestine in the coming period.
In conclusion, Palestinians and Israelis deserve
a future free from the fear of repeated new rounds of
violence. Establishing the beginning of trust between
the parties is key to overcoming the painful legacy of
this conflict. The United Nations will continue to work
at the side of Israelis, Palestinians and international
partners to advance this crucial goal towards peace and
reconciliation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.

22/10/2015

Mr. Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by expressing Palestine’s deep appreciation to
the Kingdom of Spain for convening this debate, for the
seriousness it has accorded to the critical matter before
us, and for its able and responsible leadership of the
Security Council this month.
I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing. We also express our appreciation and
thanks to the Secretary-General and his entire team
for their efforts to contribute to a de-escalation of
the current dangerous situation and to restore focus
to the core issues and the imperative for a credible
political horizon that will bring an end to Israel’s
occupation of Palestinian land and denial of Palestinian
rights — an unjust and grave situation that continues
to threaten regional and international peace and
security. Undoubtedly, the rapid escalation of violence
on the ground is the direct result of the international
community’s failure to intervent and assume its
responsibilities.
The hopes and national aspirations of the
Palestinian people for a future of freedom, security and
peace, free from occupation, colonialism, humiliation
and injustice, are continuously under assault. The
Palestinian people — in particular our children — are
being targeted and killed by the Israeli occupation
forces. They are denied their fundamental right to life
because of their national and religious identity. Their
legitimate rejection of illegitimate occupation is being
met with killing and destruction.
As we meet today there is a grave escalation
on the ground, in particular in occupied Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, where incitement and provocation continues
in Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
including attacks and incitement by Israeli extremists
and officials against Palestinian civilians. We see this
day after day. Occupying forces and extremist settlers
and their militias have unleashed a wave of violence
and hatred against Palestinian civilians, in particular
young people.
Since the begging of this month, more than 50
Palestinians have been martyred, many killed by
extrajudicial execution, including at least 10 children.
More than 1,850 Palestinians have been injured, with
Israel, the occupying Power, using live ammunition
against unarmed children. Approximately 1,000
Palestinians have been detained by the Israeli occupying

I now give the floor to Mr. Malki.

4/31

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

forces, with homes demolished as part of collective
punishment.
Open, racist and irresponsible calls by Israeli
Ministers and senior officials concerning the need
to use lethal force against Palestinians, in particular
against children and young people, have served to
entrench a culture of hatred and impunity. Israeli
occupation forces, settlers and other Israelis know full
well that they will not be brought to account for killing
innocent, unarmed Palestinians.
Yet even in the face of grave threats to their human
security, dignity and very existence, the Palestinian
people remain determined to continue their just
struggle for freedom. They are unrelenting in their
demand for the realization of their inalienable right
to self-determination in their independent, sovereign
State, as all other free peoples around the world. That
objective is recognized and supported unanimously in
the international community.
For years — decades, in fact — we have come here
to the Council to warn against the illegal actions and
aggression by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people in the occupied State of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem. Despite the constant
deterioration of the situation and repeated setbacks
in the political process, we have maintained that the
Security Council must uphold its responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations and that it must
compel Israel to halt its violations. That is a fundamental
requirement for progress in the peace process aimed at
resolving the core issues and achieving a just, lasting
solution based on international law.
Unfortunately, the Council has shown that it is not
prepared to shoulder its responsibility to achieve peace
and security. Repeated calls by the League of Arab
States, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and Member States concerned,
including Council members, that the Council address
the explosive situation on the ground and end Israel’s
impunity in order to open the path for peace have
been to no avail. Instead, the Council has remained
paralysed. That will be to the grave detriment of the
Palestinian people, if not the entire region. This will
exacerbate the crisis. Peace and security remain further
distant with each passing day.
Our debate today must focus on the main source
of the current violence and the root causes of every
other round of violence, which is the continued Israeli

S/PV.7540

foreign occupation of Palestine, its illegitimate war
machine, its ongoing settlement activity, its blockade
and its oppression that denies Palestinians every right
enshrined in the Charter. We must also not underestimate
the living conditions under a barbaric, military, racist
occupation, which leads only to suffering, despair and
anger. Nevertheless, President Mahmoud Abbas and the
Palestinian leadership have been firmly committed to
peace. In return, Netanyahu shows only commitment to
colonialism and settler colonialism.
The events we are witnessing today prove once more
that achieving a just peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, along the pre-1967 borders, requires urgent
and effective intervention by the Security Council,
not just fine words and statements. We would remind
permanent and non-permanent States on the Council of
their duty to promote the cause of peace and security in
the world. All of us know what is required to put an end
to this insufferable situation. We know the measures
required. Rhetoric and temporary solutions are not
enough. The Security Council must emphasize the
world’s unanimity that peace can be achieved only by
ending Israeli occupation and the independence longyearned for by the Palestinian people — independence
in a State along the pre-1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It also cannot be achieved
without a just solution to the issue of Palestine refugees,
in line with United Nations resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Permanent occupation, temporary
solutions and merely managing the conflict will never
lead to peace and security.
Moreover, the Security Council has a legal
and moral responsibility to provide the defenceless
Palestinian people with protection for as long as the
occupation continues. And that includes the provisions
in the report of the Secretary-General on the matter.
There can be no justification for those who call for
security for the occupying Power while at the same
time they fail to call for or provide security for people
under occupation: the Palestinian people.
Israel, the occupying Power, is not only in
violation of its Fourth Geneva Convention obligations
to ensure the safety and well-being of the civilians
under its occupation; it is actually the source of
their insecurity and suffering. In such a situation, in
accordance with article 1 of the Convention and in line
with the responsibility to protect, the international
community must act to protect the civilian population
from the occupation’s aggression and war crimes.

15-328925/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Therefore, individually and collectively, States have
a responsibility to uphold and maintain respect for
international law — which places responsibility on
third parties to assist, directly or indirectly, in whatever
manner, to stop any illegal measures.
We urge all States to break any ties with
Governments that cooperate with the Israeli occupation.
Furthermore, there are measures that have led to a grave
deterioration in the situation on the ground, including
the burning of the Dawabshe family. We do not know
about the fate of others. Have they been detained or not?
Have they disappeared or not? We simply do not know.
There is an urgent need to label such groups — the
settler terrorist groups operating outside the law — as
terrorists. That has both legal and financial repercussions.
We recall that the Israeli Government has continued to
support, aid and give succour to such terrorist groups.
They have protected and embraced them and, indeed,
urged and incited such crimes. We must therefore work
collectively to bring the perpetrators of those crimes
and those who abet them to justice. There can be no real
protection without accountability.
The Security Council must immediately address the
grave situation in occupied East Al-Quds, including the
Old City. Israel, the occupying Power, must abide by its
obligations to maintain the historic status of Al-Quds,
particularly in Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the
holy Al-Aqsa Mosque. It is clear that Israel wishes to
maintain the status quo of the occupation and not the
status quo ante. That is unacceptable. It is unbearable,
will only cause the situation to deteriorate and will
have incalculable consequences. Preventing the Muslim
faithful from entering Al-Aqsa is indeed a breach of the
historic status quo. Setting time slots for Muslims to
enter the Mosque, in the morning or in the afternoon, is
a violation of the historic status quo. Setting a minimum
age for entry is also a violation. For the Israeli military
police to enter the mosque is a violation. To allow settler
groups to enter every morning is a provocation and a
violation. Prayer by such groups entering the Al-Aqsa
Mosque is a violation of the historic status quo.
Those are some of the many measures that have
been initiated and implemented by Israel. Israel states
that it does not wish to change the status quo, but it
has, indeed, already done so. The ongoing colonial
occupation status quo is completely different from that
which prevailed between 1967, when Israel occupied
East Jerusalem, until 2000, when Ariel Sharon visited

6/31

22/10/2015

the Al-Aqsa Mosque. It was after his visit that changes
began to take place, one after the other. Now, Israel is
making changes even as it claims that it does not wish
to change the status quo. It has changed the status quo.
We want Israel to explain to us what it means when
it refers to the Al-Aqsa status quo. What does historic
status quo ante mean? We call on States, in particular
Jordan, which has a special interest in East Jerusalem,
to look closely into the issue.
For months now, the Israeli Government has
been fuelling the fires of religious racism and hatred
by allowing provocations and entry into Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. We have warned Israel and the international
community that such acts, in addition to the punishment
meted out against the Muslim and Palestinian Christian
faithful, will, indeed, lead to religious strife. Such
warnings, nonetheless, have led to no improvement.
Israel continues to take the same measures. As I
mentioned, this morning, such settler extremist groups
were allowed to enter the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is
protected by Israeli security forces, at a time when
Muslims are not even allowed to be present — from 7.30
a.m. until 11 a.m. and from noon to 1.30 p.m. Muslim
faithful are now banned from entering the Mosque at
those times. They cannot enter the site; only Jews are
allowed to enter during those two time slots.
The placing of cement barriers in East Jerusalem
shows the ugly face of the occupation in that area. The
Security Council can, in no way, justify the fact that it
is standing on the sidelines, as we face this escalating
struggle that is outside our control. It is resulting in
religious strife, which is being fed by the current
extremist Israeli Government and its Prime Minister. At
any rate, no progress can be made towards peace on the
basis of the two-State solution, while Israel is, illegally
but effectively, changing the demographic facts on the
ground in occupied Palestinian land, including East
Jerusalem, by entrenching its occupation.
We urge the Security Council once again to
respond to the current crisis in order to save innocent
lives and to allow for the possibility of a just and lasting
peace. We also warn that concentrating on short-term
formulas in an attempt to deal with the symptoms of
the problem instead of its root cause will only cause
the situation to escalate and worsen. We commend all
efforts being made to refocus our energy on ending the
conflict and finding a solution, particularly, those being
made by France. We commend the wide-ranging calls
made by the members of the Security Council for it to

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

take up its duties. We welcome and commend the clear
declarations of support and participation in creating a
credible, political horizon for peace and justice.
Palestine is prepared, as always, to cooperate and
contribute to such efforts. Any attempt to abort such
efforts will fail and can only take us further away from a
just and lasting solution. On our side, we stress anew our
firm commitment to pursuingh the peaceful, political,
diplomatic and legal path towards the realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to reach a
just, comprehensive peace that achieves the legitimate,
national aspirations of our people, namely, to live in
security, peace and justice in our State, Palestine, with
East Al-Quds as its capital. We support efforts to find
a just solution to the issue of Palestinian refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(1948). The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to self-determination, are not open
to negotiation. They cannot in any way, shape or form
be subject to the mere goodwill of the occupying Power.
Furthermore, States cannot shirk their responsibility
to protect under international law under the pretext of
supporting dialogue between the parties.
The Security Council cannot, under any
circumstances, set aside its mandate as the fundamental
body responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. I would like to call on members of the
Security Council to visit the area as soon as possible,
in order to underline their role and identify the steps
that the Security Council should take in the coming
months. The continuing Israeli military occupation is
the source of the violence and of this historic injustice
being perpetrated against the Palestinian people. The
time has come for the international community to bring
about the only way to achieve peace by putting an end
to Israeli occupation and ushering in freedom and
independence for Palestinians.
The struggle of the Palestinian people for freedom,
justice and the right of return has been a permanent
item on the agenda of the United Nations since its
inception. It is the litmus test of the importance of the
very principles that underpin the Organization and the
entire international system. It is a test the international
community cannot fail.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): As Israel’s new ambassador to
the United Nations, I have been charged with a sacred

S/PV.7540

duty: to represent the people and the State of Israel
before the nations of the world.
Like people everywhere, the people of Israel seek
to live in peace and to see their children prosper. For
the Jewish people, who have suffered centuries of exile
and persecution, our dream can be summed up in the
words of our national anthem: “To live as a free people
in our land”.
Tragically, since the establishment of the State
of Israel, every Israeli in every generation has been
touched by war and by terror. My own father, Joseph
Danon, was severely wounded by terrorists while
protecting the Jordan valley during his reserve duty.
After sustaining critical head injuries and hearing loss,
he eventually passed away after a long and painful
struggle. This was a tragedy for me and for my family.
I have experienced at first hand the price of war. We all
hope and pray for peace with our neighbours, and we
will do all that we can to achieve this noble goal, but we
will never compromise the security of the Jewish State.
Today, I address this Chamber at a time of great
difficulty and pain in my country and for my people.
This is not how I envisioned my first address to the
Security Council. Over the past six weeks, a savage tide
of terror has swept over the streets of Israel, and yet, to
my disappointment, all I hear are calls to end the cycle
of violence. Let me make one thing clear — this is not a
cycle of violence. These are simply unprovoked attacks
against Israelis for no reason other than the fact that
they are Jews living in their historic homeland. Like any
country, Israel has the right and the obligation to defend
its citizens, and this is exactly what we are doing. Any
country — any country — whose people were being
attacked in the streets on a daily basis would act in the
exact same way.
Since Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year,
Israelis have endured a season of sorrow. Men, women
and children have been maimed and killed on the
streets of Israeli cities in broad daylight. Palestinian
terrorists have chosen Israeli victims at random, using
rifles and rocks, butcher’s knives, screwdrivers and
even two-ton vehicles to shed the blood of innocents.
Israelis today know that an attack can come at any
time, in any place, without warning and without mercy.
From Haifa to Beersheva, from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem,
Israelis walking through their own neighbourhoods
are constantly looking over their shoulder to see what

15-328927/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

might come. People are afraid to stop for coffee on the
way to work or even to take a public bus.
All of us here have families. Mothers and fathers
worry that their children could be knifed to death when
they leave the house, and children worry that their
parents will not make it home. This is the true meaning
of terror. When someone leaves home holding a kitchen
knife with the intention of killing another person — any
person — this stems from a deep hatred. When that
someone is a 13-year-old boy who stabs an Israeli boy
riding a bicycle 15 times — 15 times — this stems from
a culture of hate. Nelson Mandela once said, “No one
is born hating another person ... People must learn to
hate”.
Tragically, Palestinian children have been
receiving lessons in hatred from their leaders, in their
schools and on children’s television programmes.
A children’s programme was aired on the Palestine
Public Broadcasting Corporation media station called
“Palestine This Morning”, in which a young girl recited
a poem calling for the killing of Jews. The poem called
Jews “barbaric monkeys” and “the most evil among
creations,” and those who murdered “Allah’s pious
prophets”. The young girl concluded, “I do not fear
barbarity ... as long as I have my arm and my stones”.
This is Palestinian public television.
As we saw in this Chamber during last week’s
emergency meeting of the Security Council
(S/PV.7536), many seem to be confused about the cause
of the current escalation. The words of this young girl
hold the answer. An entire generation of Palestinian
youth is being brainwashed with bigotry, brought up to
glorify violence, and raised to dehumanize Jews. This
indoctrination poisons the minds of youth; evidence of
this is only a Google search away. All we need to do
is take a look at what is showing on Palestinian social
media — vicious cartoons showing brutal killings of
Israelis, instructional videos on how to commit a terror
attack in the most efficient way, even an animated clip
of the murder of Eitam and Na’ama Henkin — Israeli
parents who were killed in front of their children.
Since most Council members have not seen this clip,
let me tell them that a special effort was made to show
the fear and terror in the eyes of the Henkin children
who were sitting on the backseat of their car as they
watched their parents being murdered. It is no wonder
that, in the current wave of attacks, at least nine of the
attackers have been Palestinians under the age of 18.

8/31

22/10/2015

When children are taught hostility and hatred instead
of math and science, when teenagers are encouraged
to grab a knife instead of a book, when young people
are shown images of violence instead of a vision for
peace, then they too are victims. When we ignore this
deliberate corruption of the minds of children, we are
not part of the solution — we are part of the problem.
The history of my region demonstrates that hatred
starts with falsehood and incitement and ends with
violence. The spree of stabbings, shootings and stonings
we are now facing began with lies about the Temple
Mount. President Abbas and the Palestinian leadership
have repeatedly and systematically accused Israel of
trying to change the status quo. This inflammatory
allegation is false, and President Abbas knows it is false.
Yet this deliberate and malicious lie is told over and
over again. Not only is this conspiracy theory not true,
but it is also not new. Allow me to quote the following:
“We hereby announce ... that no one ... has any
intention of infringing the rights of Muslims to
the places that are holy to them ... Any attempt to
describe the desire of the Jews to pray at this holy
place ... as the creation of a strategic base for an
attack on the mosques of the Muslims is nothing
but the fruit of a fevered imagination or a malicious
libel.”
Do the words I have just read out sound familiar?
The statement they come from was not issued last week.
It was not even issued last year. It was made in 1928
by the National Committee of the Jews of the Land of
Israel. Even then, 20 years before the establishment of
the State of Israel, lies were spread about the Temple
Mount in order to incite violence against Jews. In
the violence that followed back then, 133 Jews were
massacred and hundreds more were injured.
Today, when President Abbas declares, “Israel
intends to make Al-Aqsa Jewish” and says, “We
welcome every drop of blood spilled in Jerusalem”, he
understands the consequences of his words. He knows
full well that they will lead to new waves of violence
and terror and that lives will be lost. Then as now, the
story is the same — same plot, same characters, same
ending. Actually, there is one major difference. In 1928,
the convenient explanations that we now hear so often
in this Chamber did not apply. There was no Israeli
presence on the Temple Mount. In 1928, there were
no settlements; there was no State of Israel; and there
were no excuses to sell to the international community.

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Whoever claims that Israeli actions and policies are the
reason for the violence needs to learn a lesson from
history.
The Palestinians are employing old tactics and
are trying to score easy victories without having to
negotiate. They are using the violence that they have
incited and instigated in order to manipulate the
international community. Instead of penalizing the
Palestinians, the international community rewards
them.
Israel is fully committed to the status quo. Under
the agreement, Muslims are free to visit and pray at
the compound at any time. Members of other religions,
including Jews and Christians, may only visit, and may
do so only on weekday mornings between 7 a.m. and
11 a.m. Israel has not only accepted that arrangement;
it is responsible for enforcing it. The facts speak for
themselves. Let me share some statistics with the
Council.
Every year, there are 3.5 million visits by Muslims,
who come to pray in the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and 80,000
non-Muslims visit the site, of whom only 12,000 are
Jews. The status quo on the Temple Mount is the only
guarantee of the freedom of religion in Jerusalem. We
have said it before and we will say it again — Israel will
not agree to an international presence on the Temple
Mount. If the international community wishes to be
constructive, it should focus on ending the incitement.
No nation represented in this Chamber would accept
the presence of international forces on its sovereign
territory. I would like to tell my colleague, the French
representative, that we know that his country wants to
see peace in our region. We too want peace, but the only
way to achieve peace is through direct talks between
the parties. That is the only way. It has proven so in the
past, and it is the only way that should be promoted.
The best way to reduce tensions in the region is to urge
President Abbas to accept Prime Minister Netanyahu’s
call to meet with him, here at the United Nations, in
Ramallah, in Jerusalem or anywhere else. It is the only
way to promote peace.
Israel opposes any change in the status quo on the
Temple Mount. The place where the status quo needs
to change is here at the United Nations. If the United
Nations is truly interested in calming tensions and
bringing peace to the region, it must change its default
settings. The United Nations must end its usual practice
of calling on both sides to show restraint, and state

S/PV.7540

clearly that there is one side that is instigating a wave of
terror. It must stop making excuses for the Palestinians
and start holding them accountable. It must demand that
Abbas cease his incitement and insist that he return to
the negotiating table. Only then, once the Palestinians
see that promoting violence will get them nowhere, will
the reality on the ground change and the prospects for
peace return.
Please allow me to conclude with a quote from the
Bible: “The Lord will give strength unto his people; the
Lord will bless his people with peace” (The Holy Bible,
Psalms, 29:11).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of the Kingdom of Spain.
My remarks will be in the following order: a brief
introduction, the peace process in the Middle East,
Syria, Daesh, Libya and Yemen. To begin, I wish to
make three points.
When I assumed the post of Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Spain in late 2011, the
Middle East was experiencing a period of unrest, yet
there still were prospects for hope and a window of
opportunity. In some cases, dramatic events had led
to successful political processes, but in many others
conflict intensified and new threats emerged, with
tragic humanitarian consequences.
What we have learned since 2011 is that diplomacy
and negotiation, when accompanied by determined
goodwill and perseverance, are effective instruments for
resolving conflict. One such example was the success
of the nuclear negotiations with Iran. The award of the
Nobel Peace Prize to the Tunisian National Dialogue
Quartet demonstrated once again the value of dialogue
to the international community. The conclusion is that
we must restore the spirit of cooperation and the will to
build mutual understanding, if we wish to put an end
to the major conflicts affecting the Middle East. That
calls for concerted action on the part of the international
community. To that end, as a priority measure, the
Council must act in unison.
Allow me to make a few observations on the peace
process in the Middle East, beginning with one in
particular, namely, that the viability of the two-State
solution is in serious jeopardy. In 2016, the coming year,
25 years will have passed since the historic Madrid
Peace Conference, where, for the first time, Israelis

15-328929/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Palestinians sat at the same table to negotiate. The
Madrid Conference was a major turning point. We
were no longer discussing the Arab-Israeli conflict, but
rather a peace process in the Middle East with prospects
and hope for making gradual progress towards the
possibility of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in
peace and security within internationally recognized
borders.
Twenty-five years after the Madrid Conference — a full
generation later — peace between Israelis and Palestinians
is still far from settled, and the path outlined by the
Madrid Conference and the Oslo accords is in danger
of abandonment. We find ourselves facing an alarming
outlook, including the exhaustion of the negotiation
path, the progressive loss of confidence in the viability
of the two-State solution and a worrisome upsurge of
violence.
Let me be very clear on the following. there are
only two solutions to the Middle East conflict: either
a single, binational State, or two States coexisting in
peace and security. I think that we all agree that the
creation of a binational State is not a viable solution. We
must therefore renew our support for and confidence
in the two-State solution. We must do so decisively
and swiftly, distinguishing what is urgent from what
is important. What is urgent is to put an end to the
tensions that are endangering the process. I have three
observations to make in that regard.
Among the factors that triggered the recent
escalation of violence and terrorism are troubling
elements of a religious nature. Therefore I believe
that the proposal of the French presidency, which is
intended to guarantee the maintenance of the status
quo of the Haram Al-Sharif and holy sites with the
most scrupulous respect and tolerance for the different
religious beliefs, is an initiative that we must all work
on.
Secondly, to defuse the current conflict, we also
need to facilitate an interreligious dialogue that
condemns the use of violence in the name of religion.
The situation cannont be allowed to become a war
of religions. Spain, my country, offers to host that
dialogue, which we believe to be absolutely essential
and, I stress, extraordinarily urgent.
Thirdly, the settlement policy in the occupied
territories is one of the major threats to the viability of
the two States. In order to make progress towards the
establishment of a Palestinian State — of which Gaza

10/31

22/10/2015

must necessarily be part — it is fundamental that there
be unity between the Palestinian political forces on the
basis of the principles of the Quartet.
Besides dealing with urgent and immediate
matters, we must also deal with what is important. The
persistence of the occupation, which leaves no horizon
for a political solution, generates frustration among
the Palestinian population. It perpetuates the risk of
violence and does not contribute to Israel’s security.
The unsustainability and instability of the status quo
become clear and demonstrate the cost of confining
oneself to conflict management. We must aspire to
solving the conflict, not managing it.
It urgent to restore hope to the Palestinian people
for the realization of their legitimate aspirations
to establish a State of their own. It is also urgent
to help Israel coexist with its neighbours in the
region in peace and with assurances of its security.
To achieve those ends, we must not fall into either
naïveté or fatalism. Peace is possible because peace is a
commitment and a vision. The path has been drawn, but
we lack the will, determination and political courage to
walk its course.
We are pleased that both parties, Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, have formally declared their
willingness to negotiate, but that willingness must
be translated into specific steps that can change the
situation on the ground and generate the necessary
confidence, which is a precondition to returning to the
negotiation table. These steps include compliance with
ongoing commitments in the framework of the Oslo
Accords.
The major issue is what we should do to relaunch
the peace process and reach a lasting solution. The
aforementioned Madrid Conference was a success
because it combined dialogue between the parties
with a multilateral path, that is, with the support
of an international architecture representing a
consensus of the international community at the time.
Among other things, it made it possible to launch the
Barcelona process — today known as the Union for the
Mediterranean — exactly 20 years ago.
That is why I believe that we need to redirect
our efforts to setting up an international structure
acceptable to the parties, one that could re-establish
a political horizon for the definitive solution of the
conflict. That architecture must involve the countries of
the region and draw up a road map that would optimize

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

possibile incentives for peacebuilding, such as a review
and update of the Arab Peace Initiative. We commend
ongoing efforts to start a new political process, such as
those being undertaken by Secretary of State Kerry at
this very moment. The expanded Quartet, which met
in New York this past September, should be a suitable
forum for the search for a solution.
The Security Council must fully assume its
responsibility in this context and promote measures
that help re-establish calm and security. The Council
should be able to pronounce itself and adopt a solid
and legitimate political framework. Any framework
agreed upon must include a tight timetable — I stress,
tight — for negotiations, and parameters based on
internationally accepted principles as a base for a
solution to the conflict. We must go beyond a simple
declaration of policy. I propose that our efforts
culminate in a new international peace conference — a
Madrid Two, an ambitious conference opening the path
to peace and concord and facilitating the conclusion of
a definitive accord between the parties that will put an
end to so many decades of conflict.
Now I shall move to comments on Syria.
It is also urgent that we be much more ambitious
and effective when we deal with the Syrian conflict.
Here, the main victims are the civilian population.
Our inability to reach an agreement to promote a
political solution to the conflict in Syria is leading
us to an accelerating series of initiatives that open
scenarios of great uncertainty for the region and
for the entire international community. The United
Nations — particularly the Security Council — must
play a key role in the solution to the conflict. It is Spain’s
opinion that we must continue working in accordance
with the following parameters.
First, we must support the plan of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura,
which allows for partial and comprehensive ceasefires
that in turn will make it possible to send humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian population and stem the flow of
refugees towards neighbouring countries and now also
towards Europe.
Second is unity in the fight against Daesh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The international
community must continue deepening this fight, in a
coordinated and collective fashion, through a response
that goes much farther than the military dimension.
International cooperation in areas such as the fight

S/PV.7540

agains the influx against foreign fighters, financial
resources and dealing with the Daesh phenomenon in
the media is particularly important when it comes to
putting an end to the barbarity and terror of Daesh.
Spain is fully commited and participates in that
collective effort in its various facets.
Third is the humanitarian area. The Security
Council must continue working on the different
initiatives for protection and support for the population
affected by the conflict. We are working with France
and the United Kingdom to promote an initiative that
will put an end to indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population by all parties to the conflict, including, in
particular, the use of barrel bombs. It is also important
to respond immediately to other humanitarian
requirements, specifically respect for medical neutrality
and humanitarian access to areas under siege. We are
working on that with Jordan and New Zealand.
Fourth is the systematic involvement of the most
heavily affected regional Powers, including Turkey,
Iran, Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
Fifth is to start a process of transition to an inclusive
Government with full executive powers, in which the
Syrian population feels fully represented and with
enough legitimacy to push for a political change in the
country. We will need, first, to ensure the restoration of
the rights and freedoms of the Syrians so as to create
conditions that will make it possible, in a second, later
phase, to move on to the political transition proper, with
the legalization of political parties and the holding of
free and fair elections.
Sixth, Syria will be whatever the Syrians decide
it will be, but there are principles that cannot be
renounced: the territorial integrity of the country, the
secular nature of the future regime, and maintaining
the structures of the present State so as to avoid the
mistakes of the past.
Seventh, we must work to achieve the participation
in the peace plan of the various parties to the conflict.
Their commitment is needed to pave the way for a
transition process in Syria.
On Lebanon, I wish to stress two ideas.
First, we must promote peace and stability in
the Middle East region, which calls for support and
solidarity for the countries that are suffering the most
direct impact of regional conflicts and that with great
generosity have welcomed the growing influx of

15-3289211/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refugees, in particular Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and
Egypt, among others.
Secondly, we are concerned at the situation in
that country, because in order to address the various
challenges facing the region and consolidate national
coexistence, it is vital to overcome the current
institutional paralysis. The international community’s
commitment to Lebanon is reflected in the support
provided by the provisional presence of the United
Nations, in which Spain participates as one of the major
contributors, with 566 troops.
Let me conclude by touching on the situation in
Yemen. The catastrophic humanitarian situation is
aggravated by the repugnant activities of terrorist
organizations in Yemen such as Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula and Daesh, which make the most
of the security vacuum created by the conflict. The
international community, in particular regional actors
and the parties themselves, must continue to work
to relaunch the inter-Yemeni political dialogue, so
as to achieve an inclusive and lasting solution that
will guarantee the stability, unity, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen.
In the quest for such a solution, the United Nations
must continue playing a leadership role. Unity among
all of us is indispensable in order to successfully
respond to this crisis. It is our hope that in the days
to come, the parties will initiate conversations in
good faith so as to lay the foundation for the peaceful
coexistence of all Yemenis in a post-conflict scenario.
To that end, a genuine, renewed commitment on the
part of the international community will be required
to support the authorities, civil society and the
people of Yemen as a whole in a process of political
transition, institution-strengthening, stabilization and
reconstruction.
Let me conclude by saying that in such situations,
the Security Council must be able to shoulder its
responsibilities and offer a way out that guarantees
international peace and security, because what is at
stake is the very credibility of the Council itself.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): This quarterly
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in

12/31

22/10/2015

the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
is being held at a time when the entire Middle East
region is grappling with increasing and unprecedented
tensions, upheavals and challenges that seriously not
only threaten international peace and security, but also
regional peace and security. Convinced of that truth,
this quarterly meeting is being held at the ministerial
level, as the State members of the Security Council
are aware of the seriousness of the situation in the
Middle East, especially in the occupied Palestinian
territories at its core, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif
and the occupied Al-Aqsa Mosque. They are convinced
of the need to work immediately to curb its potentially
dangerous consequences and to attempt to restore peace
and stability throughout the region, so as to pave the
way to a lasting solution to all of the challenges, threats
and tensions in the Middle East.
The last two months witnessed another dangerous
escalation by the Israeli occupying authorities in the
occupied West Bank in general, including acts of
aggression carried out by, or under the protection of,
Israel against Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in particular. This represents a continuing
and flagrant violation of a series of previous Security
Council resolutions that considered, firmly and clearly,
all the measures undertaken by the Israeli occupying
authorities in occupied East Jerusalem in its entirety
absolutely null and void, in conformity with the clear
and decisive recognition of the Security Council that
East Jerusalem in its entirety, including Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, is part of the
territories that were militarily occupied by Israel in
1967, in accordance with the norms of international law
and international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, this escalation and these Israeli acts
of aggression, which are dangerous and have been
condemned and rejected, in addition to the violations in
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, have resulted in the deterioration
of the situation, in a way that puts us on the verge of a
devastating religious war. These acts fuel and provoke
the sentiments of more than 1.5 billion Muslims
throughout the world, all the more so because the
occupied Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque are a place of worship for Muslims exclusively.
In addition, these acts of aggression have a devastating
impact on the opportunities to resume the negotiation
process between Palestinians and Israel aimed at
bringing about Israeli-Palestinian peace by means
of a solution based on the peace process established

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

under international terms of reference, resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative,
with all its elements.
The position of my country, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, led by his Majesty King Abdullah
II, is to carry out the two-State solution, put an end to
the occupation, create the independant Palestinian State
enjoying full sovereignty on its territories on the the
borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
find solutions to all the core questions — Al-Quds,
refugees, security, borders, water — in keeping with the
pillars I previously mentioned, and in such a way that
safeguards and achieves the high interests of Jordan,
which are related to all those issues, especially Al-Quds
and the refugees. This is the only solution that will help
us to avoid the dangers and violence that we see every
day, such as what we are all talking about concerning
the possible dictation of the one-State solution, which
the President referred to in his statement.
Because of the recent violations in the occupied
Palestinian territories committed by the Israeli
occupation authorities, or under their protection and
watch, in occupied East Jerusalem in general and the
violations against Al-Haram Al-Sharif/the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in particular, we have seen signals of a major
and widespread escalation in the situation, which
could spin out of the control of any party. Its impacts,
especially in terms of the violence, the killings and the
counter violence, could extend beyond the occupied
Palestinian territories in a way that would threaten
international peace and security.
I reiterate here Jordan’s principled position
condemning the targeting of civilians, regardless of
its motives and reasons. The Israeli Government must
renounce the tactics and arguments of its internal
coalitions, which are no longer secret to anyone. The
Government must adopt an approach to match its
repeated claims of commitment to peace with actions
and policies leading to peace, instead of pursuing its
policy of divisiveness and the flagrant contradiction
between what it says and what it does.
Peace will not be achieved if Israeli’s unjust
attacks on the Christian and Muslim holy sites in
occupied East Jerusalem continue. Peace will not
emerge from continued unilateral Israeli measures
aimed at prejudging the results of the negotiations
on essential issues, first and foremost of which is the
Israeli settlements policy. We will come no closer to

S/PV.7540

peace with the continuation and escalation of Israel’s
collective punishment against Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories and its continuation
in imposing closures, blockade, the erecting of
walls of separation, demolishing homes, killing of
innocents, the seizure of land and other measures
that violate international law, international human
rights and international legitimacy. Peace will not be
achieved if Israel remains wedded to those illusions
and attempts to convince the world that undertaking
symbolic and economic steps to improve the lives of
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, even though those measures are important,
will be an objective in themselves, not only a means
on the road to put an end to the Israeli occupation and
to establish an economy of an independent and fully
sovereign Palestinian State living in genuine peace
and security side by side, and with, the States of the
region and their peoples. Comprehensive Arab-Israeli
peace, in turn, will not be achieved without IsraeliPalestinian peace and a two-State solution. We will not
be able to effectively and sustainably fight terrorism or
extremism or triumph and see the values of the whole
of humankind prevail without Israeli-Palestinian peace
and Arab-Israeli peace.
Jordan remains committed, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein,
to achieving a permanent, fair and comprehensive
peace on the basis of international law and the agreed
terms of reference. That commitment is firm and
an internationally recognized strategic choice. Our
credibility within the framework of that commitment
does not need to be proved. Our commitment, duty
and responsibility with regard to the preservation
and protection of Muslim and Christian holy sites in
occupied East Jerusalem, with Al-Haram Al-Sharif/
Al-Aqsa Mosque at its very heart, fall within the
framework of the Hashemite protection of those holy
sites. That protection is assured by His Majesty King
Abdullah II, who is the guardian of those holy sites. His
commitment is unequalled.
When we say that the Israeli occupation authorities
continue and escalate their violations in the occupied
East Jerusalem and against the Islamic and Christian
holy sites, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa
Mosque, we are not exaggerating. Those ongoing,
increasing and dangerous violations, which have
worsened anew over the past two months and led to
deterioration in the situation in the occupied Palestinian

15-3289213/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

territories and has brought it to the brink of exploding,
violates the historic status quo of the Christian and
Muslim holy sites.
The Israeli Government claims that it preserves it,
as it is not in keeping with the Israeli commitments
pursuant to article 9 of the Israeli-Jordanian peace
agreement. It also runs counter to the legal obligations
of Israel as the occupying Power in keeping with the
provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, which are strengthened by
international resolutions adopted by United Nations
entities. We in Jordan, as always, will deal with these
Israeli acts of aggression, which are condemned and
rejected. If they continue, they will undermine the
peace process, its prospects and all of its achievements.
We have said it before and we will say it again: Jordan
uses all diplomatic and legal options available to it to
put an end to these brazen and irresponsible violations
of international law. I note that the diplomatic options
chosen by Jordan have in the past forced Israel at various
periods and stages to adopt a number of temporary
measures to calm the situation, and it did temporarily.
However, later, Israel has always continued its attempts
to modify the historical status quo in violation of all
understandings and agreements, which were agreed
by Israel. Jordan has therefore closely considered the
legal options to address the Israeli violations, and will
continue to proceed in that direction with the aim of
putting an end to these violations, protect Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque, and ensure that Israel
respect its international legal commitments.
We also ask the Council to assume its responsibilities
in this regard, because these violations committed
by the Israeli occupation and the situation, which
are universally condemned, represent a real threat
to international peace and security. We must adopt
protection measures to ensure that these condemned
aggressions are monitored and that they do not recur
once the historical status quo has been restored, as
opposed to the new situation being created on a daily
basis by the Israeli actions in the Islamic and Christian
holy sites. We must restore and preserve that historical
status quo, in both word and deed.
Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah II, has undertaken a number of measures
to protect the holy sites in Al-Quds. The King has a
crucial role to play with regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and to the Islamic and Christian holy sites within the

14/31

22/10/2015

framework of the historic Hashemite protection of the
holy sites, which must be strengthened and supported
at the Arab-Islamic level through words, deeds and
various measures. Israeli occupation aggression and
schemes in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and against the holy
sites, especially Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque,
cannot be successfully and comprehensively challenged
except through collective, coordinated, comprehensive
and harmonized Arab, Islamic and international efforts
that effectively utilize the available measures to deter
Israeli aggression against the holy sites. These measures
should be strengthened, especially with respect to the
historical Hashemite protection and the protection
afforded by His Majesty the King to the holy sites. We
need to promote the role and work of the Islamic waqfs,
which are part and parcel the prerogative of the Waqf
Ministry.
The topic of our meeting is “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question”. I
would now like to touch upon Syria, where the situation
is deteriorating.
We have all been witness to a number of alarming
trends. The impact of the deteriorating situation has
gone beyond Syria and its immediate neighbours to
be felt internationally. I refer to the Syrian displaced
and asylum-seekers, who no longer limit themselves to
seeking refuge in neighbouring States. Jordan is among
those States that have welcomed a growing number of
Syrian refugees, who now number 1.5 million in Jordan,
some of whom are officially registerted as refugees and
some are not. That is a burden on our budget and costs
us billions of dollars at a time when my country is facing
huge economic challenges as a result, in great part, of
the very difficult situation in the Middle East. We are
sharing our very limited resources with our brothers and
sisters and making our infrastructure available to them,
on behalf of humankind as a whole, but our capacities
are overstretched. The international community should
help us in bearing this very heavy burden. Criminal
gangs and terrorists continue to control vast stretches
of territory in Syria, which of course constitutes a very
significant threat to that brotherly country.
We in Jordan reiterate our firm belief, as we have
over the past five years, that a comprehensive diplomatic
solution is the only solution to this crisis. Such a
political solution, based on the decisions of the Geneva
I Conference on Syria and supported by the whole
world, must be comprehensive. It must be inclusive and
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people, the outcome

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of agreement among all components of Syria, and
lead to transition to a new political realitydesired by
the Syrian people. It must enable us to put an end to
terrorism, which is also an objective we all agree upon.
It should restore stability and security throughout Syria,
allowing for voluntary return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to their cities, towns and villages.
And it must preserve the territorial integrity of Syria
and its political independence. We therefore renew our
continued support to all efforts to open the door to a
new comprehensive political solution.
I reiterate my country’s support to efforts aimed
at confronting and defeating terrorism in brotherly
Iraq. I emphasize that our victory in that regard
hinges quite organically on our efforts to combat and
eliminate terrorism in Syria and requires a unified,
comprehensive and coordinated approach from all us
to fight terrorism in those two brotherly countries and
the region as a whole. Terrorism is now a major and
immediate threat and is no longer a challenge faced by
any single country. It is a spreading scourge leading
to violence, hatred, division and rejection of others.
Today gangs of terrorists and criminals are spreading
and extending in various forms and manifestations
and have become a threat to international peace and
security. Terrorism exploits and distorts the very noble
Muslim religion to serve its own callous interests. As
His Majesty King Abdullah has said,
“The war against those terrorism gangs and
mavericks of this era is above all that of Arabs and
Muslims before any other, and we do wage it to
defend our great religion, our noble civilization and
to preserve peace and security in our States and for
our peoples.”
My country’s position concerning the ongoing
crises in Libya and the situation in brotherly Yemen
and efforts to restore legality, of which we are part, is
well known, and I will distribute it in the full text of my
written statement. But I would just like to emphasize
that the political process in Libya should continue.
We urge all states and parties to abide by the results
of the Skhirat agreement and the need for all to sign
this agreement, which ensures stable peace for Libya.
As far as Yemen is concerned, we endorse a political
path that underscores the legality of the Government
and presidency of that country.

S/PV.7540

the occupied Palestinian territories, and the ongoing
and escalating Israeli violations in East Jerusalem and
its holy sites, require the Council to act and assume
its responsibilities, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations, to manage and resolve the crisis and
prevent further escalation.
Mr. McCully (New Zealand): It is with a sense of
dismay that we address the Council today on the lack
of progress in relations between Israel and Palestine
and the violence that has raged there in the past few
weeks. For the nine and a half months we have been
non-permanent members of the Council, we have made
clear New Zealand’s view that concerted Council action
is required to jump-start the direct talks between
Israelis and Palestinians that are the only means by
which a durable solution can be found.
Over recent months, we have been concerned to
hear the ongoing repetition of a defeatist narrative that
is in danger of becoming self-fulfilling: “The conditions
are not right; the parties are not ready”. But if the
conditions are not right for direct talks, then surely it is
the Council’s role to try to create the right conditions. If
the parties are not ready, then surely the Council should
tell them to get ready, help them get ready and give
them a time frame within which to be ready.
No one can excuse the violence that has taken
place, but we should understand that it is at least in
part a result of a failure of the diplomatic or political
process. While those guilty of acts of violence must
take responsibility for them and be held to account, the
Council must take responsibility for the failure of the
diplomatic and political process and move to resolve it.
We therefore welcome the opportunity for the
Security Council to focus on this matter today, and
hope that the Council can find a way to extend greater
protection to those under threat of violence, and hope
to those who currently have none. Ultimately, the
Council will be judged not by the quality of the words
that are spoken around this table, but by the quality
of the actions that follow. What actions should the
Council take in relation to the question of Palestine in
the circumstances that confront us today?
First, we must clearly and unequivocally call for
a cessation of the violence and for the leaders of all
parties to use all of their authority to end it.

Finally, I reiterate that the very dangerous and
unprecedented situation in our region, especially in

15-3289215/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Secondly, we should restate the unambiguous
commitment of the Council to a two-State solution as
the only acceptable basis for sustainable peace.
Thirdly, we should be clear that a sustainable
solution can be achieved only through direct talks
between the parties, supported by key stakeholders,
including the Council.
Fourthly, if the parties are not ready and the
conditions not right for those direct talks today, then
the Council should mandate a course of action allowing
the parties to get ready and making the conditions right
for those talks to commence within a realistic but early
time frame.
My country strongly welcomes the very clear signal
sent by the Secretary-General in undertaking his visit to
the region this week. We believe that the Council must
also send its own clear signal to the parties, to their
neighbours and close friends and to the international
community. This is a time to focus on what can be
achieved, rather than to lament what cannot.
Since joining the Council, we have been clear that
we will work cooperatively with other Council members
to advance any constructive proposals in relation to the
Middle East peace process. It has been six long years
since the Council adopted a formal resolution on the
matter. The events of recent weeks cry out for action.
While we remain ready to support any other reasonable
proposals for progress, we will, over the coming days,
share with colleagues the text of a draft resolution
giving effect to the four steps that I have just outlined.
We do so in the hope that the draft resolution will at
least stimulate a level of debate and engagement that
will enable the Council to chart a way forward.
New Zealand is pleased to note the increasing level
of activity by the Quartet. We are especially pleased to
see the Quartet moving to engage the leadership of Arab
nations through the so-called Quartet-plus format. We
see that format as being the appropriate vehicle through
which the Council can mandate the necessary actions
and receive regular reports of progress. It may be that a
parameters resolution will be required in the early part
of next year.
We appreciate the fact that, over time, the Middle
East peace process has absorbed the energy and attention
of many good people. In particular, we admire the huge
energy and commitment brought to the topic by United
States Secretary of State John Kerry. We hope that the

16/31

22/10/2015

efforts of the Council will help create a space in which
the diplomatic leadership of Secretary Kerry and others
might succeed. If there is one lesson we can learn from
previous attempts to resolve this seemingly intractable
problem, it is that it will require the concerted support
of the entire international community for diplomacy to
find a solution. While no words from the Council will
themselves bring about a solution to the Palestinian
question, it is our duty today to find ways to stem the
violence and then to find a framework that creates
space for the diplomacy and political engagement that
are so seriously overdue.
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin
by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General for his
presence today. We also commend the initiative of the
Spanish presidency of the Security Council, because
we know that the Middle East is passing through a very
dangerous period, not only for the subregion but for
humankind as a whole.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The situation in the Middle East, in particular in
Palestine and its occupied territories, is a matter of
deep concern for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The recent wave of violence that has lashed the
occupied territories for the past 19 days has left more
than 53 dead and thousands wounded. That cannot be
interpreted in isolation. It is the result of the prolonged
illegal occupation for almost 60 years that has denied
the Palestinian people their human rights and the right
to self-determination as a free and independent country.
I especially welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine at this meeting.
We also welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
during his recent visit to Palestine and Israel aimed at
persuading the parties to put an end to violence in the
occupied territories.
I will pause here to make a clarification. Language
is important. If we look at the agenda item of today’s
meeting — “The situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question” — what we face in Palestine
is no longer a “question”. We should be speaking of
the tragedy of Palestine, because for seven decades
the Palestinian people have faced terrorist assaults,

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

massacres and the complete denial of the human rights
of men, women, children and the elderly.
A conflict, as we have indicated on other occasions
in this Chamber, presupposes equality between the
parties. But we cannot equate victims with those who
victimize them. That is not correct. We need to clarify
our language. However, we appreciate the efforts of
the Secretary-General. And we believe it is necessary,
as has been said before, for the Security Council to
visit the region so as to reaffirm the responsibilty of
the Organization and promote of a political solution
to the conflict, which has become a permanent act of
aggression by the State of Israel against the people of
Palestine and even, I dare say, against its own people.
We are certain that the great majority of the Israeli
people yearn for a permanent peace. My country is
aghast at the historic level of violence and damage
that Israel has caused the Palestinian people, who find
themselves without due international protection. We
echo the request by the Palestinian delegation for the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibility in this
situation, all the more so now that the population of
Israel has begun to take up arms to create paramilitary
militias that will exacerbate the conflict.
Over the course of seven decades, the toll has been
42 massacres and hundreds of thousands of people
killed. We must speak clearly and firmly on that
point. Throughout the 70 years of the existence of the
United Nations, the people of Palestine have faced a
continuous state of complete lack of respect for their
most fundamental rights. It is unfortunate that, ever
since the Organization was established, no political
solution to that bloody conflict has been found. That is a
subject of frustration for the Organization, and no doubt
for the international community as a whole. Israel’s
systematic policy of denying the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination and the existence of their
own sovereign State has created the conditions under
which extremism and violence win over the civilian
population, especially young people. The deliberate
intention of the State of Israel to impede the success
of every attempt to negotiate a firm and lasting peace
should capture the attention of the entire international
community. The occupying Power generates brutal
cycles of violence in order to justify its oppression
and control of the territory in a permanent process
of colonization. In just 10 years, from 2004 to 2014,
Israel’s military spending has been almost €110 billion.
I do not know whether the representative of Israel, in the

S/PV.7540

statement he made earlier, was referring to the amount
spent to fight defenceless children. This photograph
was taken just one day ago. Has the military spending
been devoted to fighting those children? Or perhaps to
flouting the rights of children, as members can see in
this other image.
One year after the military aggression against Gaza,
we must not forget the suffering of the victims of the
ill-named Operation Protective Edge, which, according
to information in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/20l5/677), led to the death of 551 children out of a
total of 2,251 victims altogether. That paints a picture
of war crimes committed by the occupying Power and
demands international punishment for the perpetrators.
That was one year ago. Those are only a few images,
but we know that the international community was
horrified, and there are even more tragic and dreadful
images that, perhaps, we have not brought into this
Chamber because the day is far from over.
In Gaza, the ongoing crisis is the worst of the
past decade in humanitarian terms. Israel is hindering
the work of reconstruction by obstructing imports of
medicines and access to school supplies and sanitation
and farming equipment. This initiative, which has
depended on the support of the international community,
has been cut short by the occupying Power’s refusal
to relax its control of access to Gaza. Israel’s aim is
perfectly clear. It wants to divide the Palestinians and
render the existence of an independent State of Palestine
impossible. I cannot fail to mention the situation in
Palestine right now, in which more than 300 children
have been detained, in contravention of international
law and in violation of their human rights. Their
status as minors has been ignored and they have been
subjected to cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment
by the occupying Power. Where Palestinian children are
concerned, Israeli jails bring us back to humankind’s
darkest times, in which torture and persecution have
become the rule rather than the exception.
The acquiescent attitude that some States exhibit
vis-à-vis the Palestinian question should draw the
attention of the Council and the entire international
community. Every effort to resume political talks is
blocked by the hegemonic centre. It would appear
that the only path for Israel is colonizing Palestinian
territory and denying that nation its right to selfdetermination. The result, paradoxically, is that since
the Quartet began using its good offices to get peace
talks started, the Government of Israel has unleashed

15-3289217/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a new wave of oppression and widespread violence that
has blocked the path we need to a just and lasting peace.
We call on the Security Council to speak out
immediately, demand that Israel end this new cycle
of violence and put the Palestinian people under
international protection, in accordance with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the Council’s own resolution
904 (1994). Palestine’s appeal for the protection of
the lives of its citizens from the occupying Power’s
continued and systematic aggression must be heard.
In this context, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
rejects the use of the veto, which only promotes terror
through impunity. In the context of the Palestinian
tragedy, it is a veto of shame. Venezuela reaffirms its
full support for the right of the citizens of the State
of Palestine to self-determination and to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of both the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
On 30 September, we witnessed the raising of the
Palestinian flag as part of the Organization’s seventieth
anniversary celebrations, testifying to the commitment
of the majority of the Members of the United Nations
to the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
This organ should therefore act in accordance with the
decision and the voices of the majority of its members.
It is high time that the State of Palestine became a full
Member, and that the threat of a veto by one member
of the Security Council cease being used as a weapon
prolonging the suffering of the Palestinian people. It is
a veto of shame that encourages terror and impunity.
We support every initiative aimed at achieving a
lasting solution to this tragedy. It is vital that the Security
Council act urgently to advance the negotiations, in view
of the fact that the failure to resolve the issue is having
a serious impact on peace and stability in the Middle
East. We will give unreserved support to a resolution
aimed at contributing to a definitive solution to this
prolonged conflict that includes an immediate halt to
Israel’s occupation of the territory that historically
belongs to the Palestinian people, as well as an end to
its racially and religiously discriminatory policies and
efforts to crush the people of Palestine.
I cannot conclude without expressing, on behalf of
the President and people of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, our full support for the Russian Federation’s
action in Syria. We know that right now President Putin

18/31

22/10/2015

is giving the entire Western world a history lesson by
fighting terrorism directly, without double standards
or politically exploiting an issue as sensitive as that of
terrorist violence, but which other Governments have
used to ignore or strike down Governments that are not
useful to their imperialist purposes.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over today’s
meeting, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his
thorough briefing and the Foreign Ministers present for
joining us today.
Across Israel, Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza,
clouds of fear have settled in. In the context of the recent
violence, one Israeli told a reporter, “I just don’t feel safe
any more .... I watch to see who the people are around me.
I want to know who is behind me”. A young Palestinian
said, “[Y]ou are worried that someone will shout, ‘This
is an Arab, this is an Arab,’ and someone will shoot
without you doing anything.” An Israeli tenth-grader
said, “I’m petrified. Children are scared to leave the
house. They won’t go to the shop or walk around the
neighbourhood”. Across the city, a Palestinian father
said, “I don’t feel safe. The best strategy for me was
to keep the children home from school”. In Jerusalem,
shoppers and merchants are on edge. An Israeli
shopkeeper said that his customers came, bought
and fled, and that people are afraid. Said an Arab
shopkeeper in the Old City, “When I prepare the juice,
I am scared to cut the oranges in case someone sees me
with the knife and shoots me”.
That mutual fear risks worsening the already
dangerous cycle of violence. The United States is
deeply concerned, and condemns in the strongest
possible terms the terrorist attacks and the recent and
ongoing violence. The human suffering inflicted by
these acts has been grave and continues to deepen. We
mourn the loss of all life and continue to stress how
important it is that both parties condemn the violence
and avoid provocative statements that could further
inflame tensions. Both sides must exercise restraint.
There is growing frustration on all sides as the
prospect of reaching a two-State solution appears to be
diminishing. But that frustration is not a justification
for reprehensible acts of violence against civilians.
Stabbing innocent people as they go about their day
is not an acceptable way of expressing anything. It is,
as the Deputy Secretary-General just said, attempted
murder, full stop. Such attacks must be unequivocally

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

condemned in Israel, as they would be in any of our
countries. We support Israel’s right to defend its citizens,
and we mourn the senseless and deliberate taking
of innocent lives. We have also expressed our deep
concern about the deaths and injuries of Palestinians
due to live fire from Israeli security forces, and we have
urged Israel to take steps to prevent an escalation of
the violence. As always, it is critical that every possible
effort be made to guard against unnecessary loss of life,
protect the innocent, reduce tensions and restore calm.
We have also raised our heightened concern about
the increased Israeli settler violence against Palestinians
and their property in the West Bank. Most immediately,
we urge all sides to take affirmative steps to restore calm
and reduce tensions. In that regard, we welcome Israel
and Jordan’s commitment to maintaining the status quo
at the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, and we strongly
support the efforts of all sides to ensure that this status
quo is indeed maintained. Prime Minister Netanyahu
has publicly committed to that point.
In the longer term, we remain concerned that the
trends on the ground, including violence and settlement
and outpost activity, are dangerously imperiling
the viability of a two-State solution. As the Quartet
statement of 30 September said, the United States and
its partners support concrete steps to help stabilize
the situation, show meaningful progress towards a
two-State solution and restore hope. Together we must
continue to press for meaningful steps that will lay
the groundwork for achieving a negotiated two-State
solution. Significant policy advances, particularly in
Area C, will be critical to increasing the Palestinian
Authority’s ability to address key economic and
institutional challenges. These can be pursued while
respecting Israel’s legitimate security needs. Indeed,
they will enhance stability and security for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. We continue to believe that the best
way to reduce tension is to work towards a political
solution that will result in two States living side by
side in peace and security. Only through a solution
negotiated by the two sides will true peace and security
be achieved.
Secretary Kerry had a constructive meeting earlier
today with Prime Minister Netanyahu. They discussed
the security situation in Israel, the West Bank and the
region, as well as the situation on the Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount. A number of constructive proposals
were suggested, including steps that Israel could take
to reaffirm its continued commitment to maintaining

S/PV.7540

the status quo on the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount.
Both agreed that there is a need to stop incitement, to
reduce tension and to restore calm. The Secretary will
discuss this further when the Quartet Ministers meet
in Vienna tomorrow, and he will then travel to Jordan,
where he will meet separately with President Abbas
and King Abdullah on Saturday. In his meetings, the
Secretary will be encouraging efforts to restore calm
and bring an end to the violence.
We cannot discuss peace and security in the Middle
East and not address the horrific situation in Syria,
which has escalated dramatically since we gathered
for our last quarterly open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.7490). The repercussions of events there also
reverberate well beyond the region. After four and a half
years of war, Syrian civilians continue to endure barrel
bombs, extremist violence and widespread deprivations.
In September alone, the Syrian Network for Human
Rights reported that the Al-Assad regime dropped
1,715 barrel bombs on its own people, hitting mosques,
hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure. The
death toll over the course of the conflict has surpassed
250,000 people, and that figure does not include the
tens of thousands of missing Syrians. In addition, more
than 10 million Syrians are displaced.
The new Russian military offensive has worsened
an already dire situation. Around Aleppo and Homs,
Russian airstrikes are providing cover for an offensive
by Al-Assad’s forces, supplemented by Iranian and
Hizbullah fighters. According to the United Nations,
the new offensive has forced as many as 50,000 more
Syrians from their homes in the south-western districts
of Aleppo City, and another 35,000 from Hama. That
is 85,000 people newly displaced in a relatively short
period of time. Returning from southern Aleppo earlier
this week, Dr. Zedoun Al-Zoabi, head of the Union of
Syrian Medical Relief Organizations, said, “People are
scared to death. Everyone is on the move”.
Russia says that it is defending Syrians, but
according to credible Syrian observer groups Russian
strikes around Aleppo City have primarily struck
critical civilian infrastructure, including schools and
markets. At least 100 civilians have been killed by
these strikes to date, according to the Syrian Network
for Human Rights. The Russian offensive has also been
profoundly counterproductive, even in relation to its
stated goals, as it concentrates its firepower not on
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), but on

15-3289219/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/10/2015

groups that in many cases have taken huge casualties
fighting ISIL.

I appreciate the in-depth briefing given by Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson.

Russia says that it is targeting terrorists, but Russia
is in fact targeting groups and individuals opposed
to Al-Assad’s violent rule. Just yesterday, Reuter’s
reported a very credible study of Russian strikes, which
showed that 80 per cent of the targets that Russia has
hit are located outside of ISIL control. By attacking
non-extremist groups, Russia has boosted, perversely,
the relative strength of ISIL, which has taken advantage
of this campaign by seizing new territory in Rural
Aleppo. Since Russia began its strikes, the Syrian map
has shifted in ISIL’s favour. Civilians are on the move
in terror, and ISIL is on the move gaining ground.

We also associate ourselves with the statements to
be delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

Let me be clear. Aiding and abetting Al-Assad’s
military as it targets the very groups that we need to
bring to the negotiating table will only prolong the
conflict and push a political solution further from
reach. This conflict will not end until Syria is free of
Al-Assad. Supporting him now only ensures that, by the
time a political transition is negotiated, ISIL will only
be stronger — its recruitment having been bolstered
by the actions of Russia, Iran and the regime — and
the Syrian State will only be weaker, the country more
fragmented, and the heartbreak for families across the
country more widespread.
Peace in Syria cannot be secured overnight, any
more than the fear that clouds Jerusalem today will
immediately dissipate. We hope that tomorrow’s
meeting between Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister
Lavrov will result in Russia’s recommitting, in words
and in action, to a political solution for Syria based on
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). At the
same time, we call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to take every possible measure to reduce tension and
restore calm on the ground. Throughout the region, a
return to political dialogue represents the only real path
through these darks days of terror and fear.
Mr. Marican (Malaysia): On behalf of my
delegation, I thank you, Sir, for convening and chairing
this meeting. Malaysia highly values your presence
here today, which clearly demonstrates the importance
that Spain places on the subject of today’s open debate.
I wish to also warmly recognize the Foreign
Ministers of Jordan, New Zealand, Venezuela and
Palestine, and thank them for their presence here today.

20/31

The untiring efforts of the Secretary-General in his
recent visit to the Middle East region in a bid to steer
the parties towards peace and to return to meaningful
negotiations based on the two-State solution are highly
appreciated, by Malaysia in particular. We strongly
support the goal of the two-State solution. However,
we are increasingly becoming sceptical that the best
way to achieve that goal is only through direct bilateral
negotiations between Palestine and Israel. Twenty years
since Oslo, the possibility of achieving a two-State
solution based on direct bilateral negotiations appears
more remote than ever. The continuing expansion of
illegal Israeli settlements and the construction of the
illegal apartheid wall by Israel, as well as the increasing
radicalism on both sides, have perhaps irreparably
damaged any possibility of two States existing side by
side in peace and security.
Let us recall the history. In 1947, the Trustee Power
in the Middle East decided to refer the problematic
Palestine Mandate to the United Nations after it had
been severely tested and had grown weary of years of
fighting a bloody guerrilla war with Jewish paramilitary
organizations. These organizations perpetrated terror
and violence by targeting British interests and even
civilian infrastructure in their bid to achieve statehood.
The unwillingness of both sides, the Palestinians and
the Jews, to come to an agreement essentially forced
the Trustee Power to resort to the United Nations. In
response, the General Assembly subsequently decided
to partition the disputed land, creating the State of
Israel.
Now, over six decades later, in an ironic and tragic
twist of logic, the international community declares
that Palestinian statehood can be achieved only through
direct bilateral negotiations with Israel, the occupying
Power. Furthermore, there are some of us who do
not want the Security Council, let alone the General
Assembly, to play any substantial role in realizing the
two-State solution. If we had applied the same standard
to Israel and insisted for the past 70 years that it could
come into being only via direct bilateral negotiations
with its Arab neighbours, would the State of Israel

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

exist today? Yet today, Palestine’s attempts to access
the same legal, diplomatic and multilateral channels are
derided as unilateral and counterproductive measures
that would jeopardize the so-called peace process.
If the principal players are sincere about salvaging
the two-State solution, there is a need to do away with
old thinking and habits and to come up with bold action
to achieve that end — because our past approaches have
proved that we have miserably failed. For too long now,
every time violence erupts in occupied Palestine, the
approach by the international community, including the
Security Council, is to scramble to shore up the ruins
of the peace process. Then we dangle whatever we can
muster in front of the Palestinians, as bait to pacify them
so that their frustration and anger soon subside, in the
false hope of a successful initiative. Once the situation
in occupied Palestine returns to calm, the world will
again forget about the plight of the Palestinians, who
will continue to languish in inhumane conditions under
occupation until they lose their patience once again and
the next cycle of violence erupts.
Albert Einstein once said that insanity was doing
the same thing over and over again and expecting a
different result. After two decades of failed attempts,
let us stop fooling ourselves that this approach can
still work. It is foolhardy to wait several more decades
before we finally muster the political will and courage
to do what is right and just for Palestine.
The majority of the Member States in this
Chamber, including those around this table, have at
one time or another fought for self-determination
from colonial Powers. Based on our own historical
experiences for self-determination, perhaps we should
step back and try to understand the message that we
have been sending to the Palestinians all this while.
Effectively, what we have been saying to them is:
“Obey the occupying or colonial Power, despite the
grave injustice, discrimination, the lack of freedom
and human rights violations done unto you; lay down
your arms and do not fight the occupation, because
doing so would amount to terrorism or anti-Semitism;
do not proceed with any legal or diplomatic means for
statehood, because it might anger the occupying Power
into not granting you independence; wait patiently
for your statehood, even though the occupying Power
is changing the realities on the ground to make your
statehood ultimately impossible; and, most of all, stay
moderate and subservient at all times, despite losing
your children and babies, your parents, your spouses

S/PV.7540

and your siblings due to the illegal targeting or
disproportionate use of force by the occupying Power,
even if there is no accountability for the perpetrators”.
I really wonder how many of us in the Chamber and
around this table, with our own history of legitimate
struggle for self-determination, could pass the standards
that we are currently insisting on for the Palestinians.
The continuing occupation of Palestine and the
systematic oppression suffered by its people serve as a
powerful unifying factor that has inflamed radicalism
and extremism globally. We certainly do not condone
the terrorism and violent extremism perpetrated by
the likes of Daesh and Al-Qaida, which manipulate
the plight and suffering of the Palestinians. But can
we reasonably expect the long-suffering, oppressed,
humiliated and subjugated Palestinians to remain
passive when all legal, political and diplomatic
means of resistance have been effectively blocked for
decades? Even Malaysia — a non-Arab country in a
region culturally and geographically removed from
the Middle East, with a moderate majority-Muslim
population — is not spared from increasing radicalism
due to frustration and anger at the suffering of fellow
Muslims in Palestine.
A whole generation of Palestinians has grown
into adulthood since Oslo knowing only occupation,
blockade, repression and violence. If the occupation
continues, we will eventually reap what we sow, and
one day we will wake up to realize that peace and the
two-State solution are no longer within our reach. It is
therefore in the international community’s interests to
act urgently to address the root causes of the conflict and
to end Israeli occupation. I wish to echo the sentiments
expressed by my colleagues around the table and by the
Secretary-General on the need to re-establish a political
horizon and to return to a meaningful peace process.
In that regard, we strongly support and welcome all
peaceful initiatives to resolve the long-standing conflict
and revive the Middle East peace process, including the
initiatives by France and New Zealand. Nevertheless,
Malaysia would stress the need to set a reasonable time
frame to achieve the two-State solution. The Council
has various tools at its disposal for the maintenance
of international peace and security that it could use to
achieve that aim.
Malaysia firmly supports the request by Palestine
for United Nations protection, including by deploying
temporary international observers in occupied Palestine.
We have numerous precedents for such United Nations

15-3289221/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

protection to guide us in our deliberations. I urge the
Council to start serious discussions on the request for
United Nations protection, in close cooperation with
the Secretary-General. I strongly believe that United
Nations protection would provide a way forward to
stem the current debilitating violence, in line with
international humanitarian law, in particular the
Geneva Conventions. That would ensure accountability
for all parties to the conflict and enforce adherence to
international law, international human rights law and
the various General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions.
In conclusion, we are hopeful that the Council
will agree an outcome for this open debate that would
manifest our solidarity with regard to the gravity
of the situation on the ground. Should the Council
remain paralysed, rendering itself irrelevant as far as
the Middle East peace process is concerned, we must
be prepared to look beyond the Council for a solution.
We must not give up all diplomatic efforts and let the
occupation continue in perpetuity.
The international community must continue to
uphold the legitimate right to self-determination, which
has constituted one of the core principles of the United
Nations since it was created 70 years ago. We owe it to
the Palestinian people to mobilize our political will and
explore the other peaceful, legal and diplomatic avenues
available to us in order to end the longest occupation in
modern history. With that I reiterate the position of my
country that, if we do not act, there is no doubt that
we will be condemned by history and we will face a
bleaker future.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would
like to start by expressing our thanks to Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, and in particular on
the Palestinian issue. Based on his briefing, we
have to acknowledge the frustration resulting from
the prevailing situation and the inability of the
international community — in particular the Security
Council — to provide a real, meaningful contribution
towards a solution for this painful conflict in the Middle
East and in Israel.
The current dangerous escalation of violence
between Israelis and Palestinians and the tragic loss
of life are indeed unacceptable. The recent events in
Jerusalem, with escalating tensions around the holy sites
in the city, are very dangerous developments with the

22/31

22/10/2015

potential for far-reaching consequences, which should
by avoided by all means. We strongly urge the Israeli
authorities and security forces to uphold the status quo
in the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound to avoid aggravating
tensions and religious sensitivities and causing more
resentment. It is always very difficult to put an end to
religious wars. They are very costly in human lives.
Indeed, the participants in the debate have provided
constructive contributions, which, if taken into account,
could change the way we address this issue, in particular
the right of the Palestinians to self-determination and
statehood. In this regard, the Oslo Accords offered
a unique opportunity and were a beacon of hope
for putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories. Failure in moving this forward
was catastrophic, and the restrictions under which the
Palestinians live today are greater than those of 1987,
when the first Intifada broke out.
We wonder whether the periodic waves of
confrontation are not a deliberate long-term strategy by
extremist circles in Israel to undermine the possibility
of a two-State solution. On one hand, Palestinians face
desperate living conditions and increased restrictions
on freedom of movement in the occupied West Bank
and East Jerusalem. On the other hand, there is ongoing
settlement expansion in the West Bank, in violation of
international law but endorsed by Israel’s authorities,
under the protection of Israel’s security forces. This
reality cannot persist forever. As we have witnessed in
the past forty years, it is usually followed by periodic
waves of violence, as is currently observed in Jerusalem.
Unfortunately, these outbreaks of violence, beyond
the horrendous consequences of loss of life and physical
destruction, have always resulted in the additional
loss of Palestinian land, increased restrictions and
brutal repression against the Palestinians. The most
worrisome development in the last few weeks is that
both Israelis and Palestinians have abandoned the hope
of negotiations for ending the crisis and bringing about
a lasting solution to this conflict. The failure of the
peace process — which, we have to acknowledge, is a
collective failure of the international community — will
weaken the mechanisms in place for managing tensions.
Indeed, mechanisms like the agreement between Israeli
Defense Forces and the security forces of the Palestinian
authorities are less and less viable, since negotiations
with Israel no longer offer any realistic prospects for
ending the occupation itself. It is therefore the Security
Council’s duty to overcome our differences, forge a

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

consensus and do our utmost to revive the peace process
by setting parameters for negotiations and for a final
status agreement. This has been reiterated by several
participants in the debate this morning.
It is imperative that the peace process be
reinvigorated in order to end the occupation and achieve
a just and lasting solution on the basis of two States,
living side by side and in security. In this connection,
Angola welcomes the visit of the Secretary-General to
Palestine and to Israel. We also welcome the proposed
plan for a meeting of the Quartet in Vienna tomorrow.
In order to achieve some results, we urge all sides to
put an end to the violence, as it undermines legitimate
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and Israel’s
longing for security.
To prevent further territorial expansion and
guarantee safety for both the Palestinian and Israeli
people, Angola strongly supports the request for
United Nations or other international protection for
the occupied Palestinian territory, in the interest of
preventing further escalation of hostilities. This would
be a clear and tangible manifestation of our support for
the two-State solution, which we have reiterated several
times in this Council.
The atmosphere in the Middle East is reaching a
boiling point, and we may be engulfed in a conflict that
will have global repercussions. To avoid this, we must
resolve the Palestinian question as soon as possible by
facilitating the creation of a viable Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel. We need to go beyond
the historic raising of the Palestinian flag, which we all
witnessed here at United Nations in recent days. This
was a significant political statement by the Palestinian
Authority, but it is, unfortunately, too little too late, as
the events we are now witnessing demonstrate.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): This debate is
taking place at a time when any spark of unilateral
action or any new incident can lead to an explosion
of violence, shutting off the little that remains of the
window of opportunity to reach a peaceful settlement
to the conflict. Today, we are witnessing what
actions — such as illegal settlements, evictions and
demolitions, provocations, stabbings, acts of terror
against civilians or a disproportionate response from
security forces — can cause. In his briefing, earlier
today, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson noted the
numbers of people killed and injured on both sides.
These numbers continue to grow. Lithuania strongly

S/PV.7540

condemns all acts of violence, which have resulted in
injuries and loss of human life. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be brought to account. Our deepest
condolences to the families affected. We wish full
recovery to those injured.
Palestinian and Israeli political, community
and religious leaders must stand firm against terror,
violence and incitement. They must clearly and firmly
denounce all such acts and call for calm and respect for
each other. Further inflammatory rhetoric, distortion of
facts and violence — verbal or physical — will only
bring more violence, pain, death and despair and will
make the hope for living in peace and security even
more remote.
All provocations, including at the holy sites, must
cease immediately. All holy sites must be protected.
The Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount is a sacred place
for both Muslims and Jews, and it is vital to ensure that
its status quo is respected. We welcome the repeated
reassurances by Israel’s Prime Minister regarding
respect for the status quo of the holy sites and encourage
further concrete steps to reaffirm it, working in close
cooperation with Jordan.
Gaza needs urgent reconstruction and economic
development. An immediate and unconditional lifting
of the closure and a free flow of people and goods,
while addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns,
are required for effective humanitarian relief and
recovery. We see Gaza as an integral part of the future
State of Palestine and call for genuine Palestinian
reconciliation.
The latest outbreak of violence reminds us once
again that the current situation is unsustainable. The
political establishments and people on both sides must
finally understand that it is peace and not confrontation
that is in the interest of both Israelis and Palestinians.
This week, the President of the Republic of Lithuania,
Mrs. Dalia Grybauskaité, in her meetings with
Israeli and Palestinian leaders, urged both sides to do
everything within their power to curb the escalation
of violence and restore calm. Lithuania calls on the
political leadership of both sides to do everything they
can to stop incitement, end impunity and guarantee
respect for international humanitarian and human
rights law. The political leaders have an obligation to
protect innocent civilian lives. We call on both sides to
engage in direct talks to calm the tensions.

15-3289223/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community, including the
Security Council, the United States, the European
Union, the League of Arab States, the Quartet and
regional actors, must play their role in supporting both
parties in their efforts aimed at creating the conditions
to make meaningful negotiations possible. We welcome
the very timely visits to the region by the SecretaryGeneral and by United States Secretary of State Kerry,
as well as the meeting of the Quartet scheduled for
tomorrow.
For the conflict to end, there is no other way but
an immediate resumption of peace negotiations with a
view to reaching a final political settlement — based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the road map,
the agreements previously reached by the parties and
the Arab Peace Initiative — of two democratic and
sovereign States living side by side within established
borders, in peace, security and mutual recognition. A
peaceful and just settlement of the conflict would have
a stabilizing effect on the entire region. We call on all
the relevant actors to take immediate, courageous and
bold steps in that direction.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The situation at present in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict has again spiked quite seriously.
There is a need for immediate steps to de-escalate
the situation, to attenuate the fervency of the rhetoric
on both sides and to promote rejection of all forms
of violence. We hope that this will be helped by
renewed diplomatic efforts, including the SecretaryGeneral’s negotiations in the region and the imminent
ministerial-level meeting of the Quartet in Vienna,
which will be held on our initiative.
An exit from the current cycle of violence would be
helped by a visit to Israel and Palestine by the special
representatives of Quartet. The Russian initiative
to organize a Security Council mission to the region
remains relevant. The Security Council must more
clearly focus on resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis. However, fundamental change will not occur
unless, in parallel with efforts to overcome the present
crisis, a renewal of political prospects for resolving
final-status-related issues and for implementing the
two-State concept based on a universally recognized
international legal framework, namely, the Quartet
road map, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative, does not also take place.

24/31

22/10/2015

The strategic task remains the same: resuming
direct negotiations between Israel and Palestinians in
order to address the gamut of final-status-related issues.
We are convinced that only the creation of a Palestinian
State living in peace side by side with Israel within
internationally recognized borders can guarantee
Israel’s security and the fulfilment of the aspirations of
the Palestinian people. Progress towards that objective
requires a rejection of settlement activities. The most
important issue on the agenda is the problem of restoring
Palestinian unity on the platform of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization. Neither violence nor terrorism
stands to bring us any closer to a lasting settlement of
the Palestinian issue on the aforementioned terms.
We believe that only through combined efforts of
the international community will we be able to stabilize
the situation in the countries of the Middle East. The
situation requires prompt decisions. Chaos and anarchy,
resulting to a large extent from foreign interference in
regional affairs, is being actively exploited by terrorist
organizations, first and foremost by the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), whose evil
plans are being implemented in Iraq and Syria, and
are slowly coming to light in other countries, with the
aim of creating a transborder Islamic caliphate. It is
regrettable that this international army has been joined
by fighters from many States around the world. The
situation has simply become intolerable.
That is why, pursuant to a request by the authorities
of the Syrian Arab Republic for military assistance in
its fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups active
in Syrian territory, the Russian Federation initiated, on
30 September 2015, air and missile strikes on terrorist
formations and facilities in the country. Collective
approaches are needed to eliminate the terrorist threat
on the basis of norms and principles of international law
and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
To solve this pressing issue, we should lay aside
non-essential political differences. The Russian
Federation has circulated a draft Security Council
resolution whose main objective is to close our ranks
and work to achieve the aforementioned objectives.
We urge all to come and join constructive work on our
proposal. The main thing in this regard is to review the
near-sighted policy of rejecting a joint fight against
terrorism as reflected, in particular, in a rejection of
a joint determination of targets, including facilities
whose destruction would weaken the military capacity
of ISIL and other terrorist organizations.

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would remind the Council that the Russian
initiative on Syria is two-pronged. It proposed closing
our ranks for counter-terrorist purposes and, in
parallel, the launching of a political process on the
basis of Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). In
that context, we back the efforts of Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura and urge
the opposition to form a representative delegation to
participate in thematic intra-Syria working groups.
A lasting settlement of the situation in Syria is
the objective of our contacts forged at the very highest
levels with representatives of Saudi Arabia, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Jordan, Iran and
other key players. The lack of alternatives to a political
settlement was confirmed during the meeting between
Russian President Vladimir Putin and the President of
the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, on
20 October in Moscow. In that context, we continue to
stress that Russia stands ready to make its contribution
not only to fighting terrorism, but also to promoting
the political process, so that Syria can become a
country where security and stability and the peaceful
coexistence of different religious groups prevails.
We attach great importance to the upcoming
meeting in Vienna on 23 October of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, the United
States, Saudi Arabia and Turkey. We hope that this
format will in the near future be joined by other States,
in particular Egypt, Jordan, Iran, Qatar and the United
Arab Emirates.
We backed Special Envoy for Yemen Ahmed’s
efforts aimed at moving the situation into the political
field and the launch of the intra-Yemeni dialogue for
a lasting settlement. We call for an immediate end to
violence, in the light of the tragic humanitarian situation
in the country. It is our shared obligation to put an end
to the long-standing suffering of the Yemeni people.
The well-known events of 2011 have led to the
collapse and splintering of Libya and turned the country
into another hotbed of tension in the Middle East and
North Africa. The situation is being exploited by ISIL,
which has announced its presence through horrific
vandalism. The waves of instability are travelling
southward through the Sahara and the Sahel, as well as
northward across the Mediterranean and into Europe.
The situation in Libya and other hotspots in the region
have given rise to a migration crisis that is tragic in
scale.

S/PV.7540

We urge all sides in Libya to act responsibly and
form a Government of national unity and join together
to fight terrorism. The Russian Federation, mindful of
its historical links with the States of the Middle East,
will continue to make a robust contribution to restoring
stability, normal life and sustainable development to
the region.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by conveying my gratitude to the Spanish
presidency for having organized this public debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I would also like to thank Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, for his briefing.
I welcome the presence among us of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs who have travelled so far specifically
to participate in this meeting. My statement will focus
only on the Palestinian question.
Today’s debate is taking place at a moment when
an upsurge of violence has raged across East Jerusalem
and the West Bank as a result of the incursion by Israeli
extremists on the esplanade of Al-Aqsa Mosque. The
renewed deadly acts of violence serve as a pointed
reminder that the status quo can no longer be sustained,
with its litany of repression, deprivation and frustration
that only further poisons the already explosive situation.
We would like to reiterate our strong condemnation
of all forms of violence, regardless of the perpetrators,
and to call upon all parties to exercise calm and
restraint. In that respect, we welcome the recent visit
to the region by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
his commendable efforts to encourage the parties to
ease tensions, thereby avoiding further deterioration of
the situation. We hope that renewed diplomatic efforts,
particularly the upcoming meeting of the Quartet, will
help to douse the flames and lead to a resumption of
dialogue.
It would be wrong of us to overlook the deep-rooted
sense of frustration and the lost hopes of the young
Palestinians who are expressing their anger in the face
of the continuing, unending occupation of their country
and in the absence of any political prospects that reflect
their legitimate aspirations for a viable, independent
State.
Among the main factors causing the deadlock in
the political process and the fanning of the flames of
tension and anger are the expanded settlement policy,
the illegal expropriation of land, the demolition of
housing and the building of housing units, arbitrary

15-3289225/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

administrative detention and indiscriminate repression,
among other things. Added to that is the impunity
enjoyed by the occupying Power, and the inability of
the international community to accomplish anything.
The indiscriminate repression of innocent civilians and
the daily humiliation inflicted on the Palestinians only
serve to add oil to the fire and further entrench the most
radical positions.
In a region already torn by a number of crises
and threatened by terrorism, it is in the interests of
the entire international community, including Israel,
to find a rapid and lasting solution to the Palestinian
question. To that end, the international community
must spare no effort in diffusing the violence under
way and to give a glimmer of hope to the Palestinian
people for a credible political process, with a deadline,
that will make the two-State solution a tangible reality.
In that respect, international public opinion, and the
Palestinian people especially, hope to see the Security
Council put less store by declarations of intention and
focus more on concrete action aimed at protecting
civilians and putting an end to the occupation.
The Palestinian people have waited for too long.
Their suffering is enormous, as they await the resumption
and hypothetical conclusion of the political process.
Chad therefore wishes to express its full backing for
the idea of placing the holy sites in Jerusalem and the
Palestinian people under international protection.
The grave violations committed against innocent
civilians must be subjected to an independent
international inquiry, aimed at bringing the
perpetrators to justice. To do so, the Security Council
must immediately assume its full responsibility
vis-à-vis all parties, in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations and its own relevant resolutions on
the Palestinian question, which have remained dead
letters since their adoption. The already undermined
credibility of the international community as a whole
depends on that.
Despite failing to take on its responsibility to
implement the two-State solution, the Security Council
cannot continue to deny the Palestinian State the right
to join the United Nations as a full-fledged Member,
within its pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. There is no alternative to the two-State solution.
I would like to refresh the Council’s memory with
the reminder that Israel was created through General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), of 29 November 1947.

26/31

22/10/2015

By way of conclusion, I would like to pose the same
question as that posed by the Minister of Malaysia:
Why is it that what was possible for Israel back in 1947,
is not possible for Palestine in 2015?
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting, which
provides ample opportunity to reflect on recent
developments in the Middle East. We also want to
acknowledge the presence of the Ministers and to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his profound
and inspiring briefing. And we express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, not only for his personal
involvement but especially for the moral voice that he
has lent to the search for peace in the Middle East.
The surge in violence and senseless killings in the
occupied Palestinian territory, so well articulated by
speakers before me, is deeply troubling. What began
as clashes around the holy sites has spilled over into
multiple locations in East Jerusalem and across the
West Bank. It is a clear manifestation of the extent of
the escalation. Indeed, fears have been expressed that if
the situation is not contained, the rise of a third intifada
might not be far-fetched.
We condemn the indiscriminate killings in the
strongest possible terms. They are unjustifiable, they
are immoral and they are self-annihilating. Extremists
on both sides must not be allowed to dictate the political
agenda, as that will provide fuel for the conflict and
further complicate the search for peace. Provocative
actions and hostile rhetoric must be avoided, and
political leaders on both sides must take the lead in
ensuring that calm is restored. We believe that a crucial
element of that is the maintenance of the status quo
around the holy sites.
It must be stated that recent developments must
not obscure the underlying problem in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. As is widely acknowledged, the
underlying difficulty is the lack of progress in the
Middle East peace process. We would like to see a
genuine effort on the part of Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to return to negotiations directly.
The current situation does not offer a sustainable
solution to the question of Palestine. Indeed, it is
creating despair among the people of Palestine and
causing anxiety among the people of Israel.
It cannot be overemphasized that the two-State
solution lies at the heart of the Middle East peace

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

process. Continued settlement activity by Israel greatly
undermines that. It is evident that the two-State solution
has the support of the international community. It is
also widely acknowledged as the path to lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine. We urge all concerned
to demonstrate their commitment to the two-State
solution by immediately ceasing the construction of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian Territory. We
call on all States with influence over the contending
parties to encourage them to reengage in dialogue on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the existing agreements between
them. We reaffirm our unwavering support for a twoState solution with Israel and Palestine existing side by
side in peace and security.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Spanish presidency of the Council
for the organization of this ministerial meeting on the
situation in the Middle East. I also wish to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
This meeting, following the public meeting last
week (see S/PV.7536) and the Council’s exchange
yesterday with the Secretary-General directly from
Amman, as well as the numerous diplomatic efforts
that all of us have made, again demonstrate how serious
the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories is and the extent to which our mobilization
is necessary.
We face an especially alarming escalation of
violence in the Middle East, which sadly has been
growing worse on the ground. France, I wish to
emphasize, strongly condemned the violence of the
recent weeks, whoever the perpetrators. The toll in
terms of victims, wounded, suffering and frustration
is especially heavy. That deadly spiral is the concrete
result of an impasse in the peace process, especially
from the threat posed by the continued settlement
policy, which is illegal under international law, impacts
on the viability of a two-State solution and fuels both
despair and violence. It constitutes an obstacle to the
aspirations of both parties, namely, the creation of
a Palestinian State and the right of Israel to live in
security.
While some have urged us to postpone the issue
when faced with an international agenda replete with
other crises, we have been working tirelessly in recent
months to propose solutions to break the vicious cycle

S/PV.7540

of violence in the Middle East. The current situation
highlights the validity and need for such proposals
as well as the need to stay the course. The time is
not right to fold our arms. We need to assume our
collective responsibility, and France, as a permanent
member of the Security Council and a friend of both
the Israeli and Palestinian people, intends to assume
its responsibilities. In that spirit, we have insisted for
a long time on the need for a collective mobilization
to find a lasting political solution to the conflict.
Despite the proliferation of crises in the region, we
have remained true to the conviction that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict must remain an international
priority. Not only are the parameters of a solution to
the conflict well known, but moreover, the lack of a
settlement remains a powerful recruitment argument
for terrorism in the region and remains a factor in the
destabilization of the region. We cannot run the risk
of Daesh seizing the Palestinian issue, with all of its
unimaginable consequences.
It is the responsibility of the international
community and the Security Council to find a response
to the conflict. As a priority, we strongly urge the
parties to redouble their efforts to promote a calming of
the situation by refraining from any acts or words that
could stoke the violence. Maintaining the 1967 status
quo for the holy sites in Jerusalem is an imperative,
as underscored yesterday by the Secretary-General.
France would like the Security Council to make its
voice heard — its unanimous voice heard — to preserve
the status quo and restore calm. Again, that is our
responsibility.
At the same time, we must rededicate ourselves
towards allowing a political solution to emerge on
the horizon. We must work together to support the
resumption of a credible political process to serve a
two-State solution. That is the thrust of our initiative,
alongside that of the Quartet, for renewed international
support for the peace process. That drive is aimed at
fully involving Arab and European partners to support
a settlement of the conflict. We intend to continue on
that path. The absence of any political prospect serves
no one. The two-State solution can be the only response
to the conflict. France remains mobilized and prepared
to work to that end with its partners and to support the
actions of the United Nations.
Allow me to say a few words on Syria. On
17 August, the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/15) represented, after four years of

15-3289227/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

deadlock, a glimmer of hope for the emergence of a
settlement of the Syrian crisis. We thought that the
Security Council was finally ready to tackle the root
causes of the evils ravaging that country and to advance
three main, among several, priorities, namely, to fight
more effectively against terrorism and against Daesh
in particular. It is Daesh we need to strike, not the
moderate opposition. We need to implement a real
political transition, and we need to bring a response
to the horrors experienced by the Syrian civilian
population.
The past few weeks — this is an understatement — have
not given us concrete hope and have instead given
us new reasons for concern. France and its partners
have repeated untiringly that backing Mr. Bashar
Al-Assad to combat the terrorists is a false solution,
which will do nothing more than strengthen Daesh and
prolong the tragedy. That equation will never work
because it precludes Syrians from coming together
against terrorism. It fuels Daesh propaganda and will
ultimately increase its attractiveness. That would be not
simply a moral error, but it would be a strategic error,
for which the Syrian people, the entire Middle East and
beyond will have to pay the price. The fate of the Syrian
people cannot be limited to an alternative to terror or
a dictatorship based on bloody repression or barbarous
terrorism.
The root causes of the Syrian tragedy must
be tackled at its source, which requires a political
transition that can lead to national reconciliation.
What we should seek is already included in the June
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex): a
Government enjoying full executive authority and
which brings together both the elements of the regime
and the elements of the opposition who reject terrorism.
We know what the main parameters and objectives are
as well as who the main players of such a transition are.
We should not resign ourselves to the current impasse.
Rather, we should continue to back the efforts of the
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to
engage in discussions and negotiations with all parties
and to determine the outline for an orderly solution.
With more than 250,000 dead and more than
10 million displaced persons and refugees, Syria is the
stage of the worst human tragedy of the early twentyfirst century. Against the backgdrop of that chaotic
situation, the immediate responsibility of the Council
should be to effectively protect the civilian population.
It is the Syrian authorities who have the responsibility

28/31

22/10/2015

to protect their population. However, the regime, now
heavily supported from the outside, is using its military
resources, including air assets, to terrorize and kill
civilians, in continued violation of its obligations under
international law and Security Council resolutions.
Entire areas in Syria are currently under
indiscriminate fire, including by the use of barrel bombs.
Everyone knows the horrible nature of those actions,
which strike indiscriminately and which, to quote
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, bear the sinister “hallmark”
of the Bashar Al-Assad regime. Barrel bombs are
not defensive weapons. They are weapons of terror,
weapons that fuel the displacement of individuals and,
ultimately, the flows of refugees towards neighbouring
countries and towards Europe. It is the immediate
responsibility of the members of the Security Council
to take steps to effectively halt the use of such ghastly
weapons in Syria. France, along with Spain and the
United Kingdom, will soon make concrete proposals to
its partners to achieve that objective.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
reiterates its deep concern at the new cycle of violence
that has been unleasehd in Palestine and Israel and
East Jerusalem. We especially condemn the intentional
burning of the Tomb of the Patriarch Joseph as well
as the bombing of the Beersheba Central Bus Station.
Those events are turning point in the resurgence of the
crisis.
We understand the fear that has gripped much of the
Israeli public. But the peace and stability to which they
aspire will not be achieved through the securitization of
the problem. The solution cannot lie in stronger security
measures, home demolitions or punitive measures that
violate minimum standards of procedure and the right
to fair and dignified treatment.
We are concerned that some Palestinian young
people, owing to the frustration and lack of opportunities
resulting from the occupation, are taking the path of
violence to make their demands heard. At this critical
point, it is imperative to address the root causes of
conflict. The political horizon leading to a two-State
solution must be restored; this is a realistic alternative
that would allow both peoples to coexist peacefully.
The parties must commit themselves to that solution
in word and in deed, freezing the construction of and
dismantling settlements, as well as putting an end to
and rejecting any inflammatory rhetoric. In particular,

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

we call upon the leaders of both peoples to prevent
extremist positions from hijacking the political agenda.
The current spiral of violence should lead the
members of the Council to relaunch the process of
dialogue. To that end, it is vital to create conditions
that promote trust between the parties. Any effort in
the quest for areas of convergence must include the
aspiration of Palestine to exercise its right to selfdetermination, as well as the due security safeguards
required by Israel. We believe that faithful compliance
with the agreements reached and established practices
regarding the use of and visits to the Temple Mount are
key to reducing current tensions.
Finally, we take note of the letter sent yesterday by
the Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council with regard to the request made by President
Abbas for the establishment of an international
protection system, transmitting a report setting out a
historical review of precedents in the area of protection.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome the
briefing from the Deputy Secretary-General, and I
welcome the Secretary-General’s ongoing visit to the
region.
“We are all human beings; we are all equal”. Those
are the words of Uri Rezken, an Israeli man who was
stabbed last week. Yuri was attacked in a supermarket
while working side by side with an Arab colleague. His
assailant was an Israeli, but, as Uri said afterwards, “It
does not matter if an Arab stabbed me or a Jew stabbed
me — a religious, Orthodox or secular person. I have no
words to describe this hate crime”.
Uri is just one victim of the continuing violence
and terrorist attacks across Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories. To his story we can add countless
others, from Palestinians, from Israelis and now from
an Eritrean man, Haptom Zerhom, who, like Uri, was
a victim of mistaken identity. Like Haptom, too many
of these victims are now unable to tell their own story.
All of us in the Council understand the frustration
at the lack of progress towards peace. But we must
send a clear and unwavering message today that neither
frustration nor anything else can possibly justify these
attacks. There are no words to describe these hate
crimes.
The British Government strongly condemns all acts
of violence and incitement, no matter who committed
them. We are clear that the parties need to agree on

S/PV.7540

the status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, Temple Mount,
and commit to it. They need to tackle incitement, which
fuels violence and hostility. Both sides need to do all
they can to end the violence. If it does not stop, it will
only drag the parties further away from the solution
that we all want.
The Council must also play its role in de-escalating
the situation and in driving forward political progress
towards a lasting solution. This means increasing
efforts to find practical improvements on the ground.
This is vital if we are to preserve the viability of the
two-State solution.
Without progress in three areas, I fear that we will
see only more violence. First, Gazans must be able to
secure jobs and build their livelihoods. This means the
free movement of people and goods; it means immediate
practical measures from Israel to develop water and
energy infrastructure; and it means Palestinian factions
pushing forward with reconciliation and making the
reconstruction of Gaza a priority.
Secondly, progress is desperately needed, too, in
the West Bank. The transfer of authority over Area C to
the Palestinian authority, as the Oslo Accords set out, is
critical to successful two-State solution. It could unlock
huge economic benefits. Immediate progress towards
this would not only improve the lives of thousands of
Palestinians, it would also help restore much-needed
faith in the peace process.
Thirdly, as my Prime Minister and Foreign
Secretary made clear to Prime Minister Netanyahu last
month, the expansion of settlements and the demolition
of Palestinian homes must stop. They are illegal under
international law; they erode faith in the two-State
solution; and they erode the physical viability of the
Palestinian State.
We remain convinced that a negotiated two-State
solution is the only way to resolve the conflict. It is
the only way to see a safe and secure Israel coexist
alongside a viable, sovereign Palestinian State. The
United Kingdom will continue to work towards this
urgent priority in the Council and elsewhere.
A long-term political settlement, one that ensures
a safe future for all, is exactly what we want elsewhere
across the Middle East. In the interests of time, I will
not discuss today Lebanon, Iraq, Yemen or Libya;
instead, I will focus on Syria, where, tragically, the
prospects are deteriorating. The number of refugees

15-3289229/31

S/PV.7540

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

has increased to 4 million, and tens of thousands are
crossing into Europe to avoid barrel bombs and other
violations of human rights. The Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and terrorist groups continue to
pose a threat both in the region and beyond.
To have a long-term response to the migration
crisis and to the threat from ISIL, we must tackle the
root cause. Make no mistake: the root cause in Syria
is the brutality of the Al-Assad regime. Indiscriminate
attacks on civilians with barrel bombs and the use of
chemical weapons have caused 12 million Syrians to
flee their homes and have left a quarter of a million
dead. So the United Kingdom, with France and Spain,
will circulate shortly concrete proposals designed to
bring to an end the indiscriminate use of barrel bombs.
The Council has always been united on the need to
find a political solution in Syria. Together we supported
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and voted
in favour of its principles. But now Russian military
intervention on the side of Al-Assad is assisting the
targeting of moderate armed groups. Such actions only
diminish the prospects of a political process. Some
of the groups targeted are the very ones that Staffan
de Mistura had invited to join his talks. Russia has
undermined the constructive relationship that we built
in the Council when we came together to make some
progress on chemical weapons and humanitarian issues.
Russia’s decision to target moderate armed groups
will only prop up Al-Assad and undermine peace, for
Al-Assad’s brutality remains ISIL’s greatest recruiting
sergeant. Al-Assad has shown that he cannot be a partner
against ISIL. And in deciding to take part in Syria’s
civil war, Russia will now have to defend its actions to
the Council and, indeed, to Sunni communities across
the world, and it must use his influence to get the
regime to stop its worst excesses and acts of brutality.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Spain for its initiative to hold this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, and we
welcome the presence of Foreign Minister José Manuel
García Margallo here in New York to preside over this
meeting. I listened carefully to the briefing given by
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson.
On 24 October, the United Nations will celebrate
the seventieth anniversary of its founding. Regrettably,
however, no hope has been seen for a solution to the
Palestinian issue, which is at the core of the issues of
the Middle East and has persisted since the founding

30/31

22/10/2015

of the Organization. The Palestinian-Israeli security
situation continues to deteriorate, with frequent bloody
incidents resulting in increasing civilian casualties and
threatening to further escalate and spread the conflict.
This situation is not acceptable. The international
community should take prompt action to alleviate the
situation. In that respect, China would like to emphasize
the following five points.
First, the international community should urge
Palestine and Israel to exercise restraint, keep calm
and put an end to all rhetoric and actions not conducive
to easing the tense situation so as to avoid further
escalation of the conflict. China highly appreciates the
current good offices of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
in the Middle East and welcomes the promise made by
the Palestinian side to investigate crimes committed
during the clashes. It hopes that this will help reduce
violence and conflict. We urge Israel to avoid excessive
use of force and honour its commitment to maintain
the status quo of the holy sites and put an end to its
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people to
create the basic conditions for the two sides to sit down
to seek a solution to the issue.
Secondly, the establishment of an independent
Palestine and a situation in which the two countries
of Palestine and Israel can live side by side in peace
is the correct way out of the impasse, and peace talks
are the only feasible and practical means towards that
end. The leaders of Palestine and Israel should put the
fundamental interests of their peoples and the overall
goal of maintaining regional peace and stability above
all else and make political decisions to push for the
gradual settlement of the issue. Israel should take the
lead to show good will in taking actions favourable for
the resumption of negotiations. The reasonable security
concerns of the countries in the region should also be
addressed.
Thirdly, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It should therefore actively respond
to the reasonable requests of Palestine and the Arab
countries by taking the actions necessary to put an end
to the clashes between the parties and resuming the
peace talks.
China welcomes the case studies initiated by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, at the request of
Palestine, and his report (S/2015/677) to the Security
Council with regard to international protection by the

15-32892

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations for the Palestinian people, and hopes
that the Security Council will carefully consider it.
Fourthly, the settlement of the Palestinian issue
requires the collective efforts of both Palestine and
Israel, as well as the international community. China
hopes the potential of the existing mechanisms of
the Middle East peace process can be further tapped
with strengthened communication and synergy among
the Quartet, the countries of the region and major
international partners so as to strengthen the momentum
for the resumption of peace talks between Palestine and
Israel and to find together an effective remedy for the
current Palestinian-Israeli situation.
Fifthly, efforts should be made to improve the
humanitarian situation in Palestine. Currently the
rebuilding of Gaza faces many difficulties. The
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate in the
face of multiple challenges, such as the blockade by
Israel, the unstable Palestinian-Israeli situation and
the serious shortage of resources. China urges Israel
to cooperate with international relief efforts and
completely lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip. We hope
the international community and donors will honour
their assistance commitments as soon as possible to
increase the support to Gaza in order to improve the
humanitarian situation there.
China has always supported the just cause of the
Palestinian people for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights and has always promoted peace and
facilitated negotiations. In 2013, President Xi Jinping put
forward a four-point proposal for settling the question
of Palestine. It emphasized that peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel is the right direction to
take to settle the issue between the countries with the
establishment of an independent Palestine.
Peace talks represent the only realistic path
towards reconciliation between Israel and Palestine.

S/PV.7540

Principles such as land for peace provide an important
basis for promoting the Middle East peace process,
and international support constitutes a necessary
guarantee of progress in the peace talks. China will
maintain communications and coordination with all
parties concerned in an unremitting effort to push for
the easing of the Palestinian-Israeli situation and the
resumption of peace talks.
In the 70 years of the history of the United Nations,
we have witnessed many wars in the Middle East and the
displacement of innocent civilians. The combination of
national disputes and religious and ethnic conflicts have
resulted in conflicts and wars, humanitarian disasters,
migrant crises and the threat of terrorism. The history
of the Middle East has repeatedly demonstrated that no
use of force can settle such issues definitively. Hatred
will only dash the hopes for peace. In today’s world, no
country can enjoy absolute security for itself on its own
or find stability in the instability of others.
President Xi Jinping of China, during his
participation in the general debate (see A/70/PV.13) in
September, fully elaborated on the idea of building a
new type of international relations based on win-win
cooperation, with an emphasis on building partnerships
in which countries treat each other as equals and engage
in consultations with a mutual understanding to create
a security architecture featuring fairness, justice and
joint contributions.
China is ready to join the international community
in a common effort to find the way out of the crisis
in the Middle East and to achieve peace, stability and
development at an early date.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are a
number of speakers remaining on the list. With the
consent of the Council, I therefore intend to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

15-3289231/31
