General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

120

2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and expanding the Programme;
3. Appeals once again to all States, organizations
and individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme in order to ensure its continuation and expansion, particularly during this most important period.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/32.

Offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3423 (XXX) of 8 December 1975,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 11
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;.-~--3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by
States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
<;olonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/45.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Western Sahara,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
11 A/31/287.

Considering the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at Port
Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extraordinary
session devoted to the question of Western Sahara,12
Taking note of that part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to Western
Sahara, 13
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the
Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 3412 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 regarding co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
1. Reaffirms its commitment to the principle of selfdetermination of peoples in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples;
2. Takes note of the decision taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity to convene an extraordinary
session with a view to finding a just and lasting solution
to the problem of Western Sahara;
3. Decides to postpone consideration of the question
of Western Sahara until its thirty-second session;
4. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations of the progress
achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the
Organization of African Unity concerning Western
Sahara, and invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to report on that information to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/46.

Question of the Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Solomon
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 14
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 15
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decemb~r 1960, containing the. Declaration on the Granting
of Independenc~ to Colomal_ <;:ountries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and dec1S1ons of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 3431 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the question of the Solomon Islands ,
12
See A/31/136-S/12141, annex II, resolution AHG/Res 81
(XIII). Fo~ the I?rinted text, see Official Records of the Se~urlly Counczl, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for July, August
and September 1976.
i:lA/31/197, annex I, para. 35.
14
_
Of]icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Sessw11, Sf!pplem~nt J>!o. 23 (_A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. XXI.
15
.
Ibid., TJurty-fzrst Sesswn, Fourth Committee I Ith meet1~g, paras._ 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, S~ssional Fasc,c/e, corngendum.
