United Nations

A/RES/58/146

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 110

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/501)]

58/146. Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/129 of 19 December 2001,
Recalling also the importance attached to the problems of rural women in the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women, 1 the Beijing
Declaration 2 and Platform for Action 3 adopted by the Fourth World Conference on
Women, the outcome documents of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”, 4 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 5
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 in which
Member States resolved, inter alia, to promote gender equality and the
empowerment of women as effective ways to combat poverty, hunger and disease
and to stimulate development that is truly sustainable,
Welcoming the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development, 7 as well as the Johannesburg Declaration on
Sustainable Development 8 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 9 which called
_______________
1

Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15–26 July 1985 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
2
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.
4
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
5
Resolution 34/180, annex.
6
See resolution 55/2.
7
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
8
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
9
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.

03 50334

A/RES/58/146

upon Governments to mainstream the gender perspective into development at all
levels and in all sectors,
Welcoming also the agreed conclusions on women’s participation in and access
to the media, and information and communication technologies and their impact on
and use as an instrument for the advancement and empowerment of women, adopted
by the Commission on the Status of Women at its forty-seventh session, 10
Welcoming further the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the
substantive session of 2003 of the Economic and Social Council, adopted on 2 July
2003, 11 which stressed the need for rural development to become an integral part of
national and international development policies and of the activities and
programmes of the United Nations system, and called for an enhanced role for rural
women at all levels of rural development, including decision-making,
Recognizing the critical role and contribution of rural women in enhancing
agricultural and rural development, improving food security and eradicating rural
poverty,
Noting that some effects of globalization may deepen the socio-economic
marginalization of rural women,
Noting also that the globalization process has had some benefits by providing
opportunities for wage employment for rural women in new sectors,
Mindful of the fact that the available data and existing tools of measurement
and analysis are insufficient for a full understanding of the gender implications of
the processes of globalization and rural change, and their impact on rural women,
Recognizing the urgent need to take appropriate measures aimed at further
improving the situation of women in rural areas,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 12

2.
Requests the Secretary-General and all relevant United Nations bodies to
take into account, while developing future policies, plans and activities, the views
expressed by Member States in their replies concerning the desirability of convening
a high-level policy consultation at the governmental level, with a view to setting
priorities and developing critical strategies that would meet the manifold challenges
faced by rural women;
Invites Member States, in collaboration with the organizations of the
3.
United Nations and civil society, as appropriate, to continue their efforts to
implement the outcome of and to ensure an integrated and coordinated follow-up to
United Nations conferences and summits, including their five-year reviews, and to
attach greater importance to the improvement of the situation of rural women in
their national, regional and global development strategies by, inter alia:
(a) Creating an enabling environment for improving the situation of rural
women, including integrating a gender perspective in macroeconomic policies and
developing appropriate social support systems;

_______________
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 7 (E/2003/27), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/44.
11
See A/58/3 (Part I), chap. III, para. 35. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 3.
12
A/58/167 and Add.1.

2

A/RES/58/146

(b) Pursuing the political and socio-economic empowerment of rural women
by supporting their full and equal participation in decision-making at all levels,
including in rural institutions through, inter alia, the provision of training and
capacity-building programmes, including legal literacy;
(c) Integrating a gender perspective into the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of development policies and programmes, including
budget policies, paying increased attention to the needs of rural women so as to
ensure that they benefit from policies and programmes adopted in all spheres and
that the disproportionate number of rural women living in poverty is reduced;
(d) Ensuring that the perspectives of rural women are taken into account and
that they participate in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
policies and activities related to emergencies, natural disasters, humanitarian
assistance, peace-building and post-conflict reconstruction;
(e) Investing in and strengthening efforts to meet the basic needs of rural
women through capacity-building and human resources development measures and
the provision of a safe and reliable water supply and sanitation, nutritional
programmes, education and literacy programmes, and health and social support
measures, including in the area of sexual and reproductive health and HIV/AIDS
treatment, care and support;
(f) Designing and implementing policies that promote and protect the
enjoyment by women of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and creating an
environment that does not tolerate violations of the rights of women and girls,
including domestic violence;
(g) Developing specific assistance programmes and advisory services to
promote economic skills of rural women in banking, modern trading and financial
procedures and providing microcredit and other financial and business services to a
greater number of women in rural areas for their economic empowerment;
(h) Taking steps towards ensuring that women’s unpaid work and
contributions to on-farm and off-farm production, including income generated in the
informal sector, are visible, and assessing the feasibility of developing and
improving mechanisms, such as time-use studies, to measure in quantitative terms
unpaid work, recognizing the potential for it to be reflected in the formulation and
implementation of policies and programmes at the national and regional levels;
(i) Designing and revising laws to ensure that, where private ownership of
land and property exists, rural women are accorded full and equal rights to own land
and other property, including through the right to inheritance, and undertaking
administrative reforms and other necessary measures to give women the same right
as men to credit, capital, appropriate technologies and access to markets and
information;
(j) Promoting programmes to enable rural women and men to reconcile their
work and family responsibilities and to encourage men to share equally with women
household and childcare responsibilities;
Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to continue to pay due
4.
attention to the situation of rural women in the consideration of the priority themes
identified in its multi-year programme of work for the period 2002–2006;
Invites the relevant organizations of the United Nations system dealing
5.
with issues of development to address and support the empowerment of rural

3

A/RES/58/146

women and their specific needs in their programmes and strategies, including in the
context of globalization;
6.
Stresses the need to identify the best practices for ensuring that rural
women have access to and full participation in the area of information and
communication technologies, inter alia, through specific studies, and invites the
World Summit on the Information Society, in Geneva and Tunis, to take into
consideration, while addressing gender issues, the priorities and needs of rural
women and girls as active users of information and ensure their participation in
developing and implementing global information and communication technology
strategies;
Invites Member States, the United Nations and the relevant organizations
7.
of its system to ensure that the needs of rural women are mainstreamed into the
integrated process of follow-up to the major summits and conferences in the
economic and social fields, in particular the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and the International Conference on Financing for Development, and
the 2005 review of the progress achieved in implementing all the commitments
made in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,6 the Beijing Platform for
Action3 and the outcome documents of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century”;4
8.
Invites Member States to take into consideration the concluding
comments and recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women concerning their reports to the Committee when
formulating policies and designing programmes focused on the improvement of the
situation of rural women, including those to be developed and implemented in
cooperation with relevant international organizations;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
9.
sixtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution, addressing different
aspects of the empowerment of rural women, including the impact of
macroeconomic policy frameworks on their situation.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

4
