UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

UN LlBRARy
JAN 2 IL 1993

2536’”
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2536) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16514). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2536

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Su~jlem&ts
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2536th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 9 May 1984, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Hungary, Panama
and Saint Lucia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2536)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wasiuddin
(Bangladesh), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Zumbado
Jimenez (Costa Rica), Mr. Rdcz (Hungary), Mrs. Noriega (Panama) and Mr. St. Aimee (Saint Lucia) took
the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)

4. Mr. ERDENECHULUUN
(Mongolia) [interpretation from Russian]: Permit me first of all to express our
profound satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. President,
guiding the work of the Security Council in May and to
wish you every success in the discharge of that important function. We wish to express our sincere gratitude
to your predecessor, the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Mr. Vladimir Kravets,
for his skilful and extremely tactful guidance of the
Council’s work last month.

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [253Zst to 2535th meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Cuba, Ecuador, Guyana, Jamaica,
Mongolia,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Yugoslavia and Viet Nam to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. We are grateful to all members of the Council for
affording us this opportunity to take part in the discussion of the item which is now under consideration.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca
(Turkey) took places at the Council table; Mr. Zarif
(Afghanistan),
Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Jacobs
(Antigua and Barbuda), Mr. Woolcott (Australia),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador),
Mr. Karran (Guyana), Mr. Carr (Jamaica), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia),
Mr. Wijewardane (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Golob
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took

6. Rather more than five months has elapsed since the
Security Council adopted resolution 541 (1983), of
18 November 1983, in connection with the declaration
by the leadership of the Turkish community in Cyprus
of the creation of the so-called independent State in the
northern part of the island. The Council in most unambiguous terms declared that unilateral action to be legally invalid and called for its withdrawal.
1

7. At that time the Mongolian People’s Republic, in a
statement by the representative of the Foreign Ministry
dated 18 November 1983 [S/26172, annex], expressed
profound concern at that separatist action which ran
counter to the fundamental interests of the people of
Cyprus and United Nations decisions and created a
serious threat to peace and security in the region.

independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus and its policy of non-alignment.
We believe that the internal affairs of Cyprus can and
must be’resolved, taking due account of the interests of
both communities. To this end, there must, as we see it,
be a cessation of military or’any other kind of intervention from outside, a withdrawal of all foreign troops and
the elimination
of military bases on the territory of
Cyprus.

8. The attention of the Security Council has now been
drawn to new actions leading to a further exacerbation
of the situation in Cyprus. In direct violation of resolution 541 (,l983), the leadership of the Turkish community has taken a number of steps designed to legitimize
the dismemberment
of Cyprus. The intention has been
declared to hold a constitutional
referendum and elections in August and November 1984 respectively.-On
17 April there was a ceremonial presentation of “credentials”,
purportedly
establishing- diplomatic
relations between Turkey and the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.

14. We agree with the Secretary-General’s
view that
“One important requirement [will] be the maintenance
of a continued process of communication
and negotiation” [ibid.]. In this, of course, an irreplaceable role
must be played by the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral, a function which the Mongolian
People’s
Republic supports and appreciates very highly.
15. In conclusion, I should like to express the hope
that the Security Council will take decisions aimed
at bringing about a political settlement of the Cyprus
problem on the basis of respect for the independence,
sovereignty’and
territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus. ,

9. In our view, these and other actions not only pose a
threat to the efforts of the Secretary-General
but fundamentally undermine the basis for a political settlement of the Cyprus problem. Therefore, the Mongolian
delegation finds entirely well-founded the request of
Cyprus for an urgent convening of the Security Council to consider the situation and to take prompt and
effective measures to implement United Nations resolutions.

16. The PRESIDENT
[interprefationfiom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
17.

JIMENEZ
(Costa Rica) [interSir, I should like to express
my delegation’s
sincere congratulations
on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Your intellectual gifts, skill and diplomatic experience
are a guarantee in the Council’s deliberations. I should
also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor and to,the
other officers of the Council.

10. The gravity of the situation that has arisen in and
around that country as a result of these. separatist
actions has been clearly and cogently demonstrated
in the statement in the Security Council on 3 May
[25.3Zst meeting] by the head of the Cypriot State, President Spyros Kyprianou. His statement contained an
urgent appeal for the taking of immediate measures to
reverse the process which is liable to threaten the territorial integrity and, what is more important, the very
existence of an independent
State Member of the
United Nations.

Mr. ZUMBADO

prktatiohfiom

Spanish]:

18. How often in this forum have we seen a confrontation between universally shared principles and the arbitrary use of force by some? How often have we met in
an effort to halt aggression’, to ensure respect for human
rights or to speak out against violence? How often has
there been a temptation to use weapons to solve complex problems, leading to short-lived victories that generate permanent conflicts? How often have we seen
that obfuscation which scorns dialogue, promotes
injustice and prolongs crisis? How often have the lessons of history been ignored and people been dazzled
by fleeting victories won by the use of bayonets?

Il.
The Mongolian delegation has studied attentively
the latest report of the Secretary-General
[S/26.519],
which describes in detail the events of the past few
months and his efforts within the framework of his
good-offices mission. As the Secretary-General himself
states, :‘ The developments outlined in this report speak
for themselves.”
[Ibid., paw. 23.1
12. With regard to the situation in Cyprus, we believe
it necessary to draw attention once again to the overt
and covert attempts on the part of certain circles to
turn the island into a military strategic spring-board of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in the
area of the eastern Mediterranean.
The machinations of
these circles are leading to an exacerbation of tension in
that part of the world and are aimed at the maintenance
of the defucro partition of the country.

19. Whenever and wherever necessary, more and
more of us must raise our voices against the use of force
to solve conflicts and demand respect for civilization.
20. My Government is convinced that the victory for
peace we seek in the context of Cyprus will be found
only in a united and freedom-loving
Cyprus, one which
denounces any attempt to legitimize rights created by a
foreign force. How ironic that on the native soil of
Aphrodite solutions should be sought by violence.

13. The Mongolian People’s Republic has always consistently supported, and continues to support, the
2

21. In addition to protesting the act of defiance of
Security Council resolutions 365 (1974), 367 (1975) and
541 (1983) which has brought us here today, Costa
Ricans unconditionally
support President Kyprianou’s
proposal for complete demilitarisation
of Cyprus.

28. The Ukrainian SSR, like the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations, has always unswervingly and consistently supported the position of respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and its
non-aligned status. On this basis we voted in favour of
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and of all subsequent decisions on the Cyprus
question. It is with great regret, however, that we note
that in spite of the vigorous appeals by .the General
Assembly contained in these documents for countries
to refrain from any unilateral actions that might have an
adverse effect on any just and lasting settlement of
the Cyprus problem by peaceful means, and notwith.standing the relevant decisions of the Security Council,
the situation in the island has continued to deteriorate,
seriously threatening international
peace and security
in the Mediterranean.

22. Costa Rica did away with its armed forces in 1949,
and since that time we have learned that dialogue and
peaceful compromise lead to genuine solutions, no matter how serious the conflicts. Our freedoms have,flourished and our economic progress has been enhanced.
When on occasion we have been faced with dramatic
external threats, we have been able to appreciate the
tremendous strength of a people defending itself with
principles. No one understands better than we the value
of a proposal for complete demilitarization
and the
prospects for freedom and growth this path offers. We
in Costa Rica could never remain impassive to so cherished and civilized a proposal.

29. Tension reached a particularly high point when, in
defiance of Security Council decisions, the leadership
of the Turkish community in Cyprus unilaterally declared the creation of a so-called independent State in
the northern part of the island, which had already been
under foreign occupation for 10 years. We categorically
condemn this latest separatist act leading to the parti‘tion of Cyprus, something which strikes at the very
foundations of the settlement of a problem advocated
by the United Nations. The Ukrainian SSR expresses
its support for the timely reaction of the Security Council contained in its resolution 541(1983) of 18 November
1983. In that resolution the Council reaffirmed its previous resolutions on this question, declared the separatist action as iegally invalid and called upon “all States
and the two communities in Cyprus to refrain from any
action which might exacerbate the situation”.

23. It is when the complete renunciation of force gives
way to thought and action that the boundless capacity
for understanding between men and peoples is comprehended. The most fanatic religious and political
struggles must be calmed in order to find ways towards
understanding. The greatest economic and culturai differences must find paths towards equality.
24. If the impatience of weapons prevails over dialogue every time a serious problem arises, we shall
eventually blow the world to smithereens. The nuclear
threat is not just a ‘matter of warheads; unfortunately,
it also has to do with those who have no faith in dialogue, politics and civilization.
What is civilization
if
not the possibility of our resolving differences without
destroying ourselves? In this sense we hope that the
good offices of the Secretary-General will be welcomed
in a way befitting the present situation.

30. In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, decisions of the Security Council are binding on
Members of the United Nations and must be complied
with. However, this decision of the Council went unimplemented. Moreover, further steps have been taken
which leave us in no doubt that what we are facing is
open disregard of a decision of the Security Council,
which bears major responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. This is demonstrated
by recent facts set forth in the statement in the Security
Council on 3 May by the President of the Republic of
Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou [253Zst meeting], and in the
report of the Secretary-General
[S/26.529].

25. When I think of the serious problems affecting
Central America, I think also with fear that if similar
methods to those being used in Cyprus were used there,
the magnitude of the problems and suffering could become indescribable.
26. Therefore we reaffirm our solidarity with Cyprus,
in the knowledge that we are reaffirming a commitment
to peace, as well as our trust in civilization and our faith
in mankind.
27. Mr. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) [interpretation
from Russian]: Mr. President,
permit me to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. Your diplomatic experience and mastery and
the great authority and profound respect which you so
deservedly enjoy among the delegations to the United
Nations undoubtedly will permit you to discharge your
functions as President of the Security Council in an
excellent fashion. We wish you every possible success.
I should also like to thank you and all delegations that
have offered kind words to the President of the Council
for April.

31. The Ukrainian SSR views the “exchange of ambassadors” as a violation of Security Council resolution 541(1983). We share the concern of many States at
the new steps taken by the leaders of the Turkish community in the island aimed at the partition of Cyprus, in
defiance of the clearly expressed will of the Security
Council and the efforts of the Secretary-General within
the framework of the good-offices mission entrusted to
him. We are profoundly convinced that the separatist
action of the Turkish Cypriot administration
in the creation of the so-called independent State and measures
3

to give it legal form do not improve the situation of
the Turkish community and can only complicate even
further the possibility of bringing about a settlement
acceptable to both sides.

39. In reaction to the events of July 1974 in Cyprus,
the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session
adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX), in which it, inter ah,
called upon all States to respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus and to refrain from all acts and intervention
directed against it. That resolution was later endorsed by
the Security Council in resolution 365 (1974) of December 1974.

32. Most recent events in Cyprus have once again
made it amply clear that the intrigues and manoeuvres
undertaken by external forces against the Republic of
Cyprus for many years now are not slackening. The
United States and its NATO allies are intent upon converting the island into a military
spring-board for
NATO in the eastern Mediterranean,
viewing it as an
important stronghold on the way to the Middle East.

40. The status quo in Cyprus, which is, of course, the
end result of a fratricidal conflict often fuelled from
external sources, is a classic example of the unwillingness or inability of the international community in general to act decisively to assure the security of small
States. It is a sad fact of life that after all the international admonitions have been delivered and the palliatives applied, the small State, if it is to remain a
sovereign entity, must act in conjunction with trusted
friends to assure its own security and that of its treatybound neighbours.

33. The Ukrainian SSR favours a peaceful solution to
the Cyprus problem, without any outside interference,
by means of constructive negotiations on the basis of
respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Cypriot State and its non-aligned
status. We are in favour of the withdrawal of all foreign
troops and the elimination of military bases in Cyprus.
We attach great significance to the continuation of the
good-offices mission of the Secretary-General.

41. Saint Lucia fully supports the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, unity and non-aligned
status of Cyprus. We believe that there is an urgent
need to settle the question of Cyprus. However, we
take the view that the solution to the problem in Cyprus
lies with the people of Cyprus themselves; hence, they
should be allowed to resolve it without any foreign
interference whatsoever. Saint Lucia affirms the inalienable right of the Republic of Cyprus and its citizens
to full and effective sovereignty and control over the
entire territory of Cyprus, and we urge all States to
recognize and respect that right.

34. In our view, the Security Council must continue to
strive to bring about compliance with its decisions on
the Cyprus problem and create the foundations of a
long-lasting settlement.
35. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Saint Lucia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
36. Mr. St. AIMEE
(Saint Lucia): Mr. President,
first, please accept the thanks of my delegation for
allowing us to address the Council on the matter before
it. May I also express my delegation’s pleasure at your
possession of the mantle of leadership of the Security
Council for this month. In the same vein, may I express
thanks and appreciation to the President of the Council
for the month of April for the work that was done.

42. Saint Lucia has no doubt that the people of Cyprus, through the medium of the intercommunal
talks
and continued dialogue and with the aid of the good
offices of the Secretary-General,
can find a mutually
acceptable, just and lasting solution to their problem if
they are allowed to negotiate it without undue foreign
interference. Hence, we believe that the onus now lies
on this Council to act decisively to ensure an environment which lends itself to the peaceful solution of the.
question of Cyprus.

37. The question of Cyprus has intermittently
engaged the concerns of the Security Council and the
General Assembly for over two decades, and since 1964
the United Nations has played a very direct role in
attempting to attenuate hostilities through its Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. Yet the problem in Cyprus
has remained insoluble as the chronicle of the past
20 years in Cyprus has brought us occasional hope and
frequent despair.

43. The Organization
is once again called upon to
solve a problem involving the peace, security and territorial integrity of one of its Members. This time, the
threat to peace and security has in fact been carried out
in the manner of the partitioning of a State. While it may
be seen as only a Cyprus problem, one cannot overlook
the implications for the region if a solution is not found
and the problem is not resolved peacefully. Threats to
States and regions, especially those States and regions
that are militarily weak, should never be taken lightly.
In many ways the plight of small States remains in the
hands of the Organization,
through this Council. The
situation in Cyprus provides an opportunity once again
for the Council to act decisively. Failing that, no small
State will feel secure, and the implications
are very
frightening. Security arrangements would then become

38. At the very heart of the question of Cyprus has
been an issue that is of fundamental concern to many
States Members of the Organization-that
of the security of small States. In the case of Cyprus matters
of security have always been clear-cut. In other areas
of the world threats to the security of small States
are much more subtle, But the objective is always the
same.
4

As has frequently been emphasized by the President of
the State Council of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
Mr. Todor Zhivkov, all this leads my country to do all it
can to strengthen peace in our shared region.

too necessary, as they have already in some regions,
creating a further economic burden on the limited resources of these small States.
44. Only positive action by the Council can reverse
the present trend. The resolution of the issue at present
before the Council could go a long way towards restoring the confidence of small and militarily
weak
States in particular in the Organization as a whole, and
in international relations in general, which is so necessary for the preservation of peace.

50. The unilateral declaration of a “Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus” and the subsequent efforts to
produce a constitution run counter to the interests of
the Cypriot people as a whole and are fraught with
danger for peace and security in the eastern Mediterranean region. The announcement of plans to hold a
“referendum on a new constitution*’ and “general elections” represents a new step along the secessionist path
in Cyprus. All these actions are contrary to Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 541 (1983),
which states that the declaration of a “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus’+, aiming at the secession
of part of the Republic of Cyprus, is considered to be
legally invalid.

45. The PRESIDENT
[inlerpretarionfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative
of Bulgaria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
46. Mr. TSVETKOV
(Bulgaria) [interpretufiunfrom
French]: I should like first to thank the members of the
Security Council for giving me this opportunity to take
part in the present discussions. I should also like to
congratulate you, Sir, very warmly on your election to
the presidency of the Council for the month of May. My
satisfaction is all the greater because of the excellent
relations of friendship and fraternity that bind our two
countries. I am convinced that your vast experience,
political wisdom and diplomatic skills, which are recognized by all, will enable the Council to carry out the
complex, responsible tasks with which it is faced at
present. I also pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Vladimir Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, for the exemplary manner in which he conducted the Council’s work during a period marked by
important events.

51. These actions are in contravention
of relevant
General Assembly resolutions, in particular resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was endorsed by the Security
Council. In other words, these actions run counter to
the desire of the international community that the question of Cyprus be resolved through negotiations. The
resulting situation cannot but arouse grave concern in
the People’s Republic of Bulgaria.
52. My country’s position has been set forth on a
number of occasions in the United Nations. It is a
position of principle and is unalterable. Despite their
differing ethnic origins, Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots are united by an historical destiny and by
common traditions and interests. They must be allowed
to resolve their internal problems and differences free
from all foreign interference and to live in harmony in a
united Cyprus. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria is
opposed to any efforts that might lead.to secession from
the island, as well as to its transformation into a foreign
military base.

47. I take this opportunity to remind the Council that
today’s meeting is being held on 9 May, an important
date ..which marks the historic victory over fascism
of the anti-Hitler
coalition, with a decisive role being
played by the Soviet Union. This date has become a
symbol of the aspirations of peoples to eliminate militarism, aggression and war from the life of humanity,
aspirations which are the basis of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. This
historic date reminds us never to forget the millions of
victims and makes us increase our efforts to ensure that
future generations are spared the horrors of war.

53. My country has always been in favour of efforts
for a lasting, peaceful andjust settlement of the problem
of Cyprus that would guarantee the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the
Republic of Cyprus, taking into account the rights of
both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.

48. The Security Council was informed

by the Government of the Republic of Cyprus of the latest political
development in the island, following which the tension
has worsened. The members of the,Council have heard
the statement by Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, President of
Republic of Cyprus, in which he explained the situation
created.

54. It is of paramount importance today that we prevent and refuse to tolerate any unilateral act which
might lead to a deterioration
in the situation and to
subsequent exacerbation of the conflict. In this connection I recall the communique
of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States parties to the Warsaw
Treaty, adopted at their Budapest meeting on 20 April
last, which states, inter alia:

49. Situated in the same geographical region as Cyprus, the People’s Republic of Bulgaria sincerely desires the creation and strengthening of a climate of
peace, security, trust, mutual understanding,
goodneighbourliness and co-operation between all the countries of the Balkan and eastern Mediterranean
region.

“the participants in the meeting expressed the tirm
conviction that there are no issues that could not be
resolved through talks, if they are conducted on the
basis of a constructive approach and political will to

5

attain positive results, with due regard for the vital
interests of the peoples, the interests of peace and
international security” [see S/16504, annex].

61. A comprehensive, overall solution to the problem
of Cyprus is still not on the horizon, despite the efforts
of the Organization, and especially those of the Secretary-General,
in assisting the parties to achieve the
earliest possible progress towards a just and lasting
settlement.
Unfortunately,
the latest developments
have only caused the situation to worsen, as convincingly set out in the statement made here by President Kyprianou of Cyprus.

55. The initiative of the Secretary-General,
aimed at
bringing about ajust and lasting settlement of this problem holds out genuine prospects of success, despite the
difficulties encountered. As was stressed during the
Secretary-General’s
recent visit to Sofia, my Govemment supports his efforts to bring about a constructive
dialogue between the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish
Cypriots.

62. The Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic attaches great significance to the quest .for a
peaceful, viable and lasting solution to the problem of
Cyprus. Such a solution must be based on full respect
for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus,
in accordance with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations. We consider also that
foreign intervention
should cease and that all foreign
troops and military personnel and every other military
presence should be withdrawn from the island, in order
to facilitate the solution of the Cyprus problem. Proceeding from these general considerations, we wish to
point out that attempts to divide the country and actions
to strengthen the division between the two communities are contrary to the interests of the Cypriot people
as well as to the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, specifically Security Council resolution 541
(1983), which called upon all States not to recognize any
Cypriot State other than the Republic of Cyprus.

56. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria has a high regard for the policy of non-alignment
pursued by
the Republic of Cyprus. My country is thoroughly convinced that the difference between the Greek Cypriots
and the Turkish Cypriots can and should be resolved
through negotiations between them, on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and free from all
outside interference and pressure. Furthermore, we are
fully convinced that a peaceful settlement of the problem of Cyprus in the interests both of the Greek Cypriots and of the Turkish Cypriots can be achieved only
on the basis of guarantees of the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the
Republic of Cyprus.
57. The PRESIDENT
linternretation
from Russiunl:
The next speaker is the representatite
of Hungary.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

63. The Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic has always been against imposing a solution on
the people of Cyprus, who have suffered for so long.
The Cypriot people, whose continuing tragedy has been
inflicted upon it by unlawful acts by outside forces, has
our deep sympathy and solidarity. We continue to believe that the forum of the intercommunal
talks provides the most appropriate framework within which the
substantive issues can be tackled and resolved.

58. Mr. RACZ (Hungary): Mr. President, at the very
outset I should like sincerely to thank you and, through
you, the other members of the Security Council for
inviting my delegation to participate in the current deliberations and for giving me the opportunity to express
our views with regard to the item on the Council’s
agenda.

64. Accordingly, my delegation wishes to express its
concurrence with the view expressed in the course of
the present debate by many previous speakers that the
solution of the question of Cyprus must be based on the
resolutions of the United Nations, as well as on the
Makarios-DenktaS
guidelines of 12 February 1977 [see
S/12323, para. 51 and the IO-point agreement of 19 May
1979 [see S/13369,
para. 511 arrived at between the
President of the Republic of Cyprus and the leader of
the Turkish Cypriot community.

59. It is a great honour and privilege for me to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. It is a
pleasure for me to see in the chair of this body a distinguished diplomat of the USSR, a country with which
we have fraternal relations. I express my confidence
that your well-known and widely recognized diplomatic
skill and wisdom will contribute greatly to the success of the work of the Council. I wish also to express
our sincere appreciation of the outstanding manner in
which Mr. Kravets, representative of the Ukrainian
SSR, conducted the business of the Council last month.

65. The situation in Cyprus is a problem of international magnitude, the continuation of which jeopardizes and threatens the peace and security not only of
the eastern Mediterranean
but also of Europe, and the
crisis makes its effect felt also on the outlook for and
prospect of international peace and security in general.
As a matter of fact, forces alien to the region have made
and still are making use of this situation, for their own
selfish purposes, for manipulation
and interference in
the eastern Mediterranean.

60. It is not without a sense of sorrow that my delegation joins in the present discussion. Less than a year
has passed since the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 37/253, and less than half a year since the
Council had to meet at short notice to discuss the deteriorating situation on the island of Cyprus and to
adopt resolution 541 (1983).
6

66. The Hungarian delegation reaffirms its full support for the Republic of Cyprus and calls for scrupulous
respect for its independence,
sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-aligned status. The strict and consistent implementation
of United Nations resolutions is
indispensable if we are to succeed in our mission. The
idea of holding an international conference on Cyprus
should also be borne in mind. In these endeavours the
continuation
of the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral is indeed essential. We wish to express our
deep appreciation to him for his tireless efforts and
dedication to the search for a viable solution and for the
assistance he has offered to the parties on repeated
occasions to bring about a meaningful dialogue between
them. The good offices of the Secretary-General
have
been and remain essential for the resolution of the
Cyprus problem. We can only express our full support
for him in his difficult and responsible mission.

painfully aware of the unfortunate events which led ‘us
to the present situation, in which Cyprus is virtually
divided into two separate entities. My delegation
therefore fully shares the perception that the recent
developments in Cyprus should not be viewed in isolation’from the unresolved overall question which developed soon after the country became independent and,
more particularly,
after the breakdown of its constitutional setup in 1963.
71. Bangladesh’s position on the Cyprus question has
been firm and unequivocal, and we have consistently
supported the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and non-aligned status of Cyprus. In light of
the genesis of the present problem, Bangladesh, in the
debate on the Cyprus question in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council, as well as at summit-level
meetings of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries
and the Commonwealth,
has consistently advocated an
early amicable settlement of the Cyprus question that
would enable the Turkish and Greek communities
in
Cyprus to live in safety, dignity and honour. We are
equally convinced that no solution of the problem can
be lasting unless it takes into account the legitimate
aspirations of both the communities
in Cyprus.

67. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
68. Mr. WASIUDDIN
(Bangladesh): Permit me at the
outset, Mr. President, to thank you and the other members of the Council for giving my delegation this opportunity to participate .in the Security Council debate
on the situation in Cyprus. I also wish to congratulate
you very warmly, on behalf of the -Bangladesh delegation as well as on my own behalf, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the current month.
We are confident that under your outstanding leadership and proved diplomatic skill the Council’s deliberations will lead to fruitful and constructive results. May
I also convey our deep appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir A. Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, for the excellent manner in which he
guided the work of the Council during the month of
April.

72. Given the situation, it has been our confirmed
belief that the only realistic course open to the Council
in the search for a solution is the continued encouragement of intercommunal
talks, under the auspices
of the SecretaryGeneral,
based on the fundamental
and legitimate rights of the two communities in accordance with the high-level agreements which they themselves reached in 1977 and 1979. These agreements,
aimed at the establishment
of an independent,
bicommunal and non-aligned federal Republic of Cyprus
with full territorial integrity, were welcomed by the
overwhelming majority of the world community. It is a
matter of deep regret that the intercommunal
talks did
not make much progress. Our profound concern was
expressed by Mr. Aminur Rahman Shams-ud Doha,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, when, in his statement at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, he stated:

69. My delegation has followed with interest the
current deliberations in the Council, which has been
convened to consider the latest developments, namely,
the recent exchange of ambassadors between Turkey
and northern Cyprus and the decision of the Turkish leadership to hold a referendum on a constitution and elections later this year. The Council has before it in document S/16519 of 1 May 1984 the report
of the Secretary-General.
President Kyprianou
of
the Republic of Cyprus, in his opening statement
[253Zst meeting], and other representatives who have
subsequently made statements, emphasized the need to
maintain the unity and the territorial integrity of Cyprus. We listened to their statements with great attention. We paid equal attention to the statements made by
Mr. Rauf Denktas and the representative of Turkey,
who apprised the Council of the genesis of the Cyprus
problem and the circumstances which led to the latest
developments.

“The lack of progress in the intercommunal
talks
between the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot
communities has been a cause of concern to all of us.
We urge both communities
to engage in meaningful
discussions for reaching a mutually acceptable solution of the problem that would enable them to live in
honour and dignity within the framework of a federated Cyprus, where the rights of both communities
will be fully protected. These talks have continued
much longer than was expected, and unless there is
some progress in the immediate future, the situation
in Cyprus may take an irreversible turn.“’
73. Our apprehensions proved correct when, out of a
sense of sheer desperation and frustration provoked by
the lack of any meaningful dialogue, the Turkish Cyp-

70. The Security Council has been seized of the Cyprus question for the last two decades, and we are all
7

riot community and its leadership made a proclamation
of independence
last November.
Should the international community ignore the fact that during the past
20 years the rights of the Turkish Cypriot community as
co-founder of the State of Cyprus have been trampled
upon? Was this not a violation of international law?

last 20 years have demonstrated again and again that
the establishment of a bi-communal,
bi-zonal and federal Cyprus is the only solution to the problem. While
it is still a viable proposition,
a beginning has to be
made towards that end through the resumption of the
intercommunal
talks. The Secretary-General,
while
expressing his disappointments
at the evolving situation in Cyprus, has also assured the Council that he is
prepared to carry on his mission of good offices as long
as there is unambiguous support for it.

74. The Council met after the proclamation
and
adopted a one-sided resolution which did not take into
account the historical and cultural aspects of the process of the political evolution of Cyprus. We were
convinced that the adoption of such a resolution would
neither serve the cause of conciliation nor strengthen
the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offtces. Quite
expectedly, the Turkish Cypriot leadership categorically rejected the resolution.

78. In the light of the foregoing it is quite clear that a
sound basis exists for the continuation of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices. Such a sound basis should not
be impaired through the adoption of another one-sided
resolution, which would result in the irretrievable loss
of the co-operation of one of the communities-cooperation which is so essential to the success of such an
effort. The Council should therefore make every effort
to revitalize our common search for a peaceful settlement by providing the necessary political support for
the good offices of the Secretary-General,
which would
in turn facilitate his task by encouraging a dialogue and
negotiations. Every effort should therefore be made to
adopt a resolution which is acceptable to both sides.
Instead of blaming one party or the other, we should
urge both communities to engage in meaningful discussions and apply themselves seriously to the task of
reaching a mutually acceptable agreement. The past
tragic events have shown us that the protracted deadlock in the intercommunal
talks caused by the imposition of conditions by one community on the other has
only exacerbated the situation and further compounded
the problem. The right of the Turkish community to
equal status and partnership was clearly recognized in
the 1960 Constitution,
and these rights cannot now be
qualified or diminished.

75. The Commonwealth
Heads of State, who met at
New Delhi in November last year soon after the Council debate, also considered the Cyprus problem. Our
President, Lieutenant
General Ershad; who led the
Bangladesh delegation at the meeting, emphasized that
the intercommunal
talks should be continued so that a
united, federated, non-aligned Cyprus could emerge.
He also urged the New Delhi meeting not only to try to
bring the two communities
together but to establish
contact with the Turkish community as well with a view
to creating a climate of friendship and reconciliation
between the two communities.
The Bangladesh President also cautioned that mere condemnation
and the
adoption of a strong resolution would further aggravate
the problem and mitigate against the efforts of the two
communities of Cyprus themselves to find a negotiated
solution to the problem.
76. In his latest report the Secretary-General
has
indicated the steps that he undertook in pursuance of
the Security Council resolutions that renewed his mission of good offices. It contains his five-point scenario
providing a necessary framework for the resumption of
high-level intercommunal
talks. The report also contains, in annex IV, the four-point proposal made by
Mr. Denktas in his letter to the Secretary-General
of
18 April 1984. The members of the Council are no doubt
aware that the five-point scenario and the four-point
proposal are compatible. In his statement the Turkish
Cypriot leader also made it clear that his community
continues to adhere to the concept of a united Cyprus
within a bi-communal,
bi-zonal and federal framework
as provided for by the 1977 and 1979 high-level agreements and the 1980 opening statement of the SecretaryGeneral [S/24100, annex]. Such positive signs reinforce
our firm belief that it is not too late to retrieve the
situation in Cyprus and that it is still possible to develop
the spirit of conciliation and coexistence among the two
communities.

79. In conclusion, in his report the Secretary-General
has left it to the Council to assess the present situation
and to decide what action needs to be taken to revitalize
the search for a peaceful settlement and to provide his
mission of good offices with the necessary political
support. The Bangladesh delegation would like to
reiterate that this is indeed a historic opportunity for the
Council to set in motion a process of meaningful negotiations, a process attentive to the painful history of the
past 20 years. We must all act together to channel the
course of events in Cyprus in the right direction. If we
fail at this moment, posterity will not forgive us for our
lack of vision.
The meeting

77. It would be quite easy for the Council to pronounce its verdict on the immediate developments, but
would that serve the cause of conciliation
in Cyprus,
which we all cherish? The tragic developments of the

rose at 12.40 p.m.

NOTE
’ Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, vol. I, 18th meeting, para. 252.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIEs

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprk de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
g : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Genkve.
KAK

COMO

HOIIYYHTh

CONSEGUIR

M3&AHHH

OPI-AHHRAI~UW

PUBLICACIONES

0lYI.E:~KHEHHI.I.Y

DE LAS NACIONES

HAHHR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en lib&as
y casas distribuidotas
en
todas pat-ta &I mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

!JO-613134anuary

19933,050
