S/PV.9019

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9019 th meeting

Wednesday, 20 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Coraiola Yinde Kloss
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Sharma
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Syed
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2022/313)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-32490 (E)
*2232490*

Kosovo

S/PV.9019

outcome is clear. The current majority party in Serbia
retains a secure public mandate. It is worth noting
that the ruling coalition in Pristina also currently
enjoys a comfortable majority in Parliament. Such
circumstances can sometimes lend themselves to
courageous leadership decisions.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2022/313)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Selakovič, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Caroline
Ziadeh, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/313, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ziadeh.
Ms. Ziadeh: I am honoured to be here today, as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), to thank the Council
for its ongoing support and to brief it on the Mission’s
operations during the past six months, taking account
of developments in the region since the end of the
official reporting period. As I brief the Council today,
developments in Ukraine inevitably have influenced
and will continue to influence all issues of European
security, including in the Mission’s area of operations.
I am also briefing the Council today on the
heels of the Serbian elections, conducted on 3 April.
Although the final results are pending, the overall
2/27

20/04/2022

In the lead-up to the Serbian general elections, the
international community had urged the Pristina and
Belgrade authorities to agree on modalities to facilitate
eligible voters’ participation in Kosovo. That would
have been in line with the practice of preceding years.
This time, a solution was not identified to permit that.
Together with my international colleagues and the
representatives of various Member States, I regretted
the polarizing effects of that decision, since it divided
public opinion sharply along ethnic lines.
Nevertheless, more than 19,000 voters from
Kosovo did participate by casting their vote at special
polling stations established in Serbia. Thanks to an
impressive logistical exercise facilitated by support
from both sides, the election process went smoothly and
without incident.
The resilience of democratic institutions
throughout the Balkans region is a crucial factor in the
maintenance of a secure and democratic Europe. Earlier
this month, I met with the re-elected President of Serbia
as well as other Government leaders in Belgrade. I was
encouraged by the very direct and open conversations
I had there.
Unfortunately, incidents of serious concern took
place only a few days ago in northern Kosovo, with
attacks apparently directly targeting Kosovo police
patrols. Gunshots were fired at the patrols, and stones
and pyrotechnic devices were thrown. While the motive
is yet unknown, those criminal attacks were brazen. I
have urged the public at large and officials on all sides
to join in condemning such violence and to provide any
information they may have to law enforcement so that
those responsible are swiftly identified and brought
to justice.
Today I wish to call upon the leaders of both Pristina
and Belgrade to be very judicious in their actions
and in their political rhetoric. During such complex
days, those leaders bear the main responsibility for
reducing tensions rather than fuelling them. That
applies at the political level and, equally, in the public
arena. For those reasons, I have also urged both sides
to engage constructively and more actively in the
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU). I
received reassurances of that commitment during my
recent meetings.
I have yet to be provided the opportunity to meet with
the Prime Minister or the President in Pristina. That is
of course an important prerequisite for constructive and
positive engagement. However, I met with most leaders
from across the political spectrum in Pristina, including
those of the parties in power, those in opposition and
political independents. I will also regularly reach out
to leaders in other parts of the Balkan neighbourhood
to hear their perspectives on relations with Kosovo and
on the dialogue. I am sure that the political actors in the
region will demonstrate in deeds their understanding
that dialogue and compromise represent the only viable
path towards stability, prosperity and security for all.
Yesterday marked the ninth anniversary of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations. While that process has led to meaningful
results on various practical matters, a comprehensive
normalization of relations between the two sides so far
continues to be elusive.
Even on extremely technical subjects discussed
during this reporting period, such as vehicle registration
plates, progress remains tentative and slow. As we meet
here today, we cannot be sure whether Belgrade and
Pristina will achieve an agreed solution with regard
to that matter by tomorrow’s deadline. I would like to
encourage Pristina and Belgrade to proactively seek a
permanent solution to the vehicle licence issue, along
with other issues concerning freedom of movement,
as well as energy agreements. Whatever the pace of
discussions — which we hope will increase — another
principle bears re-emphasizing. However difficult
the path towards agreements and solutions, unilateral
actions by any side have the potential to damage the
real interests of the people of both sides.
Dramatic shocks to Kosovo’s and other regional
economies were building up well before the onset of
events in Ukraine. Following two years of the global
coronavirus disease pandemic, economies have been
struggling to first manage and then recover from
that disease’s profound effects on health, as well as
social and economic well-being. Inflation, supply
shortages, rising interest rates and increasing debt
burdens were already occurring and have since been
exacerbated. In that context, finding practical modes
of economic cooperation among Belgrade, Pristina
and all the neighbours of the region assumes greater

S/PV.9019

urgency. Any region-wide initiatives that can help
towards promoting that objective should be welcomed.
Reducing restrictions on the movement of people and
flows of goods and capital can only help all neighbours
in the region, whether with respect to current or
future challenges.
Since my arrival in Pristina, I have witnessed firsthand the internal and external challenges that weigh
on Kosovo’s political leadership. The expectations
for progress and reform are exceptionally high. The
current Government will depend upon both wise
decision-making and strong international support to
fulfil its ambitious agenda and to deliver for the people.
It is therefore logical that the subject of improving
relationships sits at the top of the agenda for so many
of Kosovo’s regional and international interlocutors.
Reconciliation and addressing the grievances of
the past should reinforce the pursuit of important
strategic objectives.
At the outset of my mandate, allow me to be very
clear about two important points.
First, as Belgrade and Pristina each know well, my
responsibility is to provide objective information to
the Secretary-General and the Security Council. I will
always remain open to listening to all views. However,
the contents of the Secretary-General’s reports are not
the subject of negotiation.
Secondly, UNMIK is not a determining factor or
the spokesperson of any particular view regarding a
just and lasting settlement between the parties. That is
not our role. Too often since my arrival, I have heard
insinuations that UNMIK, in and of itself, represents
either an obstacle or a vehicle for the outcome preferred
by one or the other side or that UNMIK itself harbours
a particular agenda to forward or favour outside the
bounds of its mandate, which is to ensure conditions for
a peaceful and normal life for all inhabitants of Kosovo.
That is the mandate. Neither of those inaccurate
perceptions contains any demonstrable truth; yet both
have too frequently been allowed to gain currency in
local public discourse.
Accordingly, we will continue our work in the
areas where we are genuinely able to help to advance
the common objectives held by the authorities,
communities and institutions in Kosovo. UNMIK’s
legacy of institutional support, its trust among
communities and political actors and its work with the
full spectrum of multilateral and bilateral actors will

22-324903/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

drive my Mission’s agenda. Naturally, that includes
working in synergy with the United Nations family of
agencies, funds and programmes and in partnership
with the international community.
Progress in high-level political discussions, in
particular the EU-facilitated dialogue, can be supported
and aided by intensified people-to-people work on
the ground. My Mission remains a locus of relevant
knowledge, experience and subject area expertise,
which serves Kosovo’s institutions and communities.
Supporting an active civil society, promoting new tools
to help Kosovo reinforce the rule of law. contributing
to the empowerment of women and young people
and providing expertise and support to human rights
mechanisms will all remain major priorities. Of course,
we will continue to explore all areas where we can
make fruitful contributions under the mandate that the
Security Council gave us.
I wish to conclude by saying that the Security
Council’s support for our Mission remains essential.
Equally important is its attention to the state of relations
between Pristina and Belgrade, even though we realize
that many new and difficult situations demand its
attention. Our efforts, as a mission, will remain focused
on contributing to stability, political progress, respect
for human rights, supporting the women and peace and
security and youth and peace and security agendas and
creating and promoting greater inter-community trust
and dialogue in Kosovo and in the region.
On behalf of all the Mission staff, I thank the
Security Council for its continuing support to UNMIK.
The President: I thank Ms. Ziadeh for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Selaković (Serbia): I have the great honour
to address this body once again on the occasion
of the consideration of most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2022/313) in the territory of our southern province,
Kosovo and Metohija.
I would like to emphasize once again that the
Republic of Serbia sees the engagement of UNMIK
as one of the key factors for maintaining peace and
security in Kosovo and Metohija.
The situation in Kosovo and Metohija is far from
normal and stable. In that part of our country, citizens
4/27

20/04/2022

of Serbian nationality, as well as other non-Albanians,
are still distressed and facing each new day with great
apprehension, because they are uncertain if their
fundamental human rights will be violated or denied.
Such feelings are a reaction to the instability generated
by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina. The goal of Pristina, based on everything we
have been witnessing on the ground, is to have even
more Serbs and other non-Albanians leave Kosovo and
Metohija and to terminate any form of cultural and
national diversity.
The report on the work of UNMIK that we
are considering today provides an overview of the
situation, with a description of the events that marked
the reporting period. We would like the report to be
more elaborate and explicit when it comes to the
assessment of events and their causes, so that we can
examine the developments in Kosovo and Metohija
more comprehensively and in their true light.
There are evident problems in Kosovo and Metohija,
and it is necessary to precisely identify the causes
in order to solve them. Creating an artificial balance
and putting a sign of equality between two sides when
looking at crisis situations does not contribute in any
way whatsoever to reaching a substantial solution to
the problem. Unless we clearly define the causes of the
problems, they will recur and become more complex.
For all persons living in Kosovo and Metohija, it
is extremely important to send a message from this
meeting to those who have the authority in their hands
and who have the capacity to change the situation for
the better. That message should point to the need to
establish inter-ethnic trust by having the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina respect the
agreements reached, implement what was agreed and
harmonize their actions with international standards
regarding the rule of law and human rights.
On 16 January, the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Pristina, contrary to resolution
1244 (1999), as well as to all democratic principles,
banned the organization of a referendum in Kosovo and
Metohija on amending the Constitution of the Republic
of Serbia in the field of the judiciary. Despite the great
efforts of international actors, including the countries
of the Quint and the European Union, to ensure that
this does not happen, Pristina repeated that illegal act
and made it impossible to organize the presidential
and parliamentary elections of Serbia in Kosovo and
Metohija on 3 April. We note that this was the first
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

time since 1999 that citizens in Kosovo and Metohija
were prevented from participating in the elections of
the Republic of Serbia, which was a violation, among
other things, of the clearly defined mandate of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
mission regarding the organization of elections. By doing
so, the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina once again demonstrated their discriminatory
character and sent a message that unilateralism is the
principle on which they act.
In the same way — that is, unilaterally — on
20 September, the Provisional Institutions deployed
special police units with armoured vehicles at two
administrative crossings to central Serbia, which
confiscated the license plates of vehicles from the
north of Kosovo and Metohija and central Serbia. The
manner in which that was done showed that their goal
was clearly to intimidate Serbs from the north of the
province, and what resulted as a consequence was a
justified revolt of the local population.
The Serbs who are victims of such actions do not find
the wounds to be as painful as the terror that is carried
out daily by Pristina against the Serbian people, both
south and north of the Ibar River. I have just quoted the
words of Srećko Sofronijević, from the town of Zvečan
in Kosovo and Metohija, uttered while he was lying in
a hospital bed. On 13 October, members of the special
police shot him in the back with a firearm when they
made an incursion into the north of the province for the
ninth time, contrary to the Brussels Agreement — that
is, illegally. We would have preferred that his name had
been included in the report we are discussing today.
Fear of uncertainty among Serbs and other
non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija is also
caused by the work done by the judiciary, which acts
on secret indictments, contrary to all international
standards. The sad reality is that today in Kosovo and
Metohija, if you are a Serb, you can be sentenced to
many years in prison on the basis of unverified or
contradictory witness statements without irrefutable
and unambiguous material evidence. That indicates the
practice of passing judgments according to ethnicity,
not according to law and justice.
The malignant nationalism of the authorities in
Pristina is manifested through the ignoring of the
political representatives of Serbs in institutions,
thereby making decisions without their participation,
and the readiness to permanently remove the leaders
of the Serb community through politically motivated

S/PV.9019

investigations and judicial proceedings. That creates
an atmosphere of complete insecurity and leads to the
exodus of Serbs from Kosovo and Metohija. To illustrate
that, let me remind Council members of the events in
the municipality of Štrpce on 21 December 2021, in
which 11 Serbs were arrested, including former mayor
and Vice-President of the Serb List, Bratislav Nikolić,
who is still in custody under the alleged fight against
corruption. On that same occasion, the employees in
the municipality were informed that they were to no
longer go to work, which jeopardized the existence of
dozens of Serbian families.
Pristina has been openly saying for a long time
that the establishment of the community of Serb
municipalities, envisaged by the Brussels Agreement,
signed nine years ago, will not be allowed. That not
only undermines the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, but also directly humiliates international actors,
primarily the European Union. With such statements,
Pristina sends a message to the Serbian people in the
province that they should not count on the exercise
of collective rights and that such disenfranchisement
should ultimately lead to Serbs disappearing entirely
from Kosovo and Metohija.
Unfortunately, there are still many ethnically
motivated incidents, hate speech, intimidation,
violations of the right to a fair trial, threatening the
right to freedom of movement and religious rights, the
desecration of churches, monasteries and cemeteries.
Instead of my spending a good part of Council members’
precious time listing them, a non-paper was distributed
to them detailing the recorded incidents against Serbs
in Kosovo and Metohija during the reporting period.
The number and nature of incidents — in the
reporting period alone there were 63, according to our
records — unequivocally speaks of the high degree
of threat and exposure to continuous discrimination
against the Serb and other non-Albanian population. The
cause-and-effect relationship between the issue of the
return of displaced persons and the number of incidents
on ethnic grounds is obvious. In such conditions,
the reasons why there are still more than 200,000
internally displaced Serbs and other non-Albanians
from Kosovo and Metohija in the Republic of Serbia are
easy to understand. We are convinced that it is in that
context, in particular, that UNMIK could and should
play an important role.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s call for
enabling the return of internally displaced persons.

22-324905/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

To that end, concrete measures are needed to ensure,
inter alia, the safety of returnees and full respect for
the property rights of displaced persons. We did not
get the impression that the institutions in Pristina have
the political will to change the situation for the better.
We are witnessing the opposite. Serbs are intimidated
in various ways and encouraged to leave their homes,
and displaced persons are discouraged from returning
to their places of birth. Such a practice is not in line
with the values and principles publicly proclaimed
by Pristina.
We would like to see clear political will and
measures to prove that discrimination on national
grounds is not a desirable social value in Kosovo
and Metohija and that coexistence is possible and
necessary. The fastest and most efficient way to do that
is to respect valid international legal documents and
concluded agreements.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Republic of Serbia will continue to constantly draw the
attention of the international community to the problems
in Kosovo and Metohija. Serbia is committed to respect
for international law and the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), which includes further UNMIK
engagement and the presence of the Kosovo Force as a
guarantor of peace and security. It is equally important
that these international missions continue to operate in
an undiminished capacity, taking into account what has
been said in today’s debate.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. GërvallaSchwarz.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz: I am honoured to be here
as the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of my country, the Republic of Kosovo.
Today’s meeting is taking place in a new era
in Europe and in the world. The Europe that existed
before the Russian invasion of Ukraine is no more. By
destroying the post-war era, Russia is endangering the
United Nations as well.
Therefore, our debate today cannot not be only about
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) because it also needs to take
those fundamental changes into account. Regarding
the presence of the United Nations in the Republic
of Kosovo, I can report only that all United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations High Commissioner
6/27

20/04/2022

for Refugees, UN-Women and many others are highly
respected and appreciated in Kosovo.
However, when we talk about UNMIK, it is an
entirely different story. UNMIK is not an administrative
mission because Kosovo has a Government. UNMIK
is not a peacekeeping mission because Kosovo’s law
enforcement and the Kosovo Force guarantee the safety
and security of our people. Basically, UNMIK no longer
plays a role in the lives of our citizens and our country.
I believe that this, in itself, is quite an encouraging
development. It proofs that Kosovo, a sovereign State,
is fulfilling its obligations towards its citizens and is a
reliable and responsible counterpart for our partners in
Europe and the world.
We are glad that we could foster and extend our
relationships with other countries — not only in Europe,
but also in Africa, Asia and America, especially
in recent months. We are proud that the Republic of
Kosovo is respected — not only at home, but also in
many European countries and beyond — as a vivid
democracy with huge potential for the future. Fourteen
years after Kosovo’s independence, our Republic is a
globally established and recognized reality. Our country
can count on many friends and partners in the region and
around the globe. The vast majority of European Union
and NATO countries recognize our independence and
support our goals to become a member of NATO, the
European Union and the United Nations.
The Republic of Kosovo enjoys robust democratic,
political and economic spheres. Yet, like all other
countries, we have been hit by the pandemic and by
the recent energy and food crisis. In the most recent
period, Kosovo allocated resources to assist citizens
and businesses. After electing a new Government in a
landslide victory last year, Kosovo has reached a phase
of a more transparent democracy committed to tackling
organized crime and ensuring the rule of law.
Today, our citizens have trust and hope in us, the
Government and our country. That trust translates into
outstanding success in other areas. Economic growth in
Kosovo in 2021 reached more than 10 per cent — one of
the biggest increases in Europe last year. We registered
a significant increase in budget revenues by more than
30 per cent, and our foreign direct investments over the
past two years have increased significantly — by more
than 65 per cent.
The trust of citizens is a very hard currency, in any
country. Our Government enjoys great trust from our
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

people, but also faces high expectations. Its work is
challenging, but is paying off and is benefiting us all.
Thanks to our fight against corruption and organized
crime, Kosovo jumped up 17 places in Transparency
International’s 2021 report. We are glad, grateful and
proud that this Government can rely on public support
for our reforms. I am honoured when decision-makers
from abroad tell us that Kosovo has become a role
model for democracy and rule of law in our region. We
will continue to uphold and strengthen those values.
Allow me to be clear that Kosovo’s independence
is not a result of a secessionist movement. Our country
was born out of the genocide committed by Serbia.
Kosovo had long resisted peacefully, non-violently,
until we were forced to defend our families and lives
in a brutal war. At the end, NATO came and rescued
us. Kosovo survived Serbia’s openly declared attempt
of extinction. Today we are an example for all victims
of aggression and genocide that justice will always
prevail in the end. Our people made their choice long
ago. We are part of the West, while Serbia, our northern
neighbour, remains Russia’s satellite. That is quite
unique in modern Europe and shows the main reason
why our region remains unstable.
In 1999, in just 18 months 15,000 people out of
1.9 million were brutally killed, 20,000 women raped,
and countless war crimes and massacres committed.
Thousands of homes, mosques, churches, schools and
whole villages were levelled to the ground. It is of the
utmost importance to mention that at the time, during
the genocide, today’s President Vučić was Milošević’s
propaganda minister. Like in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
this was no war. It was an extinction campaign, like the
one Putin is now attempting in Ukraine. We will never
forget the victims, nor should the rest of the world. Now,
the world has just learned about Russian war crimes in
Bucha and other places in Ukraine.
Let me recall the horrific Serb war crimes against
a small Catholic village in Kosovo, the Meja massacre.
On 27 April 1999, Serb forces killed at least 377
civilians, 36 of whom were under 18 years old. They
were taken out of a refugee convoy and executed by the
road. Serb forces transported the bodies to a site near
Belgrade to cover up these crimes. This is only one of
the many unspeakable atrocities committed by Serbia.
And now we are in this Chamber, 23 years later,
listening to the same Serbian officials spewing hatred
and perpetuating the same warmongering and inhuman
rhetoric. Neither Mr. Vučić, who was part of the Cabinet

S/PV.9019

of the Butcher of the Balkans, nor Mr. Selaković, nor any
other of these nationalists, has ever apologized — ever.
Instead, they keep covering up and defending the war
crimes. They praise the war criminals as heroes because
the foundation of those crimes, namely, simple veiled
hatred against our nation, racism and Serb supremacy,
is still strong and alive. Serbia is the biggest threat to
normalization and peace in the region.
Instead of coming to terms with the past, they
continue to destabilize the region, not only Kosovo.
Just last September the Serb president threatened our
country with war. This was due to a dispute about
licence plates for cars. Mr. Vučić amassed troops and
sent warplanes to our border — over licence plates for
cars. Council members can therefore see that it is not
Serbia’s past that is dangerous for us; it is the behaviour
of contemporary Serbia that should change.
The Russian ambassador to Serbia supported that
war mongering and, in September, even visited the
Serbian troops at the border at that time. Following
the same logic, the Russian ambassador to Bosnia
and Herzegovina also just threatened his host country
with war.
Recently, our ethnically diverse police teams have
become the target of terrorist attacks, with an increase
in shootings at police officers and their cars. We are
lucky that no one has been hurt so far. Attacks are
coming from Serbian territory and would be impossible
if Mr. Vučić did not tolerate them. He and his allies are
risking conflict in the Balkans, from Kosovo to Bosnia
and Herzegovina to Montenegro. Serbia and Russia
remain the biggest threat to peace in the region. If we
do not close the Pandora’s box that has been opened by
Putin, Vučić and Dodik, the Balkans might become a
dark place again.
When Vučić came into office, Serbia held just
two military exercises with Putin’s Russia a year. Last
year, however, they held more than a hundred. Serbia
has received special donations — war planes — from
Russia and Belarus. Serbia under Vučić has engaged in
an unprecedented military build-up. The country is an
army ready to attack, not to defend, which is a major
concern for all the neighbours in the region.
It is not only the equipment, but also the ideology
as well as the media campaigns, that the world has
to take seriously, as we and others in the region
have warned for quite some time. Kosovo and other
countries in the region need to protect themselves from

22-324907/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

the aggressive and dangerous threat of an autocratic
Serbia. Fortunately, we have friends and allies that are
standing by our side. Just as in the cold war, deterrence
is working. Unfortunately, it is necessary that we rely
on it in dealing with both Russia and Serbia in the
Western Balkans.
At the same time, the Republic of Kosovo is
eager, willing and ready for dialogue. We want to
move forward. For that to happen, however, Serbia
needs to accept reality first. Without the fundamental
recognition of reality, there can be no discussion, as we
do not even have reality in common. The Republic of
Kosovo is a peace-loving nation, the legality of whose
independence has been confirmed by the International
Court of Justice and recognized by the majority of the
world, indeed the overwhelming majority of fellow
peace-loving and democratic nations of the world.
There is nothing to lose or fear by recognizing Kosovo.
There is, however, plenty to gain: a more peaceful,
stable and prosperous Europe, as well as a trusted and
reliable ally.
But Serbia has to make a decision now. It has to
decide if it wants to be a part of the West or remain
Russia’s proxy. After Ukraine, one thing is for sure:
sitting in two chairs at the same time, aligning with
both parties, is no longer an option; that time is over.
Russian aggression has ended that era.
There is nothing provisional about the Republic of
Kosovo and its independence. The Republic of Kosovo
as a sovereign country is here to stay. Recognizing that
reality is a fundamental step towards a European future.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Sharma (India): I would like to thank the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ms. Caroline Ziadeh,
for her first briefing to the Security Council on the
activities of the UNMIK. We welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Nikola Selaković, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, at today’s meeting.
Let me begin by reiterating India’s principled
position of supporting the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Serbia. We believe that all outstanding
issues need to be resolved through peaceful negotiations.
In this regard, we take note of the meetings held between
Serbia and authorities in Pristina since 2014 under the
auspices of the European Union (EU).
8/27

20/04/2022

It is important that meetings are held without any
preconditions and in good faith. The implementation of
signed agreements, including on the establishment of an
association of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo,
will remain fundamental. Further, both sides need to
find common ground to overcome mutual concerns,
including political and ethnic issues. We welcome the
ongoing efforts, including that of Quint members and
the EU, towards resumption of dialogue.
The issue of missing persons, given its humanitarian
character, needs to be resolved as a priority. We hope
that, with the support of UNMIK, the authorities will
be able to determine the fate of persons who remain
missing. The voluntary and safe return of internally
displaced persons from other countries in the region
is also essential as a confidence-building measure.
Together with other international partners, UNMIK
should continue to encourage the Pristina authorities to
address the problems of all communities.
We have taken note of the activities of the EU
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) during the
reporting period. Further, as part of an international
cooperation effort, we are happy to note that the Kosovo
Force troops have continued to effectively fulfil their
mandate under resolution 1244 (1999). Both missions
need to adhere to their respective mandates and
maintain neutrality. Their close tactical cooperation
with EULEX and the police authorities in Pristina has
ensured that the overall security situation remains safe
and secure.
In conclusion, I would like to note with appreciation
that UNMIK has been playing an important role in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights. We call on all sides to fully cooperate with
UNMIK and facilitate its work.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I want to begin by
welcoming Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ziadeh to the Security Council for the first
time. She has our full support in her work going
forward. I would also like to recognize Ministers
Gërvalla-Schwarz and Selaković and welcome them to
the Council.
Building peace takes political will. It takes
compromise, and it takes open channels of
communication. In Ireland, we value and believe in
dialogue because we have seen that dialogue delivers.
It brings peace, it delivers progress and it delivers
for people.
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

That is why we support the Secretary-General’s
call for constructive and sincere engagement in the
European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. That United Nations-mandated
dialogue is the channel through which issues and
tensions between Kosovo and Serbia can and should
be resolved.
Both sides have a responsibility to refrain from
further divisive rhetoric or actions and to respect and
implement the commitments that they have made
under the dialogue without delay. There have been
concrete gains that have improved the daily lives of all
communities in Kosovo, and those must not be frittered
away by actions that risk aggravating tensions.
A comprehensive, final and legally binding
normalization agreement is essential for the European
perspective of both Kosovo and Serbia, and for wider
stability in the Western Balkans region.
We very much welcome the steps taken by Kosovo to
address sexual and gender-based violence, in particular
the adoption of a strategy against domestic violence
and violence against women. We also value and support
the role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the promotion of
gender equality, including through progressing the
women and peace and security and youth, peace and
security agendas, and providing support for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence.
The women of Kosovo have made remarkable
gains in political representation at the national level,
and we hope to see that replicated at the local level in
the coming years. For that to happen, any remaining
barriers preventing women’s full and equal participation
in political life must be removed. The support or access
to the resources they need to run for office at the
local level also need to be addressed. The meaningful
inclusion of Kosovo’s youth in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding efforts is also essential to achieving
sustainable and lasting peace, and we took note of the
comments made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the focus that she will putting on
those agendas in her remarks.
We know that the people of Kosovo want prosperity
and stability. We also know that they see EU accession
as contributing to that end and note the progress made
by the Government of Kosovo in advancing the EU
reform agenda. At the same time, more needs to be
done, particularly in relation to rule of law.

S/PV.9019

In that context, I also wish to underline Ireland’s
support for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers.
Countering impunity for past crimes is essential
to preventing future violations. It is vital that the
authorities in Kosovo adhere to their commitments to
the Specialist Chambers.
The United Nations continues to play an important
role through its trust-building projects bringing
together members of different communities, in
particular young people, as well as supporting the most
vulnerable and marginalized communities in Kosovo.
We value in particular UNMIK’s work on missing
persons and the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the return
of displaced persons.
Progress on both those issues can provide muchneeded comfort and solace to the families of the missing
and those who have been displaced for too long. They
are essential steps in the process of reconciliation in
Kosovo and are important for building confidence
between Kosovo and Serbia.
We see all too often in the Council the misery
caused by conflict. We know that it takes courage to
overcome conflict and to overcome the divisions caused
by conflict, but those are the steps that need to be taken
and that are worth taking to benefit the peoples of
Kosovo and Serbia.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I will begin by welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Caroline
Ziadeh, and to thank her for her first briefing to the
Council as the Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
also welcome Minister Selaković and Ms. GërvallaSchwarz.
Mexico has followed with concern the recent events
in the Kosovo region and reiterates the importance for
all parties to abstain from actions, policies and rhetoric
that could increase tensions. We deplore the recent
attacks against police officers in the Kosovo region
and echo the statement made by Special Representative
Ziadeh calling for moderation and for those who are
responsible to be brought to justice.
A constructive Belgrade-Pristina dialogue without
preconditions is the only possible way to find a mutually
acceptable solution that will contribute to peace in
the region, social cohesion and respect for the rights
of minorities. That is particularly important given the

22-324909/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

current circumstances in Europe resulting from the
war in Ukraine. We deplore the fact that in the past six
months, progress in that respect has been minimal, and
we believe that the Council must make an unambiguous
call for redoubled efforts.
The inclusive and significant participation of
women in all aspects of public life, including in the
European Union-facilitated dialogue, is critical. We
should bear in mind the priorities and expectations
of women, youth, civil society and a broad array of
interested actors in order to move forward. We hope
that the delegations participating in the dialogue will
genuinely include the voices of women and youth.
Moreover, we have witnessed with dismay the high
levels of violence against women. The study carried
out by UN-Women at the end of last year concluded
that gender-based violence in the political sphere and
obstacles to women’s full participation in politics are
intrinsically linked to exclusion, marginalization and
other forms of discrimination. Such actions must be
uprooted, and we therefore welcome the adoption of
a protection strategy against domestic violence and
violence against women. That strategy must be in
line with the highest international standards, such as
those reflected in the Council of Europe Convention
on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women
and Domestic Violence Istanbul Convention, that is, the
Istanbul Convention.
Although the conflict ended a number of decades
ago, its impact is still being felt. I would like to highlight
two aspects thereof.
The first is that there are still 1,620 people who have
been missing since 1999. We recognize the important
backstopping efforts of UNMIK in maintaining
contact with the families and the members of the
Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on persons who are
unaccounted for in connection with events in Kosovo.
However, we deplore the fact that the working group
did not meet during this period, and we call on the
parties to resume cooperation within the group, which
has proved effective in the past.
Secondly, more than 15,000 persons are displaced
within the Kosovo region, almost 70,000 in the
Western Balkans and 200,000 persons from Kosovo,
the majority in Serbia. We recall the importance of
protecting the right of all persons to return to their
places of origin. We also urge the authorities in the
Kosovo region to work with civil-society organizations
10/27

20/04/2022

and local communities to create an environment that is
conducive to their voluntary, safe and dignified return
as well as to promote the process of reintegration and
reconciliation.
I will conclude by expressing my country’s
gratitude to UNMIK for the important work it does to
promote intercommunal and intercultural dialogue and
to promote and protect human rights in coordination
with the Kosovo Force, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We hope that with political will, in the next review of
the Council of this issue we will be able to speak about
tangible progress.
Mr. Coraiola Yinde Kloss (Brazil): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for her remarks regarding the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from September 2021 to March of this year.
Brazil appreciates the efforts of UNMIK in
assisting the people of Kosovo. We understand that,
despite remaining challenges, the Mission has been
accomplishing some of its main objectives, as set out
in resolution 1244 (1999), especially in overseeing
the development of local institutions, supporting
peacebuilding activities and providing assistance to local
authorities to perform basic administrative functions.
Nevertheless, the recent report (S/2022/313) points out
that more needs to be done regarding the strengthening
of the rule of law, the fight against corruption and
organized crime, respect for the rights of minorities
and, crucially, the establishment of the Association/
Community of Serb-majority Municipalities in Kosovo,
as agreed in the Brussels Agreement.
We also acknowledge the initiatives led by the
European Union and the United States to foster dialogue
and understanding between Pristina and Belgrade. In
that regard, the resumption of direct contact between
the authorities from both parties last October is
particularly welcomed.
We note that, despite the continuous support of
the international community, a political settlement
remains elusive. As the UNMIK report makes clear,
there is much distrust and lack of cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina. Furthermore, within Kosovo,
Serbs and other minorities feel discriminated against
and persecuted. That is most unfortunate, since the
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

political stability of Kosovo is of paramount importance
to the Western Balkans.
In that regard, we believe that the persistent
discussion on the recognition of Kosovo as an
independent State has been detrimental to the wider
political process and has undermined the prospects
for meaningful regional cooperation. Resolution
1244 (1999) is clear that the people of Kosovo can
enjoy substantial autonomy within Serbia, while the
development of self-governing political institutions is
aimed at ensuring conditions for a peaceful and normal
life for all the inhabitants of Kosovo. As the reports of the
Secretary-General inform us, substantial autonomy for
Kosovo has generally been achieved, but the conditions
for a peaceful and normal life for all communities in
the region have not yet been accomplished. Hence, the
main objective of UNMIK remains unfulfilled, and the
debate about an independent Kosovo seems premature.
It is necessary to put in place a broad dialogue
among the various communities in the region in order
to bring about much-needed stability and prosperity.
The principles for that comprehensive political dialogue
must be the strict observance of human rights, including
freedom of religion and the integrity of religious sites,
and the strengthening of the rule of law.
Many observers have noted that the status quo
in Kosovo is unsustainable and that the lack of
agreement may not only worsen tensions and deepen
the estrangement among all communities, but it also
risks irreversible changes on the ground and further
reduces the prospects of a settlement. Hence, Pristina
and Belgrade must display a renewed sense of urgency
in resuming the negotiating process.
Brazil does not underestimate the complexity of
issues involved, in particular regarding the future
status of Kosovo. Brazil has always supported, and
will remain supportive of, the efforts to bring about
a negotiated solution that allows the peoples of the
Balkans to live in peace, with security and prosperity.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ziadeh
for her briefing. I welcome the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Selaković. I
also listen attentively to the statement by Ms. GërvallaSchwarz.
At a time when Europe faces enormous security
challenges, maintaining stability in Kosovo is of even
greater significance. The international community,

S/PV.9019

particularly the Security Council, should maintain its
attention and engagement, work within the framework
of resolution 1244 (1999) and support the parties
concerned in seeking a mutually acceptable political
solution through negotiations and consultation. In
that process, Serbia’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity should be fully respected. In the
light of the current situation, I would like to make
four points.
First, it is important to maintain the security and
stability of Kosovo. Since September last year, Kosovo
has taken a series of unilateral actions, leading to an
escalation of tensions. Until the two sides reach a new
consensus through dialogue and consultation, any
unilateral actions will lead only to heightened tensions,
which are not in the interest of any party or in the
overall security interests of Europe. The temporary
arrangement on vehicle registration plates is about to
expire. China encourages the two sides to reach a flexible
and pragmatic arrangement, under the coordination
of the European Union (EU), and to actively consider
extending the current temporary arrangement.
Secondly, it is important to protect the legitimate
rights of Kosovo Serbs. The harmonious coexistence
of all ethnic groups is the key to realizing long-term
stability in Kosovo. Pristina should adopt active
measures to enhance mutual trust, solidarity and
cooperation among all ethnic groups, including
safeguarding the legitimate rights of Kosovo Serbs.
Since January this year, there have been disputes
between the two sides over the participation of Serbs
living in Kosovo in Serbian elections.
China believes that any unilateral steps in
violation of established practice will only exacerbate
existing differences and will not contribute to the
political settlement of the Kosovo issue. We hope that
similar incidents will not reoccur. In that regard, the
international community, in particular the EU, should
play an important role.
Thirdly, it is important to continue to promote
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. Since July last
year, the high-level talks have once again been at an
impasse. We look forward to the relaunching of the
dialogue process under the auspices of the EU. The
negotiation outcomes already reached by the two sides
should be fully respected and implemented. We urge
Kosovo to take concrete measures to implement as soon
as possible the provisions of the Brussels Agreement
for the establishment of the Association/Community of

22-3249011/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

Serb-majority Municipalities in order to resolve a key
obstacle in the bilateral relationship.
Fourthly, it is important to support the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in fulfilling its mandate. UNMIK was established
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), and it shoulders
important responsibilities regarding the Kosovo issue.
Given the current standstill in bilateral talks and the
ongoing tensions on the ground, maintaining UNMIK’s
presence is crucial. China appreciates the efforts of
UNMIK, under the leadership of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ziadeh, and supports UNMIK
in carrying out its work in accordance with its mandate
and playing an important role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo, responding to the coronavirus
disease pandemic, promoting national reconciliation
and assisting the return of displaced persons.
The United Nations and the Security Council should
continue to support UNMIK and provide the political
backing, personnel and financial resources required for
the full implementation of its mandate. Kosovo should
also provide security guarantees and facilitation for
UNMIK’s mandated operations.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): First of all, I would like to congratulate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Caroline Ziadeh on her first briefing on the situation
in the province, and I thank her for the views that she
provided. We welcome the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Minister of Serbia, Mr. Nikola Selaković.
We listened to the views of Ms. Donika GërvallaSchwarz.
At the outset, we would like to emphasize that
the position of the Russian Federation on Kosovo
remains unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains
the international legal basis for the settlement of this
issue. We support Belgrade and Pristina in reaching
a viable, mutually acceptable solution, on the basis
of that Security Council resolution, which should be
in line with international law and be endorsed by the
Security Council.
Before turning to an assessment of the current
situation in the province, I should like to remind
colleagues that this March marked the twentythird anniversary of the NATO coalition bombing of
Belgrade. As a result of that operation, which lasted 78
days, thousands of civilians were killed and more than
1,500 residential areas, 60 bridges, 30 per cent of all
12/27

20/04/2022

schools, hospitals and approximately 100 monuments
were destroyed. The coalition used tens of thousands of
bombs and cruise missiles, many of them equipped with
depleted uranium. In total, 15 tons of that radioactive
substance were released, thereby contaminating a large
area. The dire consequences of that crime for human
health and the environment can still be seen today.
We also cannot overlook NATO’s choice of an
ally on the ground — the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) — whose many crimes remain unpunished to this
day. On 7 January 2011, a report by the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe was published on the
crimes committed by members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army between 1998 and 2000, including crimes against
humanity, war crimes, systematic abductions and
killings, as well as widespread organ trafficking.
It is now 2022, and we are still closely following
the work of the Specialist Court on the investigation of
KLA crimes. We continue to hope for an objective trial
and fair verdicts. So far that has been in vain. For our
part, we view as unacceptable attempts by Pristina to
challenge the legitimacy of the judicial process and to
convince the international community of the manifest
infallibility of the KLA’s representatives.
I also recall that, on 24 March 1999 (see S/PV.3988),
the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations, Mr. Lavrov, cautioned about
the long-term adverse consequences of such an act
by NATO, not only for the prospects for resolving the
Kosovo situation and ensuring security in the Balkans
but also for the stability of the entire contemporary
system of international relations. It is clear that that was
when the West tried on the role of the world’s policeman
and opened a Pandora’s box.
An important step towards ending the bloodshed
and starting work towards reconciliation between
Belgrade and Pristina should have been the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). However,
the Western permanent members of the Security
Council were the first to lose sight of the resolution,
as they rushed to recognize Kosovo’s unilateral
declaration of independence in 2008. There was no
referendum or resolution of the Security Council or the
General Assembly to that effect. As a result, a Kosovo
quasi-State, a Western pet project, was created.
After another two years, the negotiations were placed
under Brussels’ auspices. However, unfortunately, the
Brussels Agreement, reached by the parties in 2013,
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

did not lead to tangible political results. Under myriad
pretexts Kosovo Albanians have been sabotaging the
creation of an association of Serb municipalities for
nine years, thereby derailing the process of inter-ethnic
reconciliation in the province. After all, the association
was intended to provide basic guarantees for the survival
of Kosovo Serbs in the areas of security, judicial and
political affairs and socioeconomic and cultural affairs.
We regret that neither the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/313) nor statements of most our colleagues pay
any considerable attention to that issue.
Without the association, Kosovo Serbs remain in a
very disadvantaged position. Here is a vivid example –
attacks on Kosovo Serbs and their property doubled in
2021 as compared to 2020. There has also been a sharp
increase in attacks this year, with 35 incidents taking
place between January and March alone.
Let us recall that, since 1999, there have been
virtually no Serbs in southern Kosovo. However,
systematic efforts to definitively drive them out of the
province continue, and there is an obvious attempt to
erase their cultural and religious identity. Orthodox
churches and monasteries, including those on the
UNESCO World Heritage List, are under constant
threat. One of them, the Vsoki Dečani monastery, has
not been able to regain its lands since 2016, despite
the decision of the so-called Constitutional Court of
Kosovo in its favour.
In addition to Serbs, other non-Albanians are
being subjected to discrimination. In fact, all national
minorities are being forced out of the province. The
number of non-Albanians returning to Kosovo are
negligible. I ask my colleagues in the Security Council to
reflect on whether they want to be complicit in creating
an ethnically cleansed Kosovo for Albanians only. For
Russia, such a prospect is categorically unacceptable.
Also absolutely unacceptable is the way in which
the so-called provincial Government has treated the
electoral rights of Kosovo Serbs. Contrary to previous
practice, they were forbidden from voting — first in the
Serbian referendum on 16 January and, subsequently,
during the general presidential and parliamentary
elections of 3 April. Ultimately, tens of thousands of
people were excluded from the democratic process. We
strongly condemn attempts to obscure the long-term
negative effect of what happened. We demand that in
the future such legal violence be countered — in deed
and not in word — by the international presence, in
line with its broad authority, first and foremost by the

S/PV.9019

missions of the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Other dangerous unilateral actions by Kosovars
include their efforts to destabilize the Serb-populated
north of the province. In September and October
2021, the situation almost spiralled out of control
when Pristina’s special forces occupied a checkpoint
Administrative Boundary Line and a number of other
areas. It should be recalled that the Kosovo police
used firearms. Dozens of civilians were injured. Such
reckless conduct continues to this day, including in
the isolated — and therefore more vulnerable — Serb
enclaves in the south. Each new pretext is more absurd
than the previous. They range from unsuccessful
searches for contraband to attempts to seize coronavirus
disease vaccines.
Pristina’s
actions
towards
UNMIK
are
unacceptable. Kosovo Albanians involved in the
beating and detention of UNMIK officer Mikhail
Krasnoshchekov on 28 May 2019 have still not been
brought to justice. Another Mission representative,
Mr. Antonov, was declared persona non grata by
regional authorities on 31 December 2021, in flagrant
violation of established international legal norms.
Clearly, the United Nations must do more to ensure the
inviolability of its representatives in Kosovo. The work
of the Mission in the province is more important than
ever. It must be able to fully carry out its mandate and
have the necessary resources to do so.
We are seriously concerned by the ongoing attempts
since late February by Mr. Kurti and his network to
undermine the situation in the region by escalating
anti-Serb rhetoric and calling on the West to protect
Kosovo from the threats it allegedly faces. Pristina has
begun to demand expedited integration into NATO and
other Western alliances and to seek the deployment of
a new permanent United States military base in the
province. Such plans, including the intention to create
a full-fledged army in Kosovo, are fundamentally in
violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and are fraught
with the risk of further escalating tensions. We have
repeatedly heard about the British deliveries to Pristina
of anti-tank missile launchers and guided missiles, and
the deployment of instructors to train the security forces.
As for Kosovars themselves, they would be welladvised to fundamentally reconsider their priorities and
not to allocate resources for the purchase of weapons,
including through a special fund established to raise

22-3249013/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

funds for strengthening the defence of the province, but
for addressing the difficult socioeconomic situation.
Those are the realities of the modern so-called State
of Kosovo. Despite the methods adopted by the United
States and a number of European countries when it was
created in 1999, which I mentioned at the beginning
of my statement, currently neither Brussels nor even
Washington are in a position to exert significant
influence over Pristina. Even the harsh criticism of
Kosovo for its failure to comply with basic democratic
and human rights standards, which Western countries
have resorted to of late, has failed to yield results.
Clearly, these kinds of observations are insufficient.
In fact, no tangible steps are being undertaken. That
brings dialogue to a dead end and leads Brussels on
a path to discreditation of mediation efforts, which is
especially unfortunate given that the protracted crisis
in the province is escalating. There are clear threats
from this area to all of Europe — economic, migration
and even terrorist threats. It is important to understand
that this is a reckless approach.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Ms. Caroline Ziadeh,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for her briefing and wish
her success in her new position. I welcome Ms. Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs and Diaspora of the Republic of
Kosovo, and Mr. Nikola Selakovič, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, to this meeting.
Let me start by commending the Republic of
Kosovo and its authorities for their achievements,
despite the largely unfavourable environment due to
the coronavirus disease pandemic. Local elections held
in October brought forth yet further confirmation of
how much Kosovo has advanced in building a State for
the citizens by the citizens. Kosovo is a full-fledged
democracy and an important actor for stability in
the region. Its democratic internal development and
its foreign and security policy have contributed to
stabilizing the Western Balkans.
As we heard today, Kosovo’s advancement on the
women and peace and security agenda and the youth,
peace and security agenda, in addition to an increase in
the number of elected women, including to the highest
positions, is remarkable.
We applaud Kosovo’s clear positioning on Ukraine
and its alignment with sanctions, and commend
14/27

20/04/2022

the Government and the people of Kosovo for their
generosity in receiving Afghan refugees and, lately,
also Ukrainian displaced persons, including journalists.
Since 1999, for 23 years, UNMIK has supported
Kosovo and its citizens in rebuilding their future. We
thank all those who have offered their contribution to
help Kosovo and its citizens move ahead.
Following the declaration of independence in 2008
and its international legitimacy through the opinion of
the International Court of Justice in 2011, UNMIK’s
competencies and responsibilities have been gradually
transferred to the Kosovo authorities. It was the right
thing to do. Also, in response to the considerably
improved reality, Council meetings on this issue have
become more infrequent. Indeed, when there is not
much to say, there is no need to meet.
We have therefore come to a moment that calls for a
reality check. With the overall progress and consolidation
of Kosovo institutions, with the strengthening of its
international profile and the prospects of agreement
through ongoing dialogue, there was no doubt that the
role of UNMIK would further diminish and erode.
There is nothing wrong with that. It is in the nature
of things. United Nations missions are not meant to
continue in perpetuity. They are there to perform their
task and exit as soon as possible. UNMIK is not part of
the walls of Kosovo. It was mandated to do a job and, in
our view, that job, in its core mandate, is done. We ask
ourselves how UNMIK, in its current configuration, is
relevant and further needed in Kosovo.
We have very carefully read the SecretaryGeneral’s report on UNMIK (S/2022/313). The Mission
has no crucial role in any of the key issues with which
Kosovo needs assistance. Dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia is facilitated by the European Union (EU).
Public order and security are the focus of the Kosovo
Police, the Kosovo Security Force, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force.
The rights of national minorities are enshrined in the
country’s Constitution and carried out through its
institutions. The Kosovo justice system is consolidated
and improving
There is a key element to keep in mind — the
Kosovo situation is no longer a matter of peace and
security. Kosovo is no longer an issue under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Speaking
of peacekeeping now in Kosovo is meaningless. We
therefore wonder about UNMIK’s raison d’être.
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

Its budget of roughly $42 million per year and its
staff of 374 people call for an overall review of the role
and effectiveness of UNMIK so as to avoid duplication
with other agencies operating there or simply spinning
in the void, with a view to the Council terminating
UNMIK’s mandate and helping move to a more
effective United Nations presence fully fit-for-purpose,
in accordance with the needs of the country.
In that connection, we commend the work of
the United Nations country team in response to
Kosovo’s needs and priorities. But while UNMIK is
in Kosovo, we will expect it to do its best and — in
full impartiality — help Kosovo and its citizens. We
listened very carefully to the commitment of the Special
Representative in that respect.
Despite legal aspects involved on how the
communication was handled, we expect UNMIK to
fully and properly investigate the allegations against its
personnel who were declared persona non grata by the
authorities. Who the persons are and what they did is of
public knowledge. We expect UNMIK to properly vet
their hires and have them behave in strict conformity
with their mandate in full impartiality — not for
any obscure agenda — and in respect of the national
security of Kosovo and the rules of the host country.
We fully support the EU-facilitated dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia and call on all those
involved to accelerate it. There is no alternative to
dialogue, but what is needed is an active and productive
process — not a frozen one. A never-ending dialogue
without results simply erodes public trust.
The image of the Balkans as a place of turmoil and
political instability is bygone. Wounds of the past have
not completely disappeared, of course. How could they,
given what Kosovo and the region have been through?
We must not forget the missing persons. There should
never be impunity for sexual violence in conflict. We
hear the silent scream of some 20,000 Kosovo women
and girls who were used as a weapon of war by Serbs
who are still at large. Yet attention should be devoted to
improving the present and the future. While the Balkans
are nowhere near perfection, they live nowadays in a
completely different reality. I challenge anyone — in
the Council or outside of it — to argue and prove that
the Balkans are not nowadays much better off with
Kosovo as an independent country.
The independence of Kosovo is a reality, an issue
settled 14 years ago. It is not for discussion in the

S/PV.9019

Council or outside of it. It has been a question for the
Kosovars to decide — and they have. Since 2008, the
entire region advances in peace and development, with
a concrete reality and an ever-increasing prospect of
close regional cooperation, moving individually and
collectively towards the European Union. Maybe it is
not known in the Council, but the Western Balkans
have created common institutions in which Serb and
Kosovar nationals serve together, such as the Western
Balkans Fund and the Regional Youth Cooperation
Office, both headquartered in Tirana.
Our leaders meet all the time, everywhere, in
Albania and Serbia, in North Macedonia and Kosovo,
and they do not talk about conflicts, tensions or war.
They talk about reconciliation and cooperation; we talk
about the free movement of people and capital. We talk
Europe. This is, in our view, is the best investment for
the future. In our part of the world, we do not need
more weapons, we need brains. We do not need killing
drones; we need ideas, innovation and investments.
Finally, let me address one key issue for the region,
for both Kosovo and Serbia — reconciliation. The
war of aggression in Ukraine brought to our mind the
dreadful memories of the war during the dissolution of
Yugoslavia. Massacres of the civilian population — be
they in Bucha, Ukraine, or in Račak, Kosovo, or in
Srebrenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina — all have one
thing in common: they are despicable, unacceptable,
intolerable crimes. And accountability always ends
by knocking on the door. Milošević died behind bars;
Karadžić was convicted of genocide and is paying for
his deeds. A word to the wise: the instrumentalization
of national minorities — in Kosovo or anywhere
else — is playing with fire, with terrible consequences,
as we have seen so many times. Our region has seen the
worst of it in the past.
We have argued several times that Russian
aggression directly and indirectly affects the entire
world, including the Western Balkans, and we should
not lose sight of or focus on the need to properly
mitigate those threats. Russian proxies in the region
should not be allowed any space to undermine or roll
back achievements.
In this respect, we condemn in the strongest
possible terms the recent attacks against the police in
Kosovo, as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral also rightly did. Such criminal attacks only
create artificial tensions that favour illegal activity.
They should be condemned by all, including Serbia,

22-3249015/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

and perpetrators must be held accountable. No part
of the territory of Kosovo should be left in the hands
of lawlessness, and we strongly encourage Kosovo
authorities to do whatever is needed to make law prevail.
The rule of law for democracies should never
be open to question. Extensive legislation and good
practices with regard to national minorities exist in
Europe and the Balkans, and Kosovo has one of the
best and strongest legislative frameworks as well as an
exemplary implementation record. It is not just us who
are saying that. Even though the minority population
of Kosovo counts for less than 5 per cent, Kosovo has
established itself as a multi-ethnic State. We disagree
with the dark picture painted by the Serbian Foreign
Minister in this respect, since it is simply not the case.
Creation of artificial entities that can only lead to
dysfunctional States is not an option and should not be
supported, and Albania will never condone it. The only
viable solutions are those that guarantee rights by law
and exercise them through institutions, and this must be
the case in Kosovo as well.
I would like to encourage Serbia and Kosovo to
engage seriously in the EU-facilitated dialogue and, by
closing the dark chapters of the past, design their future
through mutual recognition, good-neighbourliness,
increased economic and trade relations, exchanges in
science, education and culture, and people-to-people
contacts, in particular among youth. There is nothing to
invent since everything has been done before. The only
need is for more political courage, wisdom and vision.
I would add a further word, which I had not planned
to say. I listened to our Russian colleague and regret to
be obligated to react, but since I have the floor, I would
like to say that, coming from the region, what we heard
today is not true. In the last few weeks, we have become
accustomed to Russia’s false narratives in relation to
Ukraine. Now Russia is extending them to Kosovo. We
regret that Russia cannot see the changed reality in the
Western Balkans. Russia’s vision is blurred, so rather
than seeing the region as it is, Russia sees it as it wishes
it were. We are sorry for that.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Caroline Ziadeh for her briefing on the latest
developments on the ground and for her intense activity
since taking office. I welcome the participation at this
meeting of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, His
Excellency Nikola Selaković, and I thank Ms. GërvallaSchwarz for her statement.
16/27

20/04/2022

More than two decades after the establishment of
the international presence pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999), the situation in Kosovo remains worrying on
several counts. The normalization process between
Kosovo and Serbia has fallen short of expectations. It is
regrettable that diplomatic moves and various initiatives
aimed at resuming a dialogue in good faith, on the basis
of existing agreements, have not brought results.
Despite a few meetings at the technical level, the
dialogue is struggling to rise to a high level, with only
one high-level meeting having taken place during the
reporting period. Normalization is central to Kosovo’s
regional and international integration process and is the
driving force that will enable it to enter a virtuous cycle
in terms of development.
The issue of free movement remains a major
challenge. It is nevertheless crucial for Kosovo’s
cohesion that all citizens enjoy their full right to
circulate without fear for their safety. To this end, a
sustainable solution must be found for license plates in
the Serb-majority northern region.
The implementation of the Brussels Agreement is
an important pillar in the normalization process and a
vital element for the autonomy of the Serb communities.
Delaying its implementation can only take Kosovo
further away from the stability it needs. I would
nevertheless like to commend the actions of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) aimed at promoting living together and
increasing inter-ethnic relations and social cohesion.
We also welcome President Vučić’s stated
willingness to continue negotiations with Pristina on
the establishment of an association of Serb-majority
municipalities, as provided for in the First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
of April 2013. A stronger commitment is indeed needed
to give new momentum in this direction. The people
of Kosovo need this normalization for their well-being
and for their economic development.
It is in that context that we deplore the decision of the
Kosovo Parliament to no longer allow the participation
of Kosovo Serbs in Kosovo Serbian electoral processes.
We urge the authorities of Kosovo and Serbia to find a
mutually satisfactory agreement in this area. Currently,
the Quint has a role to play in this regard.
The security situation in Kosovo is still very
fragile. Violence is particularly affecting minority
communities, especially the Serbian community.
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

These violations also affect places of worship and
religious cemeteries and undermine living together
and interaction between communities. Discrimination
against minority communities must be addressed
more vigorously, and the law on protection against
discrimination must be implemented.
Progress on the return and reintegration of
internally displaced persons was also very slow, with
only 118 returns registered by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees during the
reporting period. A durable solution to the situation of
these people is urgently needed so that they can return
to their homes in favourable conditions.
The issue of missing persons is of crucial interest
for the construction of Kosovo. The fact that the
Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on Missing Persons
held no meetings during the reporting period further
postpones the administration of the cases of 1,620
persons still missing as a result of the events of 1998
and 1999. We encourage UNMIK to continue its efforts
in this regard.
We also commend the work of the Kosovo
Government commission responsible for the verification
and recognition of the status of survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, which was able to grant survivor
status to 1,149 applicants of the 1,656 applications
received. Granting survivor status to victims of
sexual crimes is an important step in their recovery.
It is also a significant contribution to peacebuilding.
We encourage UNMIK’s support for the commission
granting survivor status to 12 victims before the end
of the commission’s mandate in 2023. More generally,
we encourage the increased participation of women in
the process, as well as all actions and policies aimed at
better taking women into account in public life.
In conclusion, my country reaffirms its support
for UNMIK, and we reiterate our encouragement in its
mission to rebuild peace and cohesion in Kosovo.
Ms. Syed (Norway): Let me take this opportunity
to warmly welcome Ms. Caroline Ziadeh back to the
Security Council in her new and challenging position
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Kosovo and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Norway
looks forward to working closely with her and her team.
Let me also thank her also for her first briefing to the
Security Council and for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/313).

S/PV.9019

One key political and security development within
the reporting period was centred around Kosovo’s
local elections. We are pleased that the overall conduct
of these elections was assessed as positive by the
European Union (EU), while it did also note some
lack of transparency and accountability. Yet, when it
came to the Serbian presidential and parliamentary
elections in April, the Kosovo Government did not
take the opportunity to demonstrate its commitment
to the principle of protecting the political and civil
rights of all its citizens. We acknowledge that it is part
of the prerogative of Kosovo to decide whether or not
to permit voting in another country’s elections on its
territory. However, we note that Kosovo decided not to
allow participation in the Serbian elections, which had
been the case previously.
Last September we saw renewed tensions between
Belgrade and Pristina, triggered by long-standing,
unresolved aspects of the freedom of movement.
A permanent solution to the licence-plate issue is
urgent and would be a step in the right direction.
We encourage the parties to strengthen dialogue
and to engage constructively based on the Brussels
Agreement while also exercising pragmatism in finding
mutually acceptable compromises and respecting the
commitments already undertaken.
Above all, a comprehensive agreement between
Kosovo and Serbia on the full normalization of relations
is key to averting a frozen conflict and to achieving
improved economic development for all.
Like other speakers, we are deeply concerned about
last week’s attacks on the Kosovo police in the north
of Kosovo. We note that the relevant law-enforcement
agencies are investigating the incidents and stress
that any use of force against the Kosovo police is
unacceptable. We also echo the Secretary-General
in welcoming the adoption of Kosovo’s strategy for
protection against domestic violence and violence
against women, and we emphasize the importance
of having the standards of the Istanbul Convention
reflected in its implementation. Inclusive approaches
are key to peace. Gender mainstreaming as well as
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in any dialogue or decisions about post-conflict
peacebuilding and the future of Kosovo remain crucial.
The question of a review of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has been raised
several times. While noting that the Mission pursues

22-3249017/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

important work in various areas, we would support a
closer look at possible efficiency improvements.
We note the slow overall progress in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue and urge all actors to engage
fully. Both Kosovo and Serbia should intensify their
efforts to improve relations and refrain from actions and
rhetoric that may set back dialogue or further increase
tensions leading to incidents. There is no alternative to
the EU-led process; it needs our full support. Norway
will continue to work closely with EU institutions, key
EU member States and the United States to that end.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I welcome Ms. Caroline Ziadeh,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and thank her for her
first briefing to the Security Council and her tireless
efforts alongside the Mission’s team. I also welcome
the participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, His Excellency Nikola Selaković, and the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Diaspora, Her Excellency Donika Gërvalla-Schwarz, in
today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates believes in the
importance of intensifying efforts to reduce tensions,
encourage dialogue and prevent any exacerbations of
disagreements between ethnic groups in Kosovo on the
one hand and between Kosovo and Serbia on the other,
especially in the light of the escalated conflict and the
current situation in Europe, which has cast a shadow
over the entire region, including the Balkans.
It is imperative in that regard to recall that more
than two decades have elapsed since the region
was engulfed in a destructive war, during which
important and tangible progress was made to achieve
reconciliation. It is thus essential that those efforts do
not regress as a result of the recent turmoil in Europe.
From that standpoint, it is important to focus on the
following points.
First, we encourage continuing the dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia facilitated by the European
Union to reach a convergence of positions between both
parties. In that regard, we stress that current tensions
should not undermine the efforts made towards peace
and stability. Thus we encourage both parties to return
to the negotiating table as dialogue is the only way to
resolve the outstanding issues between them.
18/27

20/04/2022

Secondly, we commend the ongoing efforts to
disseminate the values of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence across all segments of society in Kosovo.
In that context, we stress the importance of countering
hate speech and preventing the dissemination thereof,
especially through social media, in order to build
peaceful, secure and prosperous societies in the region.
In that regard, we must look towards forging
the conditions necessary for peaceful coexistence
by intensifying communication between ethnic and
religious groups in Kosovo, including through the
efforts made by the United Nations Mission and regional
organizations as well as civil-society institutions.
Thirdly, the United Arab Emirates stresses the
importance of supporting women’s full and meaningful
participation in any mediation efforts to resolve
differences between Kosovo communities as well
as any dialogue between both parties. In that regard,
we commend the multilateral group on security and
gender in Kosovo for supporting the role of women
and its efforts to consolidate the gains made by women
in Kosovo. We also stress the importance of women’s
effective participation in the political process and
commend the progress made in Kosovo in that regard.
Women’s participation is essential to ensuring
that any agreements between both parties reflect the
concerns of both communities in a more comprehensive
manner, as that would help lay strong foundations for
sustainable peace.
Fourthly, the support for the important role played
by the United Nations in Kosovo should continue, as
it undertakes many activities and projects that support
Government institutions. The United Nations also
undertakes valuable initiatives aimed at building trust
between religious and ethnic communities, including
through the virtual Kosovo trust-building platform as
well as providing economic empowerment and support
for the search for missing persons.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that the difficult
geopolitical situation in Europe necessitates a redoubling
of efforts to resolve the differences between Kosovo
and Serbia and ensure that all issues are addressed in
a peaceful and sustainable manner in order to achieve
security and stability for both countries and the region
as a whole. Doing so will help lay a strong foundation to
prevent any escalation of disputes in the Balkans.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

S/PV.9019

Caroline Ziadeh for her briefing today, and we look
forward to working with her. I also would like to thank
Foreign Minister Nikola Selaković and Foreign Minister
Gërvalla-Schwarz for participating in this meeting.

answers to the families of the missing, and we join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the commitment of
both parties to advancing such efforts, including through
the European Union-facilitated dialogue process.

As has been noted, this is the first briefing on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) since Russia’s brutal and
unprovoked war against Ukraine. With Europe and
the world responding to the consequences of President
Putin’s war of choice, the preservation of stability in the
Western Balkans remains of utmost importance.

It remains as clear as ever that UNMIK has fulfilled
its purpose, as outlined in the Security Council’s
original mandate in 1999. We commend the work of
the United Nations entities, agencies and funds that
are active in the country to further the development of
democratic norms and institutions in Kosovo and the
region. However, a peacekeeping mission is clearly no
longer necessary for that work to continue. It is time
to reduce the frequency of these briefings to an annual
basis. UNMIK played an important role in the early
days of Kosovo’s stabilization and development, but it
has outlived its purpose. The Council needs to devote its
limited time and resources to addressing other issues.

In that regard, I just need to respond to the
comments of the Russian delegation earlier in this
meeting. The Russian intervention opened with the
usual misinformation and disinformation we have
come, I think, regrettably, to expect from the Russian
delegation these days — for example, the use of the
scare term “radioactive depleted uranium”.
I will not take the Council’s time rebutting the
falsehoods that we have heard, but I think that my
colleagues have all seen pictures live in the last few
days from Bucha and Mariupol, pictures that, of course,
no Russian citizen will freely be able to see. I think that,
as long as pictures like that continue to directly flow
from Ukraine daily, no delegation involved in causing
those pictures has the standing or credibility to lecture
anyone in the Chamber on respecting human rights or
to accuse any other State of reckless behaviour.
Let me be clear — the United States remains
committed, together with its European partners, to
fostering peaceful, prosperous, multi-ethnic societies
that uphold and respect human rights and the rule of
law across the Western Balkans. The United States
strongly urges both parties to engage energetically in
all aspects of the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union (EU) to find solutions for the outstanding issues,
implement existing agreements and make concrete
progress towards normalizing relations with the goal
of mutual recognition. The EU-facilitated dialogue
remains the best platform for achieving progress, not
only to existing tensions, but also on issues that impact
the daily lives of people in the region. We therefore
welcome the EU Special Representative’s plans to
host chief negotiators from both parties this month to
continue that important work.
We call on both Pristina and Belgrade to resume
cooperation on missing persons. That working group
has previously achieved tangible results in providing

We therefore again call on the Security Council to
end UNMIK’s mandate and enable the United Nations
presence in Kosovo to transition into a more effective
role for the benefit of Kosovo and for the entire region.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I join other speakers in
welcoming Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Caroline Ziadeh, this being her first time
in the Council in her new capacity, and thank her
for her briefing. My delegation supports the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her team
in the execution of their mandates. We also welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Nikola Selaković,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Kenya welcomes the continued consultative efforts
between Belgrade and Pristina. We call on the parties to
uphold their commitments made within the framework
of the European Union-facilitated dialogue, bearing
in mind that negotiation is the only viable path to the
normalization of relations.
We are deeply concerned by the recent reports of
a string of armed attacks against police agents. Those
attacks underscore the need to do more to entrench the
rule of law as a prerequisite for genuine reconciliation
and enduring peace. Kenya notes the continuing efforts
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and other United Nations agencies
to support the Kosovo authorities in their coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) response, including the expansion
of vaccination sites and the provision of specialized
training for health workers regarding the COVID-19

22-3249019/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

pandemic. We commend UNMIK in particular for
supporting initiatives to meet the challenges posed by
COVID-19 and support the post-pandemic recovery as
part of trust-building efforts among communities, as
well as between the people and institutions.
Kenya reiterates the need to counter the use of
divisive rhetoric and hate speech, especially through
social media. In that regard, we hope to hear more
in due course about the pilot initiative launched by
UNMIK last year to monitor incitement to hatred and
hate speech on social and online media.
Kenya underscores the need for the increased
participation of women, young people and civil society
in decision-making processes and cross-community
dialogue. We recognize the role of UNMIK in that regard
and encourage both sides to ensure the meaningful
participation of those groups so that their needs and
expectations within the EU-facilitated dialogue and
other processes are fully taken on board.
In conclusion, I reiterate the need for the parties
to recommit to the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and to constructively engage in the dialogue
in order to make swift progress on the comprehensive
normalization of their relations. We encourage them to
maintain the peace and refrain from any acts that could
spark an escalation.
Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing and reiterate my congratulations on her
appointment. I also welcome the participation of the
Foreign Ministers of Kosovo and Serbia.
France reiterates its commitment to the European
perspective of Kosovo and Serbia. That perspective
can be envisaged only if Belgrade and Pristina settle
their dispute peacefully. A comprehensive, permanent
and binding agreement is needed to normalize their
relations. The European Union is fully playing its part
in the context of the dialogue facilitated by Special
Representative Miroslav Lajčák. Kosovo and Serbia
must now fully respect and fully implement the
agreements previously reached and engage in good
faith in the dialogue.
In that context, France calls for working
constructively to resolve bilateral differences, to avoid
fuelling tensions and to act in accordance with the values
and principles that underpin European integration.
In particular, we hope that the working group on the
licence plates will be able to find a negotiated and
20/27

20/04/2022

lasting compromise solution without delay. We fully
support the mediation of European Union Special
Representative Miroslav Lajčák.
We express our satisfaction with the increased
judicial activity of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers
and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office since 2020. We
reaffirm our support for efforts to combat corruption
and impunity for serious crimes. We encourage greater
transparency in the appointment processes of highlevel judicial bodies.
France welcomes the adoption in January of the
strategy for protection against domestic violence and
violence against women and its associated action
plan, as well as the plan to host a high-level summit
on women and peace and security in Kosovo in 2022.
The inclusion of women in dialogue and reconciliation
processes and, more broadly, their political participation
must be encouraged. That is necessary for a lasting and
constructive settlement of the dispute between Belgrade
and Pristina.
We fully support the work of Ms. Caroline Ziadeh,
as Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), to promote security,
stability, the strengthening of the rule of law and
respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region
at a time when the geopolitical context is becoming
more difficult. UNMIK can count on the concerted
action of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, to which France has just increased its support.
Alongside Portugal and Italy, we have established a
standby force for maintaining order within the European
Gendarmerie Force.
France and the European Union remain committed
to the stabilization of the Western Balkans and to
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. Their common European future depends on it.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, let me
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Selaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I
thank Ms. Caroline Ziadeh for her briefing and join
other delegations in congratulating her on assuming
her duties as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). My
delegation assures her of its cooperation and support
during the period it shall be serving on the Council.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report on the implementation of the
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

mandates of UNMIK in promoting peace and security
in Kosovo and in the region (S/2022/313), pursuant to
the decision of the Security Council in its resolution
1244 (1999).
I have also taken note of the views shared with the
Security Council by Ms. Donika Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Achieving the normalization of the situation in the
autonomous province of Kosovo is necessary for the
long-term peace, security and prosperity of the Western
Balkan region and the wider European region. To that
end, we encourage the resumption of constructive
negotiations between the representatives of Belgrade
and Pristina within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue, and urge the parties to work
towards concrete progress on mutual understandings
and previously reached agreements.
Ghana remains supportive of an open, transparent
and inclusive process of dialogue, involving women,
youth and all sectors of society, to ensure the
sustainability and durability of the agreements reached.
We believe that further close cooperation between the
sides is necessary to address the common challenges
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the energy
crises and the economy. That collaborative effort can,
however, rest only on the foundations of multi-ethnic
stability and a firm respect for civil and political rights
in the autonomous province.
We also note the need to swiftly address the
developing tensions arising from the conduct of the
recently held elections and related issues of free
movement, and further call for tolerance in dealing
with incidents affecting religious and cultural sites. We
encourage all sides to refrain from rhetoric that could
be inflammatory and actions that are unilateral to
avoid the risk of escalation in a region whose security
environment is presently fragile.
We welcome the work of UNMIK in building trust
and social cohesion among the various communities,
ethnic groups and institutions. We also commend
the Mission’s support for the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals, especially
those initiatives relating to gender protection and
empowerment, and youth, peace and security. Such
efforts remain key to promoting unity and forging
peaceful relations among the people.
Finally, we encourage a unified approach on the
part of the Council and the international community
in finding a lasting and comprehensive solution in

S/PV.9019

Kosovo, in accordance with the fundamental principles
of international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and resolution 1244 (1999).
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me begin by congratulating Special
Representative Ziadeh on her appointment and
by thanking her for her briefing. We welcome the
opportunity new leadership provides for an improved
relationship with the Kosovo Government and a fresh
look at how the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) can adapt to serve the
current conditions in Kosovo.
We encourage continued constructive engagement
among the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, UNMIK and the Kosovo Government.
UNMIK has played a vital role in the incredible
progress Kosovo has made since resolution 1244 (1999)
was adopted in 1999. But conditions on the ground are
unrecognizable from 1999, and a review of UNMIK’s
role and responsibilities is needed.
Kosovo’s democracy and institutions continue to
show their maturity. In this context, we must condemn
last weekend’s violent attacks against the Kosovo police,
who represent and protect all of Kosovo’s citizens.
We congratulate the current Government of Kosovo
on its first year in office. In particular, we welcome the
renewed commitment to prioritizing the rule of law and
fighting corruption, including through legal reforms
and anti-corruption initiatives; the Government’s
continuing commitment to addressing the legacies of
the 1998-1999 conflict, including through commissions
for missing persons and victims of sexual violence;
and Kosovo’s ongoing international contribution,
through its support to the evacuation from Kabul and
the humanitarian response to Russia’s illegal invasion
of Ukraine.
We note, however, perceptions in some quarters
that the Kosovo Serb community’s concerns and
views sometimes go unheard. The recent decision on
voting in Kosovo in Serbia’s elections is an example.
We encourage the Government to refocus its efforts
to meet its constitutional duty to integrate minority
communities and address their concerns.
We are concerned by the increase of dangerous
rhetoric in Kosovo and the region leading to security
incidents. The deployment of fighter jets to the Kosovo

22-3249021/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

border in September is an example of that. Reports of the
United Kingdom supplying anti-tank missiles referred
to by the representative of the Russian Federation are
baseless, but to be clear, the United Kingdom supports
Kosovo’s right to develop its own armed forces.
Finally, I would like to emphasize the United
Kingdom’s renewed commitment to peace and security
in the region, including through our Prime Minister’s
appointment of a Special Envoy to the Western Balkans,
Sir Stuart Peach.
We fully support the dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo, facilitated by the European Union (EU), under
EU Special Representative Miroslav Lajčák. Now is
the moment for both parties to engage in the dialogue
in good faith, honour their dialogue commitments, be
open to compromise and creativity, and avoid actions or
rhetoric that could reduce prospects for a comprehensive
and sustainable normalization agreement that benefits
the people of both countries.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I cannot but respond to the statement
delivered by our colleague from the United States,
who, in commenting on my statement on the Kosovo
issue, drew a parallel to the situation in Ukraine. I
call on him to go ahead and familiarize himself with
the statement of the United States Representative at a
Security Council meeting on Kosovo on 24 March 1999
(see S/PV.3988). His own double standards will then
become quite obvious to him.
For 78 days, NATO bombed Belgrade. The United
States killed nearly 1 million Iraqis. What did it do to
Libya? Those countries are thousands of kilometres
from the United States and pose no threat to it, and
yet it actively fabricated various theories of limited
sovereignty or humanitarian interventions.
The United States representative mentioned that I
have nothing to teach him in the current circumstances,
and yet he has been teaching the residents of Belgrade,
Baghdad, Basra, Mosul, Raqqa and Baghuz, as well
as the Afghan provinces of Kandahar and Nangarhar
and other parts of Afghanistan very well. Not all of the
United States strikes were precise, to put it mildly. But
that is different. That is collateral damage, as Madeleine
22/27

20/04/2022

Albright put it, and apparently such collateral damage
was justified in the view of the United States.
Indeed, the truth lies in the fact that the essence
of United States policy and action is rooted in a single
premise — the West is always right. International law can
be distorted in any direction if it advances the interests
of Washington and its military industrial complex.
Violations of human rights are condemned only when
it is beneficial or convenient to the United States, and
international legal mechanisms are applicable only
with respect to those who it labelled ahead of time
as criminals.
For example, the United States did not wait for
an investigation into the heinous provocation that
transpired in Bucha, Ukraine. Perhaps it identified the
perpetrators even before that provocation was staged.
I ask the United States to not engage in these double
standards and approaches that are apparent — not just
to me but to others as well, including the Serbs. Insofar
as what lies behind the actions of the United States,
there is only one clear goal — the willingness and desire
of NATO to dictate and impose its will, through force,
upon other members of the international community.
The President: There are still requests for further
statements. Let me encourage participants to keep their
statements concise in the interest of time.
The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Selaković (Serbia): I have the obligation to
react and respond to the words said by Ms. GërvallaSchwarz here today.
Instead of speaking about the real problems on
the ground and the lack of respect for human rights,
about the abolition of political freedoms, about more
than 200,000 internally displaced persons, about the
desecration of churches, monasteries and cemeteries,
about totally ignored crimes by Kosovo Albanians,
without any kind of judicial epilogue, Ms. GërvallaSchwarz told us a story about her political wishes
and goals, abusing this Security Council meeting
in order to speak against the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and its
role and against the President of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, who is, by the way, the President
of her country too. She should pay due respect when
speaking about the President of her country.
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

It is the truth that so-called Kosovo is a result of
a separatist movement, of terrorist activities, of drug
trafficking and human organ trafficking. Ms. GërvallaSchwarz could teach the whole world lessons on how
something similar must never ever recur. Ms. GërvallaSchwarz was speaking about butchers of the Balkans,
but she failed to mention that the real butchers of the
Balkans are the former so-called President of socalled Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, and the former so-called
Speaker of Pristina’s Parliament, Kadri Veseli. At this
very moment, both of them are in the Hague, in the
detention unit of the special court formed by Pristina
for the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation Army, because
of their unprecedented dimensions.
Serbia is an independent sovereign State, with
clear policy goals, including the European Path and
respect for its traditional friends. The accusations
against Serbia, claiming that it is serving as a proxy,
are disrespectful of this organ and the United Nations.
Serbia is a pillar of peace and stability in the region.
That has been stated by the leaders of almost all of the
Member States sitting here today together with us.
As for regional stability and cooperation, the contrast
between President Vučić and Albin Kurti has never
been more stark and more obvious. While the President
is building every day— bridges of cooperation in the
region, such as the Open Balkan Initiative, the exchange
of missing goods, giant infrastructure projects — Albin
Kurti is destroying, mostly at night, by sending special
armoured units, banning political rights and ruining
the dialogue process. That is normal for him. Kurti has
been one of the political commissioners of the so-called
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), whose many victims
are still awaiting justice.
In June 1998, KLA terrorists attacked villages
Retimlje and Opteruša, near Orahovac. Terrorists
kidnapped 15 males from the Kostić family and killed
all of them. The only surviving member of the family
is the then-young Olgica Božinović Kostić. She was
beaten and then raped. And she was the only survivor
from that family.
Now, going on 24 years after this horrible crime,
nobody has ever been prosecuted or sentenced. The
same is true of the crimes carried out by the person
named by Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz as the son who helped
them. On 14 May 1999, NATO aircraft bombed a road
between Prizren and Suva Reka, with a long column of
Albanian refugees — killing 87 persons, all civilians,
10 newborns and 26 children under 15 years of age.

S/PV.9019

The term genocide should not be abused, especially
not for the political sensationalist purposes to which
Pristina has continuously been prone. Such rhetoric,
in general, arbitrary assessments and claims without
any evidence are frivolous, unfounded in reality and
serve the purpose of gaining cheap political points.
Such irresponsible claims jeopardize any possibility
of progress in the normalization between Belgrade and
Pristina between Serbs and Albanians.
Finally, if one wants to talk about the ethnic
composition of the population of Kosovo and Metohija,
then and now we should clearly lay out the facts and say
that over 90 per cent of persons living in Kosovo and
Metohija today are Albanians and that Serbs suffered
in recent decades from being victims of crimes and
expelled from their centuries-old ancestral homes,
forced to leave them due to intimidation, discrimination
and threats.
In support of that, we remind the Council that more
than 200,000 internally displaced persons residing in the
Republic of Serbia without the possibility or conditions
for returning to their ancestral homes. Pristina and
its policy are responsible for that. Therefore, this idea
and the attempt to reverse the well-known and often
publicly proclaimed long-term aspiration and political
goal of Albanian leaders from Kosovo and Metohija
over the decades to create an environment with an
ethnic composition that includes exclusively Albanians
is cynical.
The same is true of sexual violence against women.
Every crime is horrible, but the data in the report that
we are discussing today was collected on the basis of
the work of the Commission to Recognize and Verify
Survivors of Sexual Violence during the Kosovo War
in Kosovo and Metohija. Since the establishment of
the Commission in February 2018, a total of 1,656
applications have been registered, of which 149
have been accepted. The number of victims does not
diminish the horrific effect of this type of violence on
each victim, individually. But it should also be noted
that speculating on numbers does not contribute to the
achievement of justice, but leads to politicization and
slows down the reconciliation process.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz said that they are a vivid
democracy with huge potential in future and serve as a
model of democracy. They are not even able to respect
their so-called Constitution.

22-3249023/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

Let me just note what is mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report with regard to the need
to respect their so-called Constitutional Court’s
decision on the restitution of the property of the
Visoki Dečani monastery. That is just one of dozens of
similar decisions.
But it is not strange that she was speaking in that
way. The reason is very simple: she was representing
only herself, not an independent internationally
recognized country that is a State Member of the
United Nations.
And it is going to stay that way because their
motive is in fact not to get independence. I would refer
Council members to any interview given by Mr. Albin
Kurti. The Council will then see that their final aim
is to create a Greater Albania, not an independent socalled State of Kosovo.
The President: Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz has asked
for the floor for a further statement. I now give her the
floor.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz: I would now stress that the
dialogue process is very important and re-emphasize
that, in my earlier statement, I said that Kosovo was
eager and willing for the dialogue process to make
progress. I therefore invite Council members to consider
whether it is possible to achieve progress in a process
facilitated by Brussels in which the United States,
United Kingdom, the European Union, States Members
of the United Nations and others are playing an active
role, which we very much welcome. Everybody in the
Chamber today has witnessed how difficult the process
has been and continues to be, and that has shown us
what the dialogue process should not be in future.
The Balkans are facing the enormous impact
of cyberwar and fake news. I often ask myself if the
ones organizing the fake news are themselves the first
victims. Do they really believe the fake news that they
are spreading, or is it just a political decision to use
fake news to manipulate international public opinion?
I am really not sure which is the case but hearing so
much fake information and so many lies, all in a row,
makes it difficult to take it seriously and continue this
Council meeting without dismantling each and every
one of them.
I am not going to do that, because I am convinced
Council members and others in the Chamber know very
well what happened in the 1990s. That is one element of
truth. There is no alternative truth to that, Mr. President.
24/27

20/04/2022

It is one truth, and one that everybody knows. We do not
need to create new “facts” to establish the truth about
the Butcher of the Balkans, because it is very clear that
that was Slobodan Milošević.
It is a pity that the Serbia of today is incapable
of distancing itself from the crimes that Milošević
committed in Kosovo, but not only Kosovo; he started
in Slovenia, moved to Croatia and then to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in the end, he came to Kosovo.
And, yes, NATO came to stop the genocide. From that
multilateral engagement, a democratic and prosperous
country was born. I understand perfectly well why
Russia is so aggressive against Kosovo: it hates the
success story that Kosovo represents in the world,
namely, the success of a multilateral intervention.
That is the story of Kosovo, which is the story of the
democratic world intervening to end a genocide.
Sitting in this Chamber today and listening to the
representative of Russia talk about the liberation of
Kosovo, I cannot help but think of the brave people
of Ukraine who are defending their country. Today,
the Russians are using the same words about us that
they have used about them. As witnesses to what
is happening in Ukraine, I am very proud today to
represent a country from which brave soldiers — women
and men, members of the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) — defended their own people, their own homes
and their own country. I am very proud of that, just as I
would not be proud to represent Russia or Serbia today.
That is on them; it is not on me. I do not have the power
to decide what they do. I can decide what I do and how
I represent myself and my country.
The Serbian Foreign Minister is trying not only
to falsify the facts, but to do something very similar
to what Slobodan Milošević did in the 1980s, which is
how the war in the Balkans started. War started with
the creation of a perception that Serb minorities were in
danger and that they need Serbia to intervene with false
propaganda and fabricated news. We know very well,
and everybody knows, thanks to Serbian journalists
who have written about it, that the story of the Panda
Bar massacre in Peja in which for years and years it was
claimed that KLA soldiers had killed Serb Kosovars
was planned in Serbia and not in Kosovo, that in fact
Serbs were hired to kill other Serbs to create the image
of Serbs being in danger. The most important thing is
that they know the truth in Belgrade, which is where
the fiction was planned and executed.
22-32490

20/04/2022

Kosovo

As to the issue of organ trafficking, let me talk
about the Swiss Senator Dick Marty, who prepared
a report about war crimes that he accused Kosovar
representatives of having committed during the war
and thereafter. The same Mr. Dick Marty recently told
the media that the Swiss police had approached him
long ago to offer him the highest degree of security
in Switzerland because a Serbian intelligence agency
had wanted to assassinate him and put the blame on
Kosovo. These are the words of the Swiss police. It is
not Kosovo police making that claim.
There is a long tradition — and a very dangerous
one — of propaganda being used to create the false
impression that people are in danger when they are in
fact not and that they need the protection of third parties
who do not in fact intend to protect them but are only
trying implement their own strategic political vision.
We are seeing this pattern being repeated in Ukraine,
As the Serbian representative told us today, Serb
citizens in Kosovo are not an issue because Serb they
are protected under a very modern constitutional
framework established in 2008. I am proud to say
that we have the most modern Constitution in Europe
with respect to giving minorities extraordinary rights,
not only in terms of representation, but in terms of
participation at every level of State Government and
in every type of institution. The rights of Serbs are not
in question. Rather, the issue is how to gain political
influence, not recognize reality as it is and treat Kosovo
as a country that does not really exist. But we do exist,
and we will continue to exist, and every day we are
gaining more and more international support. The
Republic of Kosovo has shown and will continue to show
that democracy and European values are the foundation
of our country. So if one looks at the approval rates
of various countries in the Western Balkans, it is clear
that Kosovo has more than 90 per cent approval for the
European Union and more than 90 per cent approval
for NATO membership and NATO alignment. So we
are on our way, doing the work we were elected to do,
and we urge the Council very, very strongly — we
know that the war in Ukraine is taking a lot of the
time that it has to deal with other regions of the world,
but this is happening now, not in 1999, in the Western
Balkans — to please send the right messages to those
who want to destabilize the region. The investment of
the international community in peace and stability in
the Balkans is too huge to just ignore what is happening
now and what the signals are.

S/PV.9019

The President: The representative of Albania has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I will not argue with Minister
Selaković, for many reasons, because even when we
disagree, we can do that in Belgrade or in Tirana. We
do not need to take up the Council’s time. But I am
speaking since it is hard to agree with everything that
I heard, and since I heard that he ended his second
remarks by referring to an obsession we continue to
hear about, unfortunately — greater Albania.
Let me tell you the perspective that we in Albania
have, and I hope that we share it with all Western
Balkans neighbours and partners. What we care about
in Albania is not greater this or greater that. We care
about building open Balkans, not broken Balkans,
because broken we have had. We want to have united
Balkans, nor ignited Balkans, because ignited we have
had. We want everyone around the table, including
Serbia and Kosovo together, and no one on the menu.
That is because we know where we come from,
and we have seen the worst, as I mentioned. If we have
drawn any lessons from the tragedies of the 1990s, it
is what can happen if we let ourselves be taken in by
misjudgments and wrong ideas and if we do not have
the courage to face reality and move on. We should not
let extremists and extremist ideas anywhere dictate
our agendas.
Indeed, youth in Pristina, Tirana and Belgrade want
the same thing: a better life, freedom, opportunities
and to join the European Union. We should be able to
give them that, not only because it is just, but because
now we can.
Let us not forget that nothing good can come from
working to harm one’s neighbour. Instead, there are
only benefits when one does everything to work for
good, look ahead and share the dividends of goodneighbourliness; as the French say, “A bon entendeur,
salut”. And I say to the Minister, no, the only great and
greater goal that we have on our agenda is joining the
European Union.
The President: The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I respectfully request that he make these his
concluding remarks.
Mr. Selaković (Serbia): I have to react to what I
heard about Mr. Dick Marty. The Republic of Serbia
finds it unfortunate that unverified information was

22-3249025/27

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

disseminated to the international public that caused
great damage to the reputation of the Republic of Serbia
and its intelligence services and all those who have
performed their duties in full compliance with the law.
The Republic of Serbia and its relevant security
and intelligence services remain, as before, open to
international cooperation with their partners and
expect those claims to be checked as soon as possible.
It is not good to allow someone’s tendentious and
creative construction of a conspiracy to abuse this
United Nations forum, because it can only harm the
trial that is in progress in the Specialist Chambers for
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) war crimes in The
Hague, putting additional pressure on key war-crimes
witnesses, who are actually bearing witness about
trafficking in human organs.
On this occasion, Serbia praises Dick Marty
for the courage he showed, aware of the danger he
exposed himself to, when in 2010, in his report to the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, he
shared his horrific findings about the crimes committed
by the so-called KLA. I also have to react to one
sentence; I heard that “Serbs are protected in Kosovo”.
If Serbs are protected, why is it that more than 200,000
internally displaced Serbs from Kosovo and Metohija
cannot return to their homes, to their apartments? If
they are protected, why for more than 15 years have
there been more than 43,000 pending court cases on
property issues, property that was taken by force from
those Kosovo Serbs who are protected? Imagine how
those who are not protected are living there.
I fully agree with what was said by the Permanent
Representative of the neighbouring Republic of Albania,
of course, that we are willing to see open Balkans,
including all non-European Union member States and
entities from the Western Balkans. We are willing to
see there not only Albania and North Macedonia but
also Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as Montenegro;
we have also invited Pristina, and they accepted that
invitation in the Washington agreement. But after that,
it was refused by Albin Kurti. I was not speaking about
the goals of the Republic of Albania, with which we have
very good relations, but I was saying that Albin Kurti
is the one who was not willing to engage in a process of
dialogue but willing to have a greater Albania. That is
what he stated on numerous occasions.
And just to end, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for the occasion to refer to those words. But I have to say
something more. Even Ukraine, which is, as is Russia,
26/27

20/04/2022

a country friendly to the Republic of Serbia, did not
recognize so-called Kosovo, for the obvious reasons.
The President: Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Likewise, I respectfully ask that she make this the
concluding statement.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz: I really tried to skip this,
but it is not possible, because we need to put facts up
against lies. The protection of minorities in Kosovo is
stronger than in most countries in Europe and beyond.
We have provisions in our Constitution, in our laws, in
our administrative practice. Our army and our police
are ethnically mixed because we wanted them to be,
and, yes, we are proud of that.
The Constitution of Kosovo guarantees 20 out of
120 seats for minorities exclusively, let alone the fact
that they can compete for the other 100 seats as well.
Half of the 20 reserved seats, that is, 10, are exclusively
reserved for the second most numerous ethnic
minority, the Serb minority. So, within the privileges
for the minorities, there is a privilege again for the
Serb minority.
Let me describe an example of one specific practical
impact of our protection rights. The constitutional
provision led to the result that our coalition, which won
more than 50 per cent of the vote in the last election,
did not get a majority of seats in Parliament. Even if
we had won the majority of seats, our Constitution
requires that the Government of the Republic of Kosovo
include ministers from the minorities, regardless of the
election outcome.
We have a follower, a supporter, of Mr. Vučić
from Serbia in our Government. The scale of minority
protection is not found in any other country in Europe
or beyond. Our country was born out of genocide, as
I said. Mr. Vučić was part of the system of Milošević,
and he propagated that genocide as a heroic act. He has
never apologized, but just recently threatened Kosovo
again and again. His hard-core fan sits with me and the
others at the table in Cabinet meetings. Can one just
imagine that in any other country in the neighbourhood?
I therefore have a clear message to the Serb
propagandists: stop those lies; simply stop those lies.
Nobody, not the people sitting here or others outside,
takes those lies seriously. One should follow the example
of Kosovo before criticizing. I have an invitation to all
who would criticize without knowing the facts. We
invite everyone who criticizes such provisions, saying
22-32490

20/04/2022

S/PV.9019

Kosovo

that it is not enough to first implement half of those
guarantees in their own countries — only half, maybe
even only a third. They should try to do that. I ask that
they provide the equivalent of 20 out of 120 seats for
minorities in their Parliaments. They should guarantee
their most adversarial opposition who is directed by
a hostile foreign country a seat at their Government’s
table. That is obviously a rhetorical request. Each
country has to decide on its own.
But the following remark is on a serious note. We
are not only a small, but also a proud country. We are
also one of the most tolerant countries with regard to
religion and respect for others. That is our tradition and
our DNA.
Speaking again about Dick Marty, I must share a
very private experience. I was aged 10 when my father,
being a journalist, writer and musician, needed to leave
Kosovo. He escaped the former Yugoslavia to go to
Germany. It was by the then-called Uprava državne
bezbednosti, or State Security Administration, now
called the State Security, that he was assassinated
in Germany at the age of 36 because of his standing
up for the freedom of Kosovo. It is the same service
that assassinated more than 59 Croat dissidents in
Germany. There is a long tradition in having that
service assassinate people outside the country. That is
an old experience.
Regarding what Mr. Marty told us, he is not a
friend of Kosovo. He has never been, and will never
be, a friend of Kosovo, because the court will prove
that what he stated in the report is not true. Even
mentioning that Dick Marty is a friend of Serbia, and
it has been difficult for him to tell the public that it
was Serbia that wanted to kill him and to blame Kosovo
for that, that is a long tradition. Every one of us knows

that. Members know that. I know that. Those respected
people know that.
With regard to the President who was mentioned,
and it is an old thing from October last year — yes,
I have a President. My President attended last year’s
meeting in October (see S./PV.8880). We are very
proud to have a President. Her name is Ms. Vjosa
Osmani-Sadriu. She is one of the youngest Presidents
in the world. She is a highly respected woman who has
a long experience in politics in Kosovo. Through her
courage, she has shown how the future of the Balkans
in the European Union can be.
I will conclude with greater countries in the
Balkans. Always stating something that Prime Minister
Kurti mentioned in the past will not help the present
or the future, because talking about the past is not a
fair game with Serbia. Talking only about the past
makes one look bad. That is why we try to talk about
the present and the future. There are others talking
about and acting against neighbours to change borders
in the Balkans and elsewhere. We have Vladimir Putin
talking about changing borders through war, and we
have ministers in the Government of Aleksandar Vučić
who talk about Serbia. Having members of Government
who use the terminology of the 1990s and of Slobodan
Milošević now in these very fragile times is not how we
should behave.
I want to repeat that Kosovo is very committed to
contributing constructively not only to the dialogue
with our northern neighbour, under the facilitation of
the European Union and with the help of other partners
and allies, but also, at the same time, to providing a
contribution for peace and stability in the world and
showing that we are a reliable partner and ally for all
those who believe in us.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

22-3249027/27
