S/PRST/2002/27

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 October 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4626th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 October 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the progress on withdrawal of foreign
forces from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, stresses
that these withdrawals must be completed, and calls for the implementation of
all the agreements signed by the parties and all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. At the same time, the Council expresses its strong concerns
at the rising tensions in the East of the country, in particular in Uvira and in the
Ituri region.
“The Security Council condemns the continuing violence in the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the attack on Uvira by
Mai Mai and other forces, and views with great concern the build up of forces
around Bukavu. The Council notes with concern that these actions add to the
instability in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and threaten
regional stability, have severe humanitarian consequences, especially by
increasing the numbers of internally displaced persons and refugees, and could
threaten the border security of Burundi and Rwanda.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to the conflict to cease
hostilities immediately and without preconditions, welcomes the call by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its communiqué of 14
October (S/2002/1143) for such a ceasefire and calls on the Government of the
DRC and all governments in the region to exert their influence on all the
parties to this effect and to refrain from any action which would further
exacerbate the situation or undermine the peace process.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to report further on
the events in the region of Uvira and stresses the importance for the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) to increase its monitoring presence in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular in the regions bordering Burundi and
Rwanda, as soon as security conditions allow such a deployment. It encourages
all local actors, including the parties to the conflict as well as civil society and
the religious organizations, to engage in talks in order to end the hostilities and
agree on a basis for peaceful coexistence in the region during the transitional
02-64950 (E)

181002

*0264950*

S/PRST/2002/27

period in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard, the Council
encourages the Secretary-General to consider using his good offices to
promote and facilitate such talks, with MONUC providing support where
applicable.
“The Security Council reminds all parties in Uvira and in the area that
they must abide by international humanitarian standards and ensure respect for
human rights in the sectors they control.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern over the intensification
of ethnically targeted violence in the Ituri region. It condemns all such
violence or incitement to violence. It requests all parties to take immediate
actions to defuse these tensions, ensure the protection of civilians and end
violations of human rights. The Council welcomes the efforts by the
governments of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to set up
the Ituri Pacification Commission, as set out under the Luanda Agreement, and
requests MONUC to provide support in this regard when applicable.
“The Security Council stresses that no government, military force or any
other organization or individual should provide military or other supplies or
any other form of support to any of the groups involved in the fighting in the
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
“The Security Council also expresses its concern at the situation in
Kisangani, and reiterates its demand that the city be demilitarized.
“The Security Council urges all Congolese parties to accelerate efforts to
reach agreement on an all-inclusive transitional government and expresses its
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in this
regard.
“The Security Council calls on all parties and armed groups involved in
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to commit themselves to
achieving a peaceful settlement for the region, and condemns any attempt to
use military action to influence the peace process.
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, MONUC and the Government
of South Africa.
“The Security Council calls on regional leaders to continue to support
efforts to end the conflict in Burundi, and in this regard welcomes the recent
visit of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Burundi and the adoption of a joint communiqué by the two governments
(S/2002/1142). The Council calls on the two governments rapidly to conclude
an agreement on the normalization of relations and cooperation in security
matters.”

2
