S/PRST/2001/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 January 2001
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4262nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 January 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
dated 11 January 2001 (S/2001/35), submitted in accordance with the
statement by the President of the Council of 10 February 2000
(S/PRST/2000/5).
“The Security Council commends the United Nations Peace-Building
Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) and the
Representative of the Secretary-General for the efforts they have constantly
made to contribute to peace and stability in the Central African Republic. In
this connection, the Council welcomes the additional progress made in certain
areas since the previous report of the Secretary-General of 29 June 2000
(S/2000/639), particularly in the area of disarmament and the restructuring of
the security and defence forces, and as regards respect for human rights by the
police.
“The Security Council welcomes the mission to the region of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, to assess the impact of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the Central African Republic and the
Republic of the Congo, in particular its humanitarian, economic, social and
security implications. The Council is looking forward to discussing the
findings of that mission in the very near future.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the political and social
tensions which have recently resurfaced in the Central African Republic,
which threaten the national reconciliation process undertaken four years ago
with the active support of the international community. The Council notes with
concern the absence of dialogue between the Government and the opposition.
The Council is also disturbed by the deterioration of the economic situation,
partly because of the repercussions of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the resulting fuel crisis.
“The Security Council welcomes the contributions already received and
calls upon bilateral and multilateral donors to provide full support to the
efforts of the Government of the Central African Republic. The Council

01-22325 (E) 230101
`````````

230101

S/PRST/2001/2

appreciates the release by the World Bank of the second tranche of credit for
the consolidation of public finances and welcomes the recent decision by the
International Monetary Fund to release additional funds. The Council calls
upon Member States which made pledges at the special meeting in New York
co-chaired by the Secretariat, Germany and the United Nations Development
Programme in May 2000 to fulfil their commitments. The Council also stresses
the importance of international assistance to refugees and displaced persons in
the Central African Republic and in the other countries of the region in order
to contribute to regional stability.
“The Security Council reaffirms that it is first up to the Central Africans
to summon the necessary political will for national reconciliation. The Council
strongly encourages the Government of the Central African Republic to do
everything in its power to strengthen democratic institutions and broaden the
scope of national reconciliation. The Council urges all political actors in the
Central African Republic to contribute each in their own way to the reduction
of the existing tension between the Government and the opposition. In this
respect, while it welcomes the release, on 8 January 2001, of 62 persons who
had been arrested during the prohibited demonstration of 19 December 2000,
the Council nevertheless notes with concern certain constraints on the peaceful
public assembly of opposition and labour groups.
“The Security Council calls upon the Government of the Central African
Republic to take concrete measures to implement economic reforms and to
ease social tensions. The Council stresses the priority need for the payment of
salary arrears in the civil service and welcomes the recent announcement by
the Government of the Central African Republic that it will take steps in this
direction. The Council also encourages the Government of the Central African
Republic to take all the financial measures that are necessary to relaunch the
demobilization and reintegration programme.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
it regularly informed about the activities of BONUCA, the situation in the
Central African Republic, and in particular the progress made in the political,
economic and social reforms, and to submit a report by 30 June 2001, in
accordance with the statement of the President of the Council dated
10 February 2000.”

2
