S/PV.7367

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7367th meeting

Thursday, 22 January 2015, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barros Melet .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/956)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo submitted pursuant to
paragraph 39 of Security Council resolution 2147 (2014) (S/2014/957)
Letter dated 12 January 2015 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2015/19)

15-01994 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1501944*

S/PV.7367

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2014/956)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo submitted pursuant to paragraph 39
of Security Council resolution 2147 (2014)
(S/2014/957)
Letter dated 12 January 2015 from the
Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/19)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/956, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as to document S/2014/957, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo submitted
pursuant to paragraph 39 of Security Council resolution
2147 (2014).
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/19, which contains a letter
dated 12 January 2015 from the Chair of the Security

2/9

22/01/2015

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Hervé Ladsous and Her Excellency
Mrs. Dina Kawar, Permanent Representative of Jordan,
in her capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank Council
members for giving me this opportunity to brief them on
the strategic review of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), a task that the Council entrusted
me with pursuant to resolution 2147 (2014) and that has
taken quite a lot of time over the past months.
I would like to start by expressing my appreciation for
the support and assistance provided by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo throughout
this important exercise. This was demonstrated by
the time accorded to us while our delegation was
in Kinshasa by several Congolese ministers, led
by Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Tshibanda
N’tungamulongo. There were several meetings, each
one lasting several hours, which is a testament to how
seriously the Government has taken the review. I would
add that I myself had many meetings with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, the Secretary-General spoke with
President Kabila Kabange over the phone and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler
had a long meeting with President Kabila Kabange over
the past weekend.
Throughout all those meetings, we had an
opportunity to discuss with the Congolese authorities
a wide range of issues, including the political situation,
security challenges and the upcoming elections.
We agreed that over the past years much has been
accomplished: the withdrawal of foreign armed forces,
the reunification of the country, the establishment of
the transitional Government and two national elections.
And yet challenges remain. In spite of our military
defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars at the end of 2013,
armed groups — both Congolese and foreign — remain,
in particular the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces

15-01994

22/01/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(ADF). Those armed groups continue to pose a threat
to the civilian population and the overall stability and
development of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to the Great Lakes region in general.
First, allow me to mention what happened in the past
few days with regard to the troubling incidents related
to the electoral process in Kinshasa, Goma, Bukavu and
Lubumbashi. I would like to express our deep concern
about the violence that occurred during those events and
to deplore the loss of lives, the destruction of property
and the acts of looting. The Congolese have the right
to express their opinions and demonstrate peacefully.
Clearly, the use of violence is unacceptable. Of course,
demonstrators and their leaders must be urged to pursue
political objectives by non-violent means. However,
we are concerned by reports of security forces using
force against peaceful, unarmed demonstrators and by
reports of arbitrary arrests. It is the responsibility of the
Government to maintain a political space and allow for
the peaceful expression of opinions. The Government
must also ensure that the response to such violent
protests is proportionate. Furthermore, the fact that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
ordered Internet sites, text messaging services and
radio stations to shut down is a source of concern, as the
freedom of expression and communication are essential
rights in a democracy and should not be curtailed.
Throughout the discussions I mentioned earlier that
we had with the Congolese authorities, we discussed at
length the threats facing the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We discussed the role of MONUSCO and
the size of its military and police components. Overall,
our assessment was that MONUSCO continues to play
an important role in stabilizing the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in supporting the
Government in neutralizing armed groups. However, it
is true that have heard some criticism about how the
Mission is implementing certain aspects of its mandate,
specifically the performance of some of its contingents.
We take those criticisms seriously, and the report before
the Council contains a number of recommendations
aimed at ensuring that MONUSCO becomes more
effective in implementing its mandate and achieves
more tangible results. It should be noted that this
also includes a recommendation by the SecretaryGeneral for MONUSCO to intensify dialogue with the
Government on a number of key policy issues.
With regard to the military component, at
the meeting held yesterday with the troop- and

S/PV.7367

police-contributing countries, I conveyed a very clear
message: that the changes necessary to more effectively
implement MONUSCO’s mandate will not happen
merely through a transformation of the MONUSCO
force. What is necessary beyond that is a change in the
behaviour of the troop-contributing countries deployed
on the ground. All of the contingents must be ready and
willing to use armed force against those who continue to
pose a threat to the civilian population, and this resolve
must be translated into action in a more proactive
manner. Of course, it is clear that the protection of
civilians cannot be limited to military action only.
The Secretary-General has therefore recommended
a reduction in MONUSCO military personnel by
2,000 troops and the replacement of the two formed
police units that were deployed to South Sudan early
last year. His recommendation is based on the relative
improvement in the security situation in some parts of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo following
the military defeat of the M-23. It is also based on the
fact that there has been an improvement in the capacity
of the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) to address the threat posed by
armed groups. It is also based on a number of concrete
measures that were taken to make the Force more
mobile and more flexible.
It is true that President Kabila and his Government
are advocating for deeper personnel cuts. Their view is
that maintaining the numbers proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, that is, a cut of 2,000 personnel, would send a
negative signal. But, as I explained to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, that
recommendation by the Secretary-General is based
on an in-depth military capability study and troopto-task analysis. Considering the numerous political
and security challenges that remain, we think that any
reduction beyond the recommended figure would have
negative implications for the ability of the Force to
implement its mandate.
The protection of civilians remains MONUSCO’s
core mandated task. That requires a strong military
component that is able to flexibly and effectively
undertake the military aspects of a protection-ofcivilians strategy, until the Government forces have the
capacity to take over the tasks that have been entrusted
to MONUSCO. MONUSCO also has, as the Council is
aware, the mandate to neutralize armed groups, which
is now more than ever our key priority. To implement
that unique mandate, we need adequate capacity

15-019943/9

S/PV.7367

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and specialized capabilities, in particular in view of
operations against the FDLR and the ADF. I reiterate
that military operations against the FDLR must start
now. We must also recognize that achieving tangible
results in the fight against the FDLR will require both
resources and time, considering the dispersed nature
of the armed group and its immersion within the local
population, so, again, it will take time. We will also
have to be careful to avoid any repetition of what
happened in 2009, when the FARDC had undertaken
military operations against that group, which led to
devastating humanitarian consequences.
This, however, does not mean that MONUSCO
should stay in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
indefinitely. We are ready to hold discussions with
the Government to develop jointly a plan that would
make it possible for the Government to progressively
take over the tasks that we are currently performing.
MONUSCO’s exit strategy must be progressive and tied
to specific criteria and targets jointly developed with
the Government. Over the past 15 years we have made
considerable investments in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I think that it is in our collective interest
to ensure a gradual withdrawal, without reversing the
hard-won gains achieved thus far. Neither the United
Nations nor the Government can do this in isolation.
The Secretary-General has therefore recommended that
MONUSCO and the Government enter into a strategiclevel dialogue to develop an exit strategy and road map
in the coming months.
We would be happy to work with the Government
in order to enable it to implement a strategy that could
be accelerated, provided that conditions allow it.
Ultimately, the solution to the problem is in the hands
of the Government. MONUSCO’s drawdown will
depend on the Government’s commitment and ability to
make tangible progress on neutralizing armed groups,
in particular the FDLR and the ADF; on building the
capacity of the army and the police in a sustainable
manner; and its capacity and resolve to hold credible
elections that would contribute to consolidating
stability in accordance with the Constitution.
Let me conclude by underscoring that we have come
a long way and that a great deal has been achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular since
the signing almost two years ago in Addis Ababa of
the Framework for Peace, Security and Cooperation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We are on the right path, but more efforts are needed

4/9

22/01/2015

from all of us to achieve what is in our common interest
and our common goal: durable peace and stability in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. That will require translating the political
commitments agreed at Addis Ababa two years ago into
concrete action, now more than ever, in particular with
regard to the neutralization of armed groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Kawar.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): I have the honour to brief
the members of the Security Council in my capacity
as the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In my statement, I intend to briefly highlight some
of the findings and recommendations in the final
report of the Group of Experts (see S/2015/19) issued
pursuant to resolution 2136 (2014) and touch upon
the Committee’s consideration of the report during
its meeting on 9 January. I also intend to briefly
highlight the activities of the Committee since my most
recent briefing to the Council, on 20 August 2014, in
connection with the midterm report of the Group (see
S/2014/428) and set some of out the possible activities
that are being considered by the Committee during the
course of 2015. As the Group of Experts’ final report
was made available as a Security Council document on
Monday, I intend to highlight just a few of the Group’s
findings here today.
With regard to the sanctioned entity Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), the Group considers that a
recent military operation significantly weakened but
failed to defeat the ADF. The Group is of the view
that ADF still has the potential to regroup and rebuild,
as it did during similar operations in 2005 and 2010,
particularly since its recruitment, support and finance
networks have not been significantly affected. The
Group also did not find credible evidence that ADF has,
or recently has had, links to foreign terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab or Boko Haram.
With regard to the sanctioned entity Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Group of Experts noted that the armed group’s leadership
had failed to demonstrate a genuine commitment to
the disarmament process. The Group documented
the FDLR’s involvement in military operations,
recruitment and collaboration with other armed groups

15-01994

22/01/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and elements of the national army, the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
The Group also established that FDLR leaders and
some of their international political supporters had
been meeting outside the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since at least 2013, and documented FDLR’s
engagement in the local-level taxation and exploitation
of natural resources, sometimes in collaboration with
FARDC units.
In the report, the Group also notes that the ADF,
FDLR, Nduma Defence for Congo, led by sanctioned
individual Sheka Ntabo Ntaberi, and other armed
groups continue to recruit, train and use child soldiers
in 2014. Armed groups also committed a variety of
other abuses, including torture, enslavement and sexual
violence. There were mass killings in June in Mutarule,
South Kivu, and in October and November 2014 in Beni
territory, North Kivu.
The Group also observed that, while there had
been progress on traceability and due diligence efforts
concerning minerals in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, smuggling continued. In addition, elements of
the FARDC and some armed groups remain involved
in the minerals trade, potentially introducing conflict
minerals into the supply chains in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring States.
According to the Group, there was virtually no
progress in addressing the smuggling of gold from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2014. The
illegal exploitation of, and trade in, wildlife products,
including ivory, remains a serious problem, involving
armed groups, elements of the Congolese army, local
poachers and armed bands from South Sudan. The
FDLR and elements of the army remain involved in the
production and trade in charcoal and wood in North
Kivu.
Among its 15 recommendations, the Group
of Experts proposed that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and several other
Governments exchange information to ensure that
gold was traded in compliance with international
transparency and due diligence standards, namely, by
requiring full documentation, including a certificate of
origin.
The Group also recommended that the Governments
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
investigate and prosecute reported acts of sexual
violence and abuse by the Burundian army and/or the

S/PV.7367

Burundian Imbonerakure militia group in the Kiliba
area of South Kivu, and that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo investigate and
prosecute FARDC officers and soldiers cited in the
report who violate the mining code.
In their consideration of the Group’s recommendations
and the proposed actions by the Committee in connection
with the recommendations, the members registered
their preliminary agreement with many of the proposed
actions, such as letters addressed to a number of States
highlighting the Group’s recommendation to investigate
individuals identified in the report who were involved in
the finance, material support and recruitment networks
of the ADF. Those draft documents were circulated
on Tuesday to the Committee under the standard
five-day no objection procedure. With regard to several
recommendations where there was no clear agreement
from the floor regarding the proposed actions, such as
a hold, the Chair intends to conduct further bilaterals
with interested delegations to see whether a flexible
approach can be found to the manner in which the
Committee conveys the Group’s recommendations to
the relevant Member States.
Since my last briefing to the Council on 20 August
2014, in connection with the Group’s midterm
report, the Committee held informal consultations
on 17 September to hear a briefing by Mr. Abdallah
Wafi, Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Rule of Law, on the sanctions
monitoring mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), in particular weapons marking
and tracing, which, in my view, is a key component to
the identification of arms embargo violations. At the
same meeting, the Committee also heard briefings by
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and by Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
at which time both representatives put forward names
for possible sanctions designation. A press release was
issued following that meeting.
In terms of the Committee’s possible activities this
year, it would be the Chair’s desire to visit the Great
Lakes region, hopefully during the middle of 2015. Prior
to that time, I have asked members of the Committee
for their views in terms of possible interlocuters
who could deepen the Committee’s understanding
of the implementation of the sanctions regime. In

15-019945/9

S/PV.7367

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

that connection, the Committee is taking forward my
proposal to convene a meeting with States in the region
following the publication of the Group of Experts final
report as a Council document. To that end, letters to the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania and South Africa, in its capacity as Chair of
the Southern African Development Community, will be
transmitted in connection with the proposed meeting
of Friday, 6 March, of the Committee with the invited
States. We also value the engagement of Angola in its
capacity as Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and a member of the Sanctions
Committee in the Council.
It would also be my intention, with the agreement
of the Committee members, to invite the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator to speak with the
Committee regarding the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also believe
that the Committee would value the insights of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler or the
relevant MONUSCO representative on the Mission’s
sanctions monitoring mandate. The Committee could
also consider a possible briefing by the Chair of the
African group of Member States here in New York to
discuss the implementation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo sanctions regime.
The date of 12 March 2015 will mark 11 years since
the Security Council established a Sanctions Committee
to monitor the implementation of the arms embargo. It
is my hope that, during the course of this year, through
the Committee’s meetings with the regional States and
their other interlocuters and through my visit to the
Great Lakes region, we may be able to step back and
assess the effectiveness and impact of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo sanctions regime and consider
some very important questions. What, for example, can
be done to improve weapon stockpile management and
combat networks that supply arms and ammunition to
armed groups, in violation of the embargo? How can
we stop the recycling of ex-combatants from one armed
group to another existing or new armed group? What
sort of impact is being felt by the 31 individuals and nine
entities whose names are on the sanctions list? What
further information do Member States need in order to
propose additional names for sanctions, including those
who support armed groups through the illicit trade in
natural resources, including gold, wildlife and wildlife

6/9

22/01/2015

products, as well as those who continue to recruit
children and sexually abuse women?
We must make sure that Member States,
particularly those in the region, are cooperating with
the Group of Experts and the Committee by answering
its letters, facilitating its visits and implementing
its recommendations. I trust that this year we will
collectively acquire a better appreciation for the
commitment given to implementation of the sanctions
regime, and of the action can be taken to address any
gaps or deficiencies. I am aware of the challenges before
us, particularly the differences in views in the region
about who bears the greatest responsibility for violating
the embargo. Let us engage with their interlocutors
by hearing their views and providing assistance
as necessary, and, ultimately, let us strengthen the
implementation of the sanctions regime. The people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
the civilians who have borne the brunt of the suffering,
deserve no less.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I would
first like to say how pleased my delegation is to see you
presiding over today’s Security Council meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
to welcome the fact that the representative of Chile is
steering the Council for the month of January. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to sincerely
congratulate you, on my own and my delegation’s behalf,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
also commend your predecessor, the representative of
the Republic of Chad, and express our appreciation for
the mastery and skill he showed last month during his
presidency. And, finally, I would like to pay tribute to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom my country
is indebted for the outstanding efforts that have been
made to effectively restore peace in the Great Lakes
region in general and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in particular.
I will focus on three key topics covered in the
reports before the Council: the Secretary-General’s
report of 30 December 2014 on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2014/956), his
report on MONUSCO submitted pursuant to paragraph

15-01994

22/01/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

39 of resolution 2147 (2014) (S/2014/957), and the final
report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2015/19).
In resolution 2147 (2014), adopted on 28 March,
the Security Council requested that the SecretaryGeneral conduct a thorough strategic review of
MONUSCO and the entire United Nations presence in
the Democratic Republic of Congo, and submit to it, by
30 December, his recommendations on MONUSCO’s
future objectives, activities, exit strategy and efficient
deployment of resources, keeping in mind that the
Mission’s effectiveness should continue to increase.
My delegation hopes that our exchanges in this and
subsequent meetings will enable us to reach a consensus
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Security Council on the progress that has been made
towards normalizing the situation in the country, the
obstacles that still clutter the road to normalization
and thus demand our urgent collective attention and,
lastly, on future action by the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We can never emphasise strongly enough that the
long-suffering peoples of the countries in our region
see the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
as eloquent proof of the international community’s
determination to help find a definitive solution to an
instability that has lasted all too long and for which my
country in particular has paid a heavy price. That was
evident when, as soon as the Framework agreement was
signed, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo began working to meet its obligations, which
are in fact the same vital and high-priority tasks we
have known about for the past 11 years.
In that context, we have accelerated and systematized
our security sector reform. Recent concrete actions
undertaken to make the defence of our territory more
effective and the State’s authority more solid include
rationalizing the structures and personnel of the army
and security and police services; recruiting young
Congolese from every province of the country into
the defence forces; reopening military academies; and
training special forces and support units with the help
of bilateral partners with the primary aim of making our
rapid reaction force operational. I note that in November
2014, in order to consolidate that State authority, with
the help of MONUSCO and the United Nations country
team, we began implementing stabilization strategies
and action plans in North Kivu, Orientale and South

S/PV.7367

Kivu provinces. The Government also welcomes the
choice of 13 priority areas for intervention as part of
the revised International Security and Stabilization
Support Strategy. In that regard, MONUSCO’s creation
of new islands of stability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, located in Katanga, North Kivu,
Orientale and South Kivu is an encouraging initiative
that my Government wholeheartedly supports.
Decentralization, as provided for in the Constitution,
has taken another step forward with the adoption of the
laws needed to implement it. Reform of the management
of public finance, which has been under way for several
years and whose positive results are apparent in the
overall stability of the economy, is still ongoing and
has been usefully supplemented by the entry into force
of measures designed to improve the business climate
and the national mechanism for certifying mining
resources, which in turn will strengthen economic
growth. Even better, the Government has just completed
a thorough review of its document on strategy and
growth for poverty reduction, aimed at making growth
more inclusive, partially reducing the delays that have
accumulated in achieving the Millennium Development
Goals and ensuring that the fight against poverty is
more credible and effective.
In that regard, we see as particularly crucial
elements the economic recovery and rehabilitation
and social integration components of our stabilization
and reconstruction programmes, particularly the
stabilization and reconstruction plan for areas emerging
from armed conflict and the programme developed
by the United Nations country team, designed to
consolidate and develop the northern and western
regions that, though they have not seen conflict, are still
having to deal with the consequences of the instability
in the north and east. We are therefore counting on
the active involvement of the United Nations and the
international community in those programmes’ funding
and implementation.
In the wake of the reform of the National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI) and the
enactment of various relevant laws, my country is
resolutely committed to the process leading to the
holding of democratic elections for the third time. The
Government is determined to meet the challenge of
organizing them peacefully and in a way that ensures
that they will be free and democratic. The unfortunate
events that took place in Kinshasha over the past few
days, to which Under-Secretary-General Ladsous

15-019947/9

S/PV.7367

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

referred earlier and which should be viewed as part
of the learning experience on the road to democracy,
will not hinder the organization of those elections, the
calendar of which is to be published by CENI, which is
constitutionally mandated to manage them.
With regard to these events, I note that during the
2011 elections, various partners of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the opposition made
suggestyions that CENI deemed useful to include in
the new electoral law enacted by Parliament. Those
suggestions included promoting gender awareness and
counting the votes of Congolese abroad. The events
were the result of the manipulation of the country’s
population by an opposition party.
When we consider the security situation that
prevailed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
just two years ago, this analysis gives us grounds for
great satisfaction. Major progress has been made in
reducing threats to the security of the population and in
improving the conditions under which the Government
can assume responsibility for that security. We
legitimately believe that we are emerging from the
phase of restoring and keeping the peace. From that
point of view, we should look at future objectives and
the MONUSCO withdrawal strategy.
After 15 years of United Nations presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we should give
credit to the partnership of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations, the international
community and regional organizations for, among
other things, the withdrawal of foreign armed forces,
the reunification of the country, the establishment of
the transitional Government, and the holding of two
national elections.
Fifteen years is a significant amount of time. We
believe that we are jointly responsible for assessing the
United Nations actions in our country to support the
Government in order to ensure that they remain relevant
to the goals we have set and the emerging challenges
we face. We agree with the Secretary-General that
frank discussion between the United Nations and the
Government of my country is necessary to reach a
compromise without endangering the progress achieved
on the ground. My Government would like the Security
Council to engage in such a discussion instead of
making a unilateral decision.
The ultimatum issued to the Forces démocratique de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) rebel group to lay down

8/9

22/01/2015

its weapons and demobilize for voluntary repatriation
ended on 2 January. The forced disarmament of
that Rwandan rebellion by the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo, in cooperation
with the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade, is now
a military issue. The impatience seen among a number
of partners is shared by the Congolese people and their
leaders. The mere 25 per cent of FDLR combattants who
laid down their arms to enter transit centres is not at all
satisfactory to my Government. Forced disarmament
remains the only option at present. It will take place as
soon as possible and in the most appropriate fashion,
bearing in mind all the parameters that are open to our
defence and security forces.
We recall that FDLR is not an army in the
traditional sense. These are fighters without distinctive
markings who hide behind a human shield made up of
our compatriots and Rwandan civilian refugees. It is
therefore up to the army to adapt its entire strategy to
that reality on the ground. At this time, the national
imperative for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to put an end to the presence
in the country of FDLR combattants, who are a threat
to peace not only in their country of origin, but also
and above all in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
where they have committed many criminal acts against
our country and its population for over two decades.
It is generally agreed today that assistance to a
country in a post-conflict situation like my own must
be based on the priorities of that country and its real
needs in order to make it possible for the population to
legitimately benefit from the dividends of peace. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo recognizes that it
needs lasting peace in order to respond to the challenges
of building a well-functioning, strong and prosperous
State that cares for the rights of its citizens and is able
provide for their needs. We therefore expect a great
deal from the United Nations, which undeniably has
the ability to assist in strengthening public institutions.
All that we ask is that we be treated as responsible
adults able to assume the prerogatives of our recovered
sovereignty.
The keywords for the future of our cooperation are
“dialogue” and “partnership” based on the principle of
ownership by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the secondary role of international cooperation.
We recognize that to be effective, ownership requires
strengthened national capacity.

15-01994

22/01/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

To conclude, my delegation takes this opportunity
to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and the representative of
Jordan for their briefings. I would also like to thank the
members of the Security Council for all of their tireless
and very welcome initiatives to re-establish peace in
my country.

S/PV.7367

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite the
members of the Council to proceed to consultations on
this same topic.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

15-019949/9
