United Nations

S/PV.4121

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4121st Meeting
Wednesday, 29 March 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cappagli
Mr. Duval
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. Hamer
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Minton

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau (S/2000/250)

00-36672 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2000/250)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Da Gama
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kiernan Prendergast,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Prendergast to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau,
document S/2000/250.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kiernan Prendergast, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs. I give him the floor.

2

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
Mr. Prendergast: The report before you, Sir, is the
fourth report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS).
As members of the Council will recall, the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, briefed the Council on 23
February 2000 on the results of the second round of the
presidential elections and on the progress of the
democratic process in that country. He also outlined the
daunting post-electoral challenges facing the new
Government of President Kumba Yala.
Members of the Council will also recall that
following Mr. Nana-Sinkam’s briefing the President of
the Council issued a press statement, welcoming the
return of constitutional and democratic rule to GuineaBissau and encouraging all parties in that country to work
closely together in a spirit of tolerance, to strengthen
democratic values, to protect the rule of law and to
guarantee the protection of human rights. The statement
also encouraged the new institutions to develop and
implement programmes designed to consolidate peace,
national reconciliation and economic development.
The present report covers developments in GuineaBissau since Mr. Nana-Sinkam’s briefing. It provides
further details of the Government’s strategy for dealing
with the post-electoral challenges that confront it. The
report also describes the contributions of the United
Nations Office, in collaboration with United Nations
agencies on the ground, to promote peace and national
reconciliation, human rights and the rule of law in
Guinea-Bissau.
As members of the Council will recall, the mandate
of UNOGBIS was adjusted to respond better to the
post-electoral realities and was approved by the Council
on 10 March.
If I might turn to highlights of the report, I am glad
to report that the overall situation in Guinea-Bissau is
peaceful and the humanitarian situation has noticeably
improved. More political detainees have been
provisionally released and the trials of some of them have
already begun, despite the severe logistical and human
constraints facing the judiciary.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Regrettably, the economic situation remains worrying.
The Government still does not have resources to pay longoverdue salaries to civil servants and soldiers.
There are lingering concerns about the difficulties
encountered in redefining the relationship between the new
Government and the military establishment in the
post-electoral period. However, it is encouraging to note
that negotiations between the Government and the former
military junta are continuing. They are led by the Bishop of
Bissau and a group of mediators from civil society. The
Representative of the Secretary-General is providing his
good offices in this area, as required.
In view of the situation described in his report, the
Secretary-General has urged members of the international
community to provide urgent assistance for the
Government’s 100-day transitional programme. This
programme is critical for the credibility of the new
Government as it faces mounting pressures from ordinary
citizens who are demanding basic services in areas such as
water and electricity.
Allow me to take this opportunity to thank, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, those Member States which have
contributed to the trust fund in support of activities of
UNOGBIS. I also appeal for continued support to this trust
fund.
Since the report was completed, there appears to have
been some positive movement on the issue of the role of
the former military. Through the mediation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Gambia, Mr. Jobe, President
Kumba Yala met on 22 March with members of the former
military junta led by General Mane. Following the meeting,
the President announced that five posts of minister of state
without portfolio had been offered to members of the
former junta. The offer was accepted in principle, and its
details are being finalized. General Mane was quoted as
saying after the meeting that “there was not a single cloud
between the new authorities and the military”.
Also on 22 March, the first session of the newly
elected National Assembly was solemnly opened. The
debates will continue until 22 April. In their opening
addresses, the President of the Republic and the President
of the Assembly sought to reaffirm their commitment to
respect for the authority of the State and for human rights.
Before convening a new round-table conference on
Guinea-Bissau, the Government is planning to hold
consultations with development partners on its overall

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
strategies and priority areas. This will take place on
Tuesday, 11 April, in Bissau. At this forum, the
Government intend to present their major concerns, their
strategies and their priority actions for lasting
development, the effects of which will benefit the
majority of the population.
To conclude, please allow me to highlight three
points made in the observation section of the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
First, the successful outcome of the legislative and
presidential elections has brought to an end the
transitional institutions put in place under the Abuja
Accord of 1 November 1998.
Secondly, it is crucial that all Guinea-Bissau’s
parties, including the former military junta, fully accept
this new democratic reality and work with the
Government to solve the problems that lie ahead in a
spirit of patriotism and national reconciliation.
Finally, I would like to re-state that without the
combined efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, the United Nations and Member States, the
transition to democracy in Guinea-Bissau would never
have got under way. It is gratifying that this joint effort
has produced tangible results. This may perhaps serve as
an example of what the international community, with the
full cooperation of national actors, is able to do with
minimal resources. However, the task has not yet been
completed, and there is no room for complacency.
The President: I thank Mr. Prendergast for his
briefing and introduction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral.
I will now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Minton (United States): I thank Mr. Prendergast
for his briefing at a very important time in the
development of democratic institutions in Guinea-Bissau.
We welcome today’s Secretariat briefing and the recent
release of the Secretary-General’s latest report on GuineaBissau. They indeed highlight a situation where timely
United Nations and international intervention have made
a difference in resolving conflict and restoring order.
During most meetings in this Chamber, the Council
focuses on situations where law and order are threatened

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
and where the prospects for peace remain very dim indeed.
Fortunately, today, in the case of Guinea-Bissau, peace has
been restored, free and fair national elections have been
conducted, and efforts are under way, with the assistance of
the United Nations, to promote national reconciliation and
to foster a favourable climate for economic development.
These positive developments merit our special recognition
and attention. They set an impressive standard of success.
The United States Government commends the people
of Guinea-Bissau for their commitment to peace and for
their efforts to work together to build a stronger society.
My Government also commends the United Nations
personnel serving with the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), under the
very able and insightful leadership of the SecretaryGeneral’s Representative, Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, for
their efforts to strengthen democratic values, to promote the
rule of law and to encourage the protection of human rights
in Guinea-Bissau. The United Nations mission in GuineaBissau represents a good example of the critical role that
the United Nations can play in conflict resolution and in
post-conflict institution-building.
Of course, there is much work that remains to be
done. With the successful conclusion of the presidential
run-off election on 16 January, the new Government of
President Yala and Prime Minister Caetano N’chama can
now begin to develop and implement programmes designed
to further democracy and promote economic growth. These
tasks will not be easy, as I have said; many challenges still
lie ahead. In particular, we would like to emphasize that
members of the Council and of the United Nations will
have to support vigorously efforts made by the Government
of Guinea-Bissau to redefine the role of the military in the
country in accordance with the rule of law and democracy.
As a member of the group of friends of Guinea-Bissau, the
United States stands ready to do what it can to help in this
regard.
As a matter of policy and in conformity with our own
domestic legislative requirements, we suspended direct
bilateral assistance to the Government of Guinea-Bissau at
the time of the May 1999 coup. However, in the wake of
the November and January elections in that country, which
were conducted — in our view — in a free, fair and
transparent manner, we are now reviewing ways in which
to recommence our bilateral assistance efforts. We hope to
be able to provide trade and investment promotion support
once remaining legal impediments have been removed, and
to help on demining programmes as well.

4

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
The international community would react very
negatively, in our view, should Guinea-Bissau return to
military rule under any guise. Guinea-Bissau is just
beginning to recover from civil conflict. It needs peace,
reconstruction and development. Nothing could hinder
that more than renewed military intervention in
governance, and we do not expect to see this.
The people of Guinea-Bissau need and deserve the
support of the international community. Thanks to
international encouragement and intervention, GuineaBissau has taken the first critical steps towards reestablishment of a society based on national reconciliation
and democratic values. We must continue to support these
efforts.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recent decision
to extend the mandate of UNOGBIS for one additional
year, through 31 March 2001. In a fragile subregion
fraught with many challenges and interlocking crises, the
United Nations must continue to play a key role in
assisting the Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau
to continue building a strong foundation for peace.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): First, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report of 24
March and Mr. Prendergast for his supplementary
briefing. In deference to the wishes of the President, I
will be brief.
I would recall first that the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections in Guinea-Bissau marked a major
stage in the democratization of the country. As the
Secretary-General’s report states, with the completion of
the transitional process, the country stands at a critical
crossroad in its history, energized by the progress made
so far, but conscious of the many challenges that lie
ahead.
The need to satisfy the popular need for change, as
shown by the overwhelming election victory of President
Kumba Yala, who got 72 per cent of the vote, is very
strong, which determines the post-electoral priorities for
the authorities in Guinea-Bissau for the short and medium
term. It should also reinforce the spirit of reconciliation
among the people, consolidate the rule of law, and assure
good administration of public affairs as well as respect for
human rights.
We are pleased at the positive measures reported by
Mr. Prendergast. At the same time, the new authorities in
Guinea-Bissau must continue to improve relations with

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4121st meeting
29 March 2000

neighbouring States and cooperation with the international
community as a whole.

reform and has adopted positive measures in that regard.
We express our appreciation for all this.

Despite the achievements made so far, however, the
situation in the country is still fragile, and that is why we
believe that the Security Council must send a strong signal
to the political class of Guinea-Bissau, of all political
parties, and to civil society in that country, a signal
insisting on a return to normalcy and emphasizing the end
of the transition period established by the Abuja Accord of
1 November 1998.

We agree with the observation in the report of the
Secretary-General that Guinea-Bissau is at present at a
critical crossroad. We encourage the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to continue its efforts to enhance national
reconciliation, consolidate constitutional rule and begin
economic reconstruction at an early date so that peace and
stability in that country can be maintained.

Likewise, we believe it urgent that the international
community be mobilized to provide assistance for the
rebuilding of the economy and the consolidation of lasting
peace in Guinea-Bissau. In this regard, we look forward
with interest to the donors conference that will be held in
New York in May of this year.
The draft Presidential statement that has been
submitted to the Council for consideration, which will be
adopted following this meeting, may be viewed precisely
from this twofold perspective.
I would like to recall the firm commitment of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
to continue its efforts to consolidate the situation in Sierra
Leone as well as to stabilize the entire subregion. President
Konaré has made this a priority in his term of office as
Chairman of ECOWAS, and has shown determination and
resolve, as was recalled yesterday by Mr. Miyet in a very
timely way.
In addition, I would also like to pay tribute to the
representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nana-Sinkam,
to the people working in the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, and to the whole United
Nations team, for their devoted efforts on behalf of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the report that he has provided to us. We also
thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Prendergast, for his
additional briefing.
Recently, the situation in Guinea-Bissau has remained
stable, and Guinea-Bissau’s relations with neighbouring
countries have further improved. The current humanitarian
situation in Guinea-Bissau has also improved. We are
satisfied with developments in Guinea-Bissau. Since it came
into office, the new Government has committed itself to

At the same time, we call upon the international
community to continue to give attention and support to
Guinea-Bissau and to support the peace process in
particular. In this regard, we would like to thank the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for the
enormous efforts that they have been making for a long
time. We would also like to thank the Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nana-Sinkam, and the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau,
for the positive role that they have played in the peace
process in Guinea-Bissau. We also hope that, in the year
to come, they will continue to work tirelessly for peace
and development in Guinea-Bissau.
Before concluding, I should like to say that we
support the draft presidential statement, which will be
adopted later.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this formal
meeting today to discuss the Secretary-General’s latest
report, of 24 March 2000, on developments in GuineaBissau and the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS).
We also wish to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for
introducing the Secretary-General’s report and for
updating us on the situation.
The report has made clear that the people of GuineaBissau strongly desire peace and wish to put the traumatic
events of the civil strife behind them. We welcome the
fact that the process of normalization and the transition to
democracy is taking place in earnest following the
successful holding of the legislative and presidential
elections in that country. The successful completion of
those elections and the subsequent setting up of a new
Government has ushered in a new chapter for the people
of Guinea-Bissau, one full of the promise of a democratic
and peaceful political future. It also brings to a close the

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
transitional Government established in accordance with the
Abuja peace accord of 1 November 1998.
In this regard, we would like to congratulate President
Kumba Yala on his impressive mandate and wish him
every success as Guinea-Bissau completes the process of a
return to civilian rule. We support the President’s intention
to fight corruption and to build a more just and democratic
society. The early identification by the Government of
post-electoral priorities for the short and medium term is
most heartening.
However, we note that, as Guinea-Bissau moves ahead
with its democratization process, the military has,
nevertheless, continued to maintain a high public posture.
We strongly urge the former military junta to fulfil its
earlier pledge that it would endeavour to stay out of politics
and would remain loyal to the newly elected President. We
are heartened to hear about the positive outcome of the
negotiations between the Government and the former
military junta to redefine the role of the military in
accordance with the rule of law and democracy. We pay
tribute to the Foreign Minister of the Gambia for the
commendable role he has played in this regard. For a
smooth transition to democracy in Guinea-Bissau, it is
important for the military to support the supremacy of
civilian institutions and the rule of law and to confine its
role to that of national defence.
Meanwhile, we continue to be concerned about the
wide circulation of small arms, which serves only to further
complicate the security situation. My delegation therefore
welcomes efforts to develop a package of incentives to
encourage civilians to turn in their weapons under the
coordination of UNOGBIS, with the active support of the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations. In addition, we must
underline the importance of the World Bank mission to the
country proposed for early next month in an effort to
promote the demobilization and reintegration of the military
into civilian life. Furthermore, we are pleased to note the
improvement in human rights, as well as the overall
humanitarian situation in the country, and the role that
UNOGBIS continues to play in the process. The continued
improvement in relations between Guinea-Bissau and its
neighbours has helped to facilitate the smooth and early
return of refugees to the country. We welcome this.
Guinea-Bissau requires our continuing attention and
assistance as it moves forward to consolidate peace and
stability in the country. Malaysia joins others in calling on
the international community to support the Government’s

6

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
three-month transitional programme, pending the
organization of a new round-table conference. We agree
with the Secretary-General that the ability of the
Organization to fulfil its critical facilitation role in
Guinea-Bissau is very much dependent on the continued
and additional support of the international community.
In conclusion, Malaysia commends the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, for their
important roles in facilitating the transitional process. We
also commend States Members of the Organization,
particularly France, the Netherlands and Cyprus, for their
contributions to the trust fund established in support of
the activities of UNOGBIS. We also wish to join others
in commending the Secretary-General’s Representative,
Mr. Nana-Sinkam, UNOGBIS and the United Nations
country team in Bissau for their efforts thus far and for
their continued success in assisting Guinea-Bissau in its
peace-building efforts.
Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open briefing on GuineaBissau, and we wish to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for
updating us on the current situation in that country. We
also welcome the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2000/250.
The events that have been unfolding in GuineaBissau over the past month are, indeed, testimony to the
fact that the United Nations, with the full cooperation of
national actors and with sustained support from the
international community, can make a meaningful
contribution to a country’s effort to move from a state of
civil strife to one of peace. In this regard, my delegation
applauds the sterling achievements of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS). We also extend congratulations to President
Kumba Yala, and wish him and his Government every
success.
The United Nations can be proud of the fact that its
proactive steps, taken to restore constitutional rule in
Guinea-Bissau, including the recent extension of the
mandate of UNOGBIS for one year, means that this
Organization is poised to embark on a new phase in its
political role in Guinea-Bissau. With the revised mandate
of the Support Office, emphasis has been aptly placed on
peace-building facilitation. Equally, we wish to recognize
the sterling contribution of the States members of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for the key

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
role they played in the restoration of peace and security
throughout Guinea-Bissau, particularly in the successful
implementation of the Abuja Accord.
We join other delegations in paying tribute to the
people of Guinea-Bissau, who have demonstrated the
political maturity necessary for the success of free, fair and
transparent elections, and who have clearly demonstrated a
desire for peace. We were pleased to hear from Sir Kieran
about the recent accord between the Government and the
former military junta, and we express our delegation’s
appreciation to the Foreign Minister of the Gambia for his
mediation.
We agree that Guinea-Bissau clearly stands at a
critical crossroads. While the progress made is laudable,
efforts must now be channelled into confronting the
enormous challenges which lie ahead. The report of the
Secretary-General identifies several of these challenges,
including the consolidation of Guinea-Bissau’s nascent
democracy, the revitalization of State institutions, the
demobilization and reintegration of retired military
personnel, the return of refugees and the re-launching of the
economy. These will require constructive partnerships,
combining the efforts of national actors and neighbouring
States. Jamaica shares the view that the Security Council
must continue to play a role in the post-conflict peacebuilding phase in Guinea-Bissau by lending its political
support. The draft presidential statement, which we will
adopt later and which has the full support of my delegation,
sends a strong message to the new Government of GuineaBissau as it consolidates its new constitutional role, while
at the same time bringing to closure the transitional
institutions deriving from the Abuja Accord and its
additional protocol, and other related agreements which
have now been completed.
The international community also has a role to play in
mobilizing the necessary financial support for the
development of the state structures of Guinea-Bissau. The
Secretary-General’s report highlights the need to address
urgently the economic and social needs of the population,
chief among which is the eradication of poverty. It is our
firm belief that commitment to the goals of peace and
security must be matched by plans to foster sustained
economic growth and sustainable development. We
therefore encourage the cooperation of the United Nations
system and the Bretton Woods institutions in the targeting
of the priority sectors, such as health, education and
agriculture, and look forward to the results of the
forthcoming round table.

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General’s representative, Mr. Nana-Sinkam,
and the staff of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau for their hard work and
dedicated commitment to ensuring peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
join my colleagues in thanking the Secretariat, in
particular Mr. Prendergast, for the introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau.
France appreciates the energetic activities in that
country of the Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Nana-Sinkam, and the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS). We feel that the presence of the United
Nations there since June 1999 has allowed its transition
from a state of war to one of peace and the gradual reestablishment of constitutional order. The courageous
stances taken by Mr. Nana-Sinkam, as well as his close
contacts with the authorities and the judiciary, have
heightened respect for human rights and the rule of law.
As Mr. Prendergast rightly noted, this is an excellent
example of the essential role of the United Nations.
France welcomes the successful holding of the recent
legislative and presidential elections in Guinea-Bissau.
The first objectives set by President Kumba Yala seem to
point in the right direction and deserve the international
community’s support. We feel that the President’s
concern to consult civil society on a regular basis with
regard to the various programmes that have been
undertaken is also well directed. France will, of course,
be participating in a constructive and positive in the
forthcoming round table to be organized by the United
Nations Development Programme.
In view of the successful convening of the elections,
we consider it important that civilian power be endowed
with all authority necessary to implementing its action.
We believe that full respect for the Abuja Accord of 1
November 1998 negotiated under the auspices of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
will require the dissolution of the junta. The full return to
constitutional normality is a genuine priority. The armed
forces must henceforth obey unequivocally the
instructions of the civilian power.
At this point, I wish to pay tribute to the very
positive role played by the Gambia, in particular by

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4121st meeting
29 March 2000

Foreign Minister Jobe. We hope that the agreement reached
on 22 March will be put into effect. We support all
initiatives to promote the demobilization and reintegration
of the military into civilian life and, like others, look
forward to learning the results of the World Bank mission
to take place in early April.

Nana-Sinkam, and of Alpha Oumar Konaré, President of
Mali and current Chairman of the Economic Community
of West African States, who have overseen the
establishment of a joint monitoring mechanism along
Guinea-Bissau’s borders with Senegal and Guinea, as well
as other confidence-building measures.

France encourages Mr. Nana-Sinkam, the SecretaryGeneral’s Representative, to pursue his consultations with
the countries of the region so as to resolve the border
security issues. The adoption of the confidence-building
measures proposed by President Konaré of Mali, as current
Chairman of ECOWAS, would also seem appropriate.

We are encouraged by reports from civil society
groups in Guinea-Bissau that the human rights situation
has improved substantially and by the Government’s
decision to free a number of people detained following
the May 1999 coup. Some 50 remain, however, in what
the Secretary-General has described as deplorable
conditions. We also note the technical assistance provided
by United Nations bodies in strengthening local judicial
capacity, which has already helped to expedite trials in a
fair and transparent manner.

The loss of peace in Guinea-Bissau posed a threat to
the peace and stability of the entire subregion. Undoubted
progress has been made, but the information contained in
the Secretary-General’s report, indicating the continuing
circulation of large quantities of small arms in civilian
communities, is a genuine cause of concern to my
delegation. I associate myself with Ambassador Hasmy’s
statement highlighting the importance of a vigorous
implementation of the arms-recovery programme. This is an
essential matter for the future of Guinea-Bissau and the
stability of the entire region.
Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS) for another year. We thank Mr. Prendergast
for his briefing and, like him, believe that the Office can
build on the recent success of the democratic process and
on the formation of a broad-based Government to assist
civil society and government in the consolidation of peace
in the country.
We commend in particular the support given by the
Bissau Guinean military to the peace and democratization
processes and its commitment to transforming the armed
forces into a more professional army subordinate to civilian
authorities. The reaffirmation by military leaders of the
supremacy of the country’s Constitution and their
non-interference in the recently completed electoral process
suggest an encouraging respect for civilian rule. We
encourage Council members and relevant regional
organizations to remain engaged in ensuring that the
transitional military authority does indeed relinquish all
powers to the elected civilian administration.
Relations between Guinea-Bissau and its neighbours
continue to improve, in large part due to the exemplary
work of the Secretary-General’s Representative, Samuel

8

Finally, we are encouraged by the efforts of
UNOGBIS to promote the rights of women through
discussions with local women parliamentarians and by the
Government’s commitment to creating an institute for
women and children.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
I also wish to thank Mr. Prendergast, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his introduction to the
report of the Secretary-General on developments in that
country.
The delegation of Tunisia notes with satisfaction the
gradual return to constitutional and democratic order in
Guinea-Bissau following the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections. In this regard, we welcome the
efforts of the new Government to consolidate the nascent
democracy, to promote national reconciliation through
grass-roots involvement in the decision-making process,
to provide for good governance of public affairs and to
once again become part of the overall dynamic of
development in the subregion, within the Economic
Community of West African States.
It is clear that the return of Guinea-Bissau to a
lasting state of normalcy will require large-scale national,
subregional and international efforts. It is, of course, the
responsibility of the Bissau Guineans themselves to
undertake this task by tackling the economic
reconstruction of their country, while ensuring the
consolidation on a daily basis of national reconciliation,
with a view to bringing about lasting stability.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
In extending the mandate of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) for
a year as of 31 March, the Security Council has reaffirmed
its resolve to continue to lend the necessary support to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. The
international action which took that country from a state of
war to a state of peace is for us a source of pride. The
cooperation of all Bissau Guinean parties, with the support
of ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries and the United Nations, proves that the
mobilization of the entire international community to work
for peace always provides grounds for hope.
The satisfactory outcome of the conflict in GuineaBissau should encourage protagonists in other areas of
tension and conflict to reflect on this example and opt
resolutely for peace.
Mr. President, the Tunisian delegation supports the
statement that you will be making on behalf of the Council,
which reflects our full support for the process of
reconciliation and its requirements, as well as the role that
the international community will continue to play in
building peace in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I thank the UnderSecretary-General for his introduction of the report and for
the additional information that he has provided. The report
overall seems quite positive, although we have Sir Kieran’s
concerns in mind of the worrying economic situation in
Guinea-Bissau.
As the Secretary-General states in paragraph 23 of his
report, Guinea-Bissau serves as a positive example of a
case in which the region, the international community and
the United Nations together were successful in promoting
a peaceful solution with relatively modest means. We must
keep the subject on the agenda to help Guinea-Bissau
consolidate peace and democracy and to see to it that the
moderate elements will continue to prevail.
The return to constitutional and democratic order in
Guinea-Bissau is now complete, and it is important that the
extra-constitutional structures, which had a role to play
under the Abuja Accord and related agreements, now give
way to the newly established constitutional institutions.
Our chief concern in this regard remains the military
junta. The junta must be told in no uncertain terms that
with the installation of the new Government its role has
come to an end, and the military must now be depoliticized.
The international community will not tolerate a revival in

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
any form of the junta on the political scene in GuineaBissau.
Another remaining source of concern is the slow
pace of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
The Government of Guinea-Bissau must take up this
matter with priority. We also encourage the World Bank
to accelerate its efforts in this regard. As a member of the
Group of Friends, the Netherlands will continue to
support the United Nations Peace-building Support Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) Trust Fund and is ready in
principle to make a further contribution of 500,000 Dutch
guilders.
Finally, my delegation will be happy to support the
presidential statement to be made by you, Mr. President,
and we thank the delegation of Mali, which currently
holds the chairmanship of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), for its efforts in
preparing these statements.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): We would like to thank
Sir Kieran Prendergast for his report, which offers solid
grounds for hope that the concerted efforts of the people
of Guinea-Bissau and of the international community have
not been in vain.
We all recall the time of hardship in Guinea-Bissau,
when the country was plagued by political tensions that
sparked a brutal civil war. The United Nations was there
at that time, ready to help the country to create an
environment conducive to the restoration of peace,
national reconciliation and democratic principles. The
political controversy in the country has been resolved, and
credit must be given to the efforts of the people of
Guinea-Bissau, to the demonstrated political will of the
parties involved, to the neighbouring countries, to the
support of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP), and to the
outstanding work of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS).
The recent political developments in that country
clearly demonstrate the strong will and the ability of the
people of Guinea-Bissau to vote for change and to take
the path of democracy, national reconciliation and unity.
We are most gratified at the fact that the
commitments by the signatories to the Abuja Accord and
other related agreements are being translated into

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
meaningful steps towards restoring democratic rule and
constitutional order.
Following the transitional period, the new Government
of Guinea-Bissau will be facing new and pressing
challenges in various spheres, including the consolidation of
democracy, the promotion of the demobilization and
reintegration of the military into civil society, the
strengthening of a fair judicial mechanism for those
detained following the events of May 1999, and the
energizing of the economy. The creation of social and
economic conditions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons should remain among the
priority tasks for the young constitutional Government.
There is no time like the present for the international
community to extend a helping hand to the people of
Guinea-Bissau. The Security Council’s approval of the
revision and extension of the mandate of UNOGBIS for a
year, starting from March 31, is an appropriate and
essential step in this direction. However, political support
alone cannot suffice; financial backing is also necessary in
order to focus on the major needs of the country in the
social and economic areas, and in this respect international
donors must play a crucial role.
We sincerely hope that the case of Guinea-Bissau will
vividly exemplify the success of the consolidated efforts of
the people of that country and the international community
at its best, and that the other countries in Africa which have
yet to overcome their political and security difficulties will
follow suit.
Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
at the outset thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting in the form of an open briefing, which
enhances the transparency of the work of the Security
Council. This makes it possible for all of the Members of
the United Nations to have access to the information
provided to us.
We have read attentively the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 24 March on developments in Guinea-Bissau,
and we would like to thank Mr. Prendergast for his
informative presentation.
The second round of elections, held in January, and
the investiture of the new constitutional President of
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Kumba Yala, marked the close of the
country’s transitional phase, as provided for in the Abuja
Accord.

10

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
Today we can state that this transitional phase has
been successful. As emerges from the report of the
Secretary-General, and from what we have heard from
Mr. Prendergast, the general situation in Guinea-Bissau
has improved. The rule of law has been restored to the
country; relations with neighbouring countries are
developing positively; and the humanitarian situation has
improved, with the return of a large number of refugees
to the country and of many internally displaced persons
to their homes.
This has been possible thanks to the efforts of many
people, first and foremost those of the people of GuineaBissau themselves. But we would also like to mention in
particular the Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Samuel Nana-Sinkam, and the personnel of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS), among others.
Although, as we said earlier, the transitional phase
has concluded, the tasks that the new Government must
still face are daunting. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral indicates, new relations must be established
between the civilian Government and the armed forces,
which must respect civilian authority; the problem of
small arms must be addressed; the judicial system needs
to be improved; and basic socio-economic needs must be
met.
Successfully meeting these challenges will be a test
for United Nations peace-building activities. UNOGBIS,
whose revised mandate has been extended for a year as
of 31 March, has a fundamental role to play in supporting
the new Government of Guinea-Bissau. We urge the
international community to give these tasks all the
necessary support. We pledge our own support here in the
Security Council.
Finally, we would like to lend our support to the
draft presidential statement that has been prepared by the
delegation of Mali.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Namibia wishes to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
Guinea-Bissau. We also thank Mr. Prendergast for the
update he has given us.
The situation of Guinea-Bissau was high on the
agenda of the United Nations during the past year and it
will continue to enjoy the attention of the international
community, so as to enable the people of that country to
consolidate their democracy. I therefore wish to take this

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
opportunity to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau.
We commend them for the efforts they have made in
bringing about peace and the rule of law in their country.
The successful conclusion of the legislative and presidential
elections and the formation of a broad-based Government
are clear indications of their commitment to transform their
country into a democracy.
We encourage the new Government of President
Kumba Yala to embark upon a vigorous programme to
promote genuine national reconciliation and to inculcate
democratic values, the rule of law and good governance in
Guinea-Bissau. These are important tenets for bringing
prosperity and improving the quality of life for the people
of Guinea-Bissau, whose ingenuity and enterprise can be
realized with the full support of the international
community.
In this connection, we pay special tribute to the
Representative of the Secretary-General and to the men and
women of the United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) for the tireless efforts
they have made in assisting the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Our special thanks also go to the Member States, United
Nations agencies, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries, for their support and the
critical role they have played in the peace process in
Guinea-Bissau. We call on the international community to
continue to support the reconstruction process in that
country.
Guinea-Bissau needs a dependable and democratically
accountable defense force. The process for induction into
the force must, as a matter of priority, take members with
no track record of gross human rights violations or active
involvement in politics. Members unfit for service in the
force must be given skills that are transferrable into civilian
life.
We express our concern about the flow of small arms
in the country, and we wish to associate ourselves with the
point made by Ambassador Hasmy in this regard.
Finally, we wish President Kumba Yala and the people
of Guinea-Bissau every success.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I share
the unity of view in both the thanks and praise that have
come out of the statements this morning, and also in the
note of optimism that we have seen a relative success for
the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau.

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
I just wanted to make two quick points. One is that
we must, on this issue, make sure that we get the postconflict situation right. I think this is a chance for us to
go on focusing on what happens after the worst has been
resolved, with the help of the United Nations and the
excellent work done by Mr. Nana-Sinkam and the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS). That includes, as people have said this
morning, focusing on the police and the armed forces in
particular.
But there is another aspect to it, and that is the
regional aspect. Too often in Africa we have seen
progress at one point washed out by things moving back
in from the region or from outside. The flow of small
arms is one example, but regional politics can also do
damage. We may have to watch that very carefully in
Sierra Leone, for instance. But with the elections in
Senegal, the success in Guinea-Bissau and — I hope —
with an improvement in the fragile situation in Sierra
Leone, West Africa is beginning to show us a bit of an
example of how we can do things in Africa. We must
keep an eye on that post-conflict situation. So I would
want this subject to come back to the Security Council so
that we can keep a check on this part of it and not turn
our backs on it because we think that the work has been
done.
The President: I shall now make a brief statement
in my capacity as the representative of Bangladesh.
I join my colleagues in thanking UnderSecretary-General Kieran Prendergast for his presentation
this morning. Let me also thank the Secretary-General for
his report on recent developments in Guinea-Bissau.
Indeed, there have been positive developments. The
post-conflict transitional process in Guinea-Bissau, as
envisaged in the Abuja Accord, has come to an end with
the formation of a broad-based Government and the
inauguration of a pluralist parliament in the country.
We are encouraged to note that human rights as well
as the humanitarian situation in Guinea-Bissau continue
to improve. The United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) and Mr. NanaSinkam are playing a very useful role in this regard. We
also welcome the focused attention being given to the
issues related to women and children.
Since the challenge now faced by Guinea-Bissau is
to consolidate peace, stability and democracy, the role of

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
the United Nations in that country is also changing. The
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building has been
signified by the revised mandate of UNOGBIS approved by
the Council on 10 March 2000. However, we believe it is
still too early to be complacent. As the report makes clear,
the situation remains precarious. The military maintains a
high public posture. The continuing circulation of small
arms compounds the security situation.
The United Nations and the international community
have to remain vigilant and supportive. We have to watch
out for any moves to offset the process of institutionalizing
democracy in Guinea-Bissau. The supportive role of the
Council is indeed essential in this context.
As the Secretary-General mentioned in his report,
Guinea-Bissau today represents a case in which the United
Nations, with full cooperation from national actors and
support from the international community, has made a
meaningful contribution at a modest cost.
In conclusion, Bangladesh would like to congratulate
the people of Guinea-Bissau on their successful transition
to democracy. We would also like to thank the Economic
Community of West African States and its current
Chairman, President Konaré of Mali, as well as the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for their
constructive role in this regard.
I now resume my function as the President of the
Council and give the floor to Mr. Prendergast to make any
comments that he might like to make at this stage.
Mr. Prendergast: Maybe I could pick out five points
from this very interesting discussion this morning. First of

4121st meeting
29 March 2000
all, I detected a very widespread view that there are solid
grounds for hope in Guinea-Bissau, notwithstanding
current economic and other problems. Secondly, there was
also very wide and strong support for the people of
Guinea-Bissau in the ongoing process of democratization
and good governance. Thirdly, I must say I very much
welcome the emphasis that was placed by speakers on the
importance of consolidating the democratic process and
on its essentially civilian nature. It was right to emphasize
that. Fourthly, I noted — and this was not in my own
introductory remarks — comments that correctly
emphasized the dangers that small arms pose to the
region, and therefore the importance of the arms-recovery
programme.
Lastly, let me say how much I welcome the
emphasis on post-conflict peace-building. The figure that
one has heard is that about 60 per cent conflicts slide
back into violence after settlements. This rather
melancholy figure illustrates the importance of not resting
on our oars once there has been a formal peace
agreement. A lot remains to be done, and there are always
Cinderella areas. And one of those, which I think is also
highly relevant to Guinea-Bissau, is the question of
demobilization and, particularly, reintegration into civilian
society. Resources are required for this process; often in
the past this has been placed on a voluntary basis, and it
tends to be something of a Cinderella. So again, I very
much thank those members of the Council who
emphasized that this is an ongoing task and that we need
to place more emphasis on post-conflict peace-building.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The next meeting of the Security
Council to continue the consideration of the item on the
agenda will take place immediately following the
adjournment of the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

12
