30

General AHembly-Twenty-fifth SeS11ion

6. Expresses its appreciation of the assistance
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the specialized
agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the non-governmental organizations concerned;
1. Recommends that all parties concerned should
continue their co-operation with the Scientific Committee;
8. Commends the Scientific Committee for the discussion it has had on the contribution that might be
made to the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment and recommends that the Secretary-General should fully utilize the relevant experience of the
Committee in the further preparations for this Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the dissemination of its findings to the public.
1864th plenary meeting,
13 October 1970.

2624 (XXV). The policies of apartheid of the
Government of South Africa
The General Assembly,
Takin1 note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa/'
RecalUn1 its resolution 2505 (XXIV) of 20 November 1969 expressing the firm intention of the United
Nations, actinJ in co-operation with the Organization
of African Umty, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the present grave situation in southern Africa,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 282
(1970) of 23 July 1970 calling upon all States to
strengthen the arms embargo against South Africa,
Seriously concerned at reports that this resolution
of the Security Council is not yet being implemented
by some States,
Gravely concerned about the continued build-up of
the South African military and police forces and the
consequent aggravation of the situation in southern
Africa,
Taking note of the resolution adopted on 2 September 1970 by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity,8 mandating a delegation of five African States to urge the
Governments concerned to stop selling arms to South
Africa and also to stop assisting in the manufacture of
arms in South Africa,
Taking note also of the resolution on apartheid and
racial discrimination8 adopted by the Third Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September
1970,
1. Calls upon all States to take immediate steps to
implement fully the provisions of Security Council
resolution 282 (1970);
2. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the implementation of the present resolution, as he has
been doing with regard to Security Council resolution
282 (1970), and to report to the- General Assembly
not later than 10 December 1970.
1864th plenary meeting,
13 October 1970.
I Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8022/
llev.1).
a See A/SPC/L.181.

2656 (XXV). Establishment of the Working
Group on the Financing of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East4

The General Assembly,
Havi"!.g considered the report of the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 July 1969 to 30 June 1970,G
Noting with grave concern the acute financial situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its serious
implications for the future work of the Agency,
Bearing in mind the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral on 2 December 1970 at the 740th meeting of
the Special Political Committee as well as the appeal
made by the Chairman of that Committee on 25 November 1970 at the 733rd meeting of the Committee,
and taking into account the suggestions made in the
course of the debate concerning possible means of
securing additional income,
1. Decides to establish a Working Group on the
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, consisting of nine Member States, to study all aspects of
the financing of the Agency;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
in consultation with the Secretary-General, to designate
the Member States which will compose the Working
Group;
3. Requests the Working Group, in consultation
with the Secretary-General and the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to
present an interim report to the General Assembly,
not later than 14 December 1970, containing its recommendations on possible measures to be taken to
prevent a reduction of the Agency's services in 1971;
4. Also requests the Working Group, in the interv&l
between the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions of
the General Assembly, to assist, as appropriate, the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner-General of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in reaching solutions to the problems posed by the Agency's financial
crisis;
5. Further requests the Working Group, in consultation with the Secretary-General, the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
the specialized agencies, to present a comprehensive
report on all aspects of the financing of the Agency
to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
1918th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.

•

•

•

At the 1926th plenary meeting, on 11 December 1970, the
President of the General Assembly announced that, in pursuance of paragraph 2 of the above resolution, he had
designated the nine members of the Working Group on the
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
4 See also resolution 2728 (XXV), p. 8.
G Official Records of the General Assembly,

Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/8013).

Twenty-fifth
