A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/70
20 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 89
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/52/619)]
52/70.

Questions relating to information
A
Information in the service of humanity

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the comprehensive and important report of the Committee on Information,1
Also taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on questions relating to information,2
Urges all countries, organizations of the United Nations system as a whole and all others concerned,
reaffirming their commitment to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of
freedom of the press and freedom of information, as well as to those of the independence, pluralism and
diversity of the media, deeply concerned by the disparities existing between developed and developing
countries and the consequences of every kind arising from those disparities that affect the capability of the
public, private or other media and individuals in developing countries to disseminate information and
communicate their views and their cultural and ethical values through endogenous cultural production, as well
as to ensure the diversity of sources and their free access to information, and recognizing the call in this
context for what in the United Nations and at various international forums has been termed "a new world
information and communication order, seen as an evolving and continuous process":
(a) To cooperate and interact with a view to reducing existing disparities in information flows at all
levels by increasing assistance for the development of communication infrastructures and capabilities in

1

A/52/21. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement
No. 21.
2

A/52/455.

98-76363

/...

A/RES/52/70
Page 2

developing countries, with due regard for their needs and the priorities attached to such areas by those
countries, and in order to enable them and the public, private or other media in developing countries to
develop their own information and communication policies freely and independently and increase the
participation of media and individuals in the communication process, and to ensure a free flow of information
at all levels;
(b) To ensure for journalists the free and effective performance of their professional tasks and condemn
resolutely all attacks against them;
(c) To provide support for the continuation and strengthening of practical training programmes for
broadcasters and journalists from public, private and other media in developing countries;
(d) To enhance regional efforts and cooperation among developing countries, as well as cooperation
between developed and developing countries, to strengthen communication capacities and to improve the
media infrastructure and communication technology in the developing countries, especially in the areas of
training and dissemination of information;
(e) To aim, in addition to bilateral cooperation, at providing all possible support and assistance to the
developing countries and their media, public, private or other, with due regard to their interests and needs
in the field of information and to action already adopted within the United Nations system, including:
(i)

The development of the human and technical resources that are indispensable for the improvement
of information and communication systems in developing countries and support for the continuation
and strengthening of practical training programmes, such as those already operating under both
public and private auspices throughout the developing world;

(ii) The creation of conditions that will enable developing countries and their media, public, private or
other, to have, by using their national and regional resources, the communication technology suited
to their national needs, as well as the necessary programme material, especially for radio and
television broadcasting;
(iii) Assistance in establishing and promoting telecommunication links at the subregional, regional and
interregional levels, especially among developing countries;
(iv) The facilitation, as appropriate, of access by the developing countries to advanced communication
technology available on the open market;
(f) To provide full support for the International Programme for the Development of Communication3
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which should support both public
and private media.
69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

3

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Twenty-first Session, Belgrade, 23 September to 28 October 1980, vol. 1, Resolutions, sect. III.4,
resolution 4/21.
/...

A/RES/52/70
Page 3

B
United Nations public information policies and activities
The General Assembly,
Strongly reaffirming its primary role in elaborating, coordinating and harmonizing United Nations
policies and activities in the field of information,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Committee on Information;1

2.

Notes that the Committee on Information was unable to finish its task during its nineteenth session;

3.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on questions relating to information;2

4. Also takes note of the report of the Task Force on the Reorientation of United Nations Public
Information Activities;4
5.

Requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement already mandated activities;

6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its twentieth
session, and to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session, on United Nations public information activities
and on the implementation of the measures regarding information and communications approved by the
Assembly;
7.

Requests the Committee on Information to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;

8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled "Questions
relating to information".
69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

4

A/AC.198/1997/CRP.1, annex.
