S/2007/613

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 October 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 9 October 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to Security Council resolution 1734 (2006), by which the Council
approved a temporary increase in the strength of the military and police teams in the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) of 5 military liaison
officers and 10 civilian police officers for the period from 1 January to 31 October
2007, in order to enhance UNIOSIL capacity to support the security sector of Sierra
Leone, before and during the recent presidential and parliamentary elections. In
addition to providing electoral and operational planning support to the security
sector of Sierra Leone, these personnel have played a critical role in monitoring,
assessing and reporting on the security situation in the country.
In the light of the deterioration in the security situation during the period
leading up to the elections, and considering the security challenges that the new
Government will continue to face in the immediate post-elections period, UNIOSIL
has recommended the retention of these 15 additional personnel for a further period
of two months to enable the Office to continue to provide effective technical and
operational planning support to the security sector of Sierra Leone.
In addition, it may be recalled that just before the elections, there had been
growing dissatisfaction within the Sierra Leone army and police with their living
and working conditions. UNIOSIL played a key role in monitoring this issue and in
mobilizing donor and Peacebuilding Fund support, which helped to improve the
situation and enabled the army and police to provide effective security for the
elections. In its early days in office, the new Government will require the continued
support of UNIOSIL and its international partners in addressing these challenges.
Therefore, UNIOSIL military and police liaison officers will work closely with the
International Military Advisory and Training Team, the Peacebuilding Commission
and other international partners to support the security sector of Sierra Leone.
Under these circumstances, I would like to request that the Security Council
approve the request of UNIOSIL to retain the 5 additional military liaison officers
and 10 civilian police officers for a further period of two months, from 31 October
to 31 December 2007. The related cost of their extension will be absorbed in the
approved UNIOSIL budget for 2007.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-55265 (E) 191007

*0755265*
