A/63/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

93

rd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 30 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. YáñezBarnuevo (Spain), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now consider the reports of the
Fifth Committee on agenda items 116, 118, 121, 132 to
136, 138 to 149, 157 and 117.
I request Mr. Patrick Chuasoto, Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee, to introduce, in one intervention, the
reports of the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Chuasoto (Philippines), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee: I have the honour today to introduce
to the General Assembly the reports of the Fifth
Committee that contain recommendations on issues
that required action during the second part of the
resumed sixty-third session.
In the course of the second part of the resumed
session, which took place between 11 May and 25 June
2009, the Fifth Committee held 15 formal meetings and
numerous informal meetings and informal informal
consultations. In accordance with General Assembly
resolution 49/233, of 23 December 1994, the second
part of the resumed session of the Fifth Committee was
devoted primarily to considering the financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions and associated
peacekeeping issues. The Committee considered the
financing of 18 peacekeeping missions, related
peacekeeping items and other issues.

On sub-item (b), entitled “United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, of agenda item 116, entitled
“Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors”, the Committee, in
paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/63/637/Add.1, recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 118, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009”, in
paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/63/648/Add.6, the Fifth Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
entitled “Estimates in respect of special political
missions, good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the
Security Council”, which the Committee adopted
without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 121, entitled “Pattern
of conferences”, the Committee, in paragraph 6 of its
report contained in document A/63/638/Add.1,
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution entitled “Timely submission of
documents”, which the Committee adopted without a
vote.
In its report under agenda item 132, entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”, which
is contained in document A/63/894, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
three draft resolutions and one oral draft decision: draft

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-38696 (E)

*0938696*

A/63/PV.93

resolution I, entitled “Rates of reimbursement to troopcontributing countries”; draft resolution II, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy”; draft resolution III, entitled “Support
account for peacekeeping operations”; and the oral
draft decision entitled “Closed peacekeeping
missions”. All those drafts were adopted without a
vote.
With regard to the draft proposals on the
financing of peacekeeping operations, I should like to
inform the General Assembly that, with the exception
of the draft resolution on sub-item (b) of agenda item
144, entitled “United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”, the Fifth Committee adopted all the draft
proposals without a vote.
Reports of the Fifth Committee are presented
under the following agenda items: 133, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi”; 134, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”; 135, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus”; 136, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo”; 138, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”;
139, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea”; 140, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”; 141,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti”; 142, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo”; 143, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia”; 144, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the
Middle East”, including sub-item (a), entitled “United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force”; 145, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone”; 146, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan”; 147, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara”; 148, entitled “Financing of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”;
149, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad”; and 157,
entitled “Financing of activities arising from Security
Council resolution 1863 (2009)”.
With regard to sub-item (b) of agenda item 144,
entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”,
the report of the Fifth Committee is contained in

2

document A/63/905. The Committee decided to retain
the fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 15 by a single recorded vote of
74 in favour, 5 against and 45 abstentions. In paragraph
12 of that report, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution
as a whole, which was adopted by the Committee in a
recorded vote of 125 in favour, 2 against and no
abstentions.
Under agenda item 117, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee had
before it a draft decision entitled “Questions deferred
for future consideration”, which the Committee also
adopted without a vote and which is before the
Assembly in paragraph 5 of document A/63/649/Add.2.
Before I conclude, allow me once again to thank
delegations for their spirit of cooperation and
flexibility in the conduct of the complex negotiations
during this very challenging second part of the
resumed session. I take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Gábor Bródi, Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, for his stewardship of the Committee. I
would also like to thank my fellow Bureau members,
Ambassador Mohamed Abdelmannan, Mr. Olivio
Fermín and Mr. Henric Råsbrant, for their camaraderie
and friendship, which made the difficult work tolerable
in the end.
On behalf of all of us, I would like to express the
Committee’s
profound
gratitude
to
all
the
representatives of the Secretariat who toiled with us
during the long and tiring negotiations, in particular
those who handle peacekeeping finance issues. I also
wish especially to acknowledge the secretariat of the
Fifth Committee for its strenuous efforts in servicing
the Committee during this extended session.
Commendations are in order for Mr. Movses Abelian,
acting head of the Fifth Committee secretariat,
Mr. Wiryanto Sumitro, his very able and hardworking
deputy, Ms. Katherine Durnin, Mr. Paul Dysenchuk,
Mr. Marc Latrique and Ms. Ana Burgi.
Last but not the least, I should also like to extend
our thanks to Ms. Susan McLurg, Chairperson of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, whose cooperation during trying times was
greatly appreciated by the Bureau. To all other officials
with whom I have had the privilege and honour of

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

working during this historic resumed session I extend
my warmest regards and best wishes.
I would like to end my statement by quoting a
Chinese proverb that provides us with some words of
wisdom to guide the Committee in its future work: By
scrambling for something, both parties look bad; by
giving up something, both parties win. I wish all
members a nice summer vacation.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee for his
statement.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Second
Committee which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote or position. The positions of delegations regarding
the recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that,
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That
means that where recorded votes or separate votes were
taken, we will do the same. I also hope that we may
proceed
to
adopt
without
a
vote
those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Fifth Committee.

09-38696

Agenda item 116 (continued)
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/637/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/246 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 116.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/648/Add.6)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Estimates in respect of special political
missions, good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the
Security Council”. The Fifth Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/283).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 118.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/638/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Timely submission of documents”. The Fifth

3

A/63/PV.93

Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/284).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 121.

decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 132.
Agenda item 133

Agenda item 132
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/894)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it three draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 14
of its report and a draft decision recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 15 of the same report. We will
now take a decision on draft resolutions I to III and on
the one draft decision.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Rates of
reimbursement to troop-contributing countries”. The
Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
63/285).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution II is entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy”. The Fifth
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/286).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution III is entitled “Support account for
peacekeeping operations”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution III without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/895)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/288).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 133.
Agenda item 134
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/896)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/289).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 134.

Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/287).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
draft decision is entitled “Closed peacekeeping
missions”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft

4

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

Agenda item 135
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/897)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/290).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 135.
Agenda item 136
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/898)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/291).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 136.
Agenda item 138
Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/899)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

09-38696

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/292).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/646/Add.2)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/257 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 139.
Agenda item 140
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/900)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/293).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 140.

5

A/63/PV.93

Agenda item 141
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/901)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/294).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 141.
Agenda item 142
Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/902)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/295).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Serbia, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position following
the adoption of resolution 63/295.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): I would like to express
the satisfaction of Serbia at the creation of three
professional positions in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as stipulated
by paragraph 11 of resolution 63/295. Those positions
are intended to ensure coordination and cooperation
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), in line with the
mandate established by the Security Council and, in
particular, as part of the status-neutral framework of
the Council’s resolution 1244 (1999).

6

I wish to point out that the creation of those three
positions will fill the void in the matter of coordination
and cooperation between the two Missions, as the
report of the Secretary-General (A/63/803) did not
specify an adequate mechanism, staffing and resources,
but referred to this issue only in abstract terms. We
therefore expect the newly created positions to have a
clear and well-defined role, in particular with regard to
coordination pertaining to the three core functions of
EULEX: policing, justice and customs.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 142.
Agenda item 143
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/903)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/296).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 143.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/904)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled
“Financing
of
the
United
Nations
Disengagement Observer Force”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/297).

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 144.
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/905)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon”. A single separate vote has been
requested on the fourth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 19 of the draft
resolution. Is there any objection to that request? There
is none.
I shall now put to the vote the fourth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 19, on
which a single separate and recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Benin, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, New Zealand, Trinidad
and Tobago, United States of America

09-38696

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia,
Slovenia,
Sweden,
Switzerland,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 19 of the draft resolution were
retained by 75 votes to 6, with 46 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Colombia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
advised the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution as a whole. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,

7

A/63/PV.93

Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by
134 votes to 2 (resolution 63/298).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Colombia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the
United Republic of Tanzania advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
call on those representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
Having joined the consensus on resolution 63/297, on
the financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, my delegation voted in favour of
resolution 63/298, on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, by virtue of the
often-reaffirmed principle that the responsibility for
financing that Force should be borne by Israel, the
occupying Power, which was the reason for the
mission’s establishment. That principle is in
accordance with the main principles of resolution 1874
(S-IV) of 27 June 1963.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): At the outset, I wish
to convey Israel’s full support for the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which participates
in a critical mission to implement Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) in an effort to stabilize our
region.
However, I wish to reiterate Israel’s firm position
on resolution 63/298, given that it lacks the necessary
impartiality and any precedent. Regrettably, this

8

resolution is a repetition of an annual political
manoeuvre by some Member States. Each year, certain
Member States continue to promote a hateful political
agenda that seeks to pin both the blame for and the cost
of the unfortunate incident that took place in Qana,
Lebanon, squarely on Israel. Such diplomatic
manipulation takes place while the world witnesses the
rearmament of the terrorist organization, Hizbullah,
that brought about the conflict in Lebanon during the
1990s and in 2006.
Even this past December and January, Israel was
attacked by rockets from Lebanon. Those attacks,
which, incidentally, targeted civilians, are a clear
violation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
and threaten the stability and security of the people of
Israel and the entire region. Additional unlaunched
rockets were discovered in southern Lebanon as well.
The territory of Lebanon also continues to
witness
Hizbullah
smuggling
and
building
sophisticated and deadly terrorist infrastructure as it
embeds itself in the civilian population and near United
Nations facilities. Member States that acquiesce in
these matters must stand firm in the face of those who
actively encourage and abet terrorism and who seek to
hijack this resolution and use it to promote their
politicized objectives.
Israel wishes to remind members here today that
Fifth Committee draft resolutions should be technical
in nature. For the sake of peace and peacekeeping in
our region, the Fifth Committee and the General
Assembly must reject this sort of politicization, which
only undermines the budgetary and administrative
issues related to United Nations peacekeeping that we
are gathered here to address.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Our
delegation explained its position on the draft resolution
on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) before the Fifth Committee. We did not wish
to take the floor again, but we find ourselves obliged to
do so in order to clarify a number of issues.
Our delegation reaffirms that the Lebanese
Government upholds and fully supports the activities
carried out by UNIFIL in cooperation with the
Lebanese army in southern Lebanon in order to avoid
any possibility of recurrent and renewed Israeli
aggression against Lebanon.

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

Concerning the financing of UNIFIL, our
delegation considers that the principle of collective
responsibility for the cost of peacekeeping operations
does not contradict the general principle of
international law regarding the responsibility of
individual States for their individual wrongdoing in
international affairs. The events that took place in Qana
in 1996 were surely one such wrongdoing perpetrated
by Israel, and the international community must hold it
fully responsible for that. This includes compensation
for material damage caused by such activities. Today,
Israel has yet to comply with the 16 General Assembly
resolutions calling upon Israel to pay the compensation
it owes as a result of its 1996 bombardment of the
United Nations facilities in Qana.
UNIFIL does indeed perform an important duty
in southern Lebanon, but to date it is still unable to
fully carry out its tasks because of Israel’s continued,
daily violations of Lebanese airspace, as described by
the Secretary-General in his reports on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006). Israel also persists in its occupation of the
northern part of the village of Ghajar, despite the
clarity of resolution 1701 (2006) and despite all
international resolutions and reports on this matter.
Our delegation has never wanted to politicize
draft resolutions of a financial nature under discussion
in the Fifth Committee, and ours was not the
delegation politicizing this matter. Our delegation is
dealing with issues concerning the National Dialogue
on reconciliation currently under way in Lebanon. The
delegation responsible for this politicization is the one
that is trying to interfere in our internal affairs. The
resolution we have just adopted is aimed at providing
financial and administrative support to allow UNIFIL
to carry out its tasks, which is one of the Lebanese
Government’s priorities.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 144.
Agenda item 145
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/906)

09-38696

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/299).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 145.
Agenda item 146 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/63/787/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/273 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 146.
Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/907)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/300).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 147.

9

A/63/PV.93

Agenda item 148 (continued)
Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/647/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/258 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 148.
Agenda item 149 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/788/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/274 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 149.
Agenda item 157 (continued)
Financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 1863 (2009)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/789/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

10

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/275 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 157.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/649/Add.2)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 5 of its report. We
will now take action on the draft decision, entitled
“Questions deferred for future consideration”. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 117. The General
Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of all
the reports of the Fifth Committee.
I shall now suspend the meeting as we await the
arrival of the President of the Republic of Honduras.
The meeting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and
resumed at 12.45 p.m., with the President in the
Chair.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development
Draft resolution (A/63/L.74)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will first proceed to take action on the draft
resolution contained in document A/63/L.74, after
which we shall hear an address by His Excellency
Mr. José Manuel Zelaya Rosales, President of the
Republic of Honduras.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Honduras who will introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.74.

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

Mr. Reina Idiaquez (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to address the Assembly to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.74 on behalf of the
following countries, which have sponsored the draft
resolution: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Belize, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Dominica, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, Peru, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Uruguay and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. The draft resolution is the
object of consensus in the Assembly, with a view to its
adoption by acclamation.
A number of revisions have been made to the
text. First, a final phrase has been added to paragraph
2: after the word “Honduras”, the following phrase
should be inserted: “in order for him to fulfil the
mandate for which he was democratically elected by
the Honduran people”.
Paragraph 3 should now read as follows:
“Decides to call firmly and unequivocally upon
all States to recognize no Government other than
that of the Constitutional President, Mr. José
Manuel Zelaya Rosales”.
A new paragraph 4 will be added, which reads as
follows:
“Expresses its firm support for the regional
efforts being undertaken pursuant to Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations to resolve
the political crisis in Honduras”.
It is my hope that the Assembly will adopt draft
resolution A/63/L.74, as orally revised by acclamation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Honduras
has been asked to read out the full text of the draft
resolution on which the General Assembly will take
action.
Mr. Reina Idiaquez (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): Having read out only the revisions to the
document originally submitted, I shall now read out the
entire text, incorporating the revisions that I read out
previously. The draft resolution is entitled: “Situation
in Honduras: democracy breakdown”.
“The General Assembly,

09-38696

“Deeply concerned by the coup d’état that
took place in the Republic of Honduras on
28 June 2009,
“Deeply concerned also by the acts of
violence against diplomatic personnel and
accredited officials in the Republic of Honduras
in violation of the 1961 Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations,
“Recalling the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and conventions on international peace and
security,
“Gravely concerned by the breakdown in
the constitutional and democratic order that has
led to the endangerment of security, democracy
and the rule of law, which has jeopardized the
security of Honduran and foreign citizens,
“Condemns the coup d’état in the Republic
of Honduras that has interrupted the democratic
and constitutional order and the legitimate
exercise of power in Honduras, and resulted in
the removal of the democratically elected
President of that country, Mr. José Manuel Zelaya
Rosales,
“Demands the immediate and unconditional
restoration of the legitimate and Constitutional
Government of the President of the Republic of
Honduras, Mr. José Manuel Zelaya Rosales, and
of the legally constituted authority in Honduras,
in order for him to fulfil the mandate for which
he was democratically elected by the Honduran
people,
“Decides to call firmly and unequivocally
upon all States to recognize no Government other
than that of the Constitutional President, Mr. José
Manuel Zelaya Rosales,
“Expresses its full support for the regional
efforts being undertaken pursuant to Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations to resolve
the political crisis in Honduras,
“Requests the Secretary-General to inform
the General Assembly in a timely manner with
regard to the evolving situation in that country.”
Again, I hope that the Assembly will adopt the
draft resolution, as orally revised, by acclamation.

11

A/63/PV.93

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Ambassador of Honduras for reading out the text of
this truly important and historic draft resolution.

Zelaya Rosales, constitutional President of the
Republic of Honduras, and to invite him to address the
Assembly.

Copies of the text of the oral revisions will be
circulated in the General Assembly Hall.

President Zelaya Rosales (spoke in Spanish):
The resolution that the General Assembly has just
adopted unanimously, with the affirmative vote of all
countries members of the Assembly, strongly bolsters
the dignity of the peoples of Honduras and of the rest
of the world, encouraging them to continue fighting for
the sole principles asserted by the Charter of the
United Nations and international human rights
agreements, and for the fundamental values of
humanity, namely, the right to life, freedom, justice and
individual and collective dignity, as well as the right to
citizen participation. Those principles are so important
at the beginning of the twenty-first century, a time
when challenges and conditions are becoming
increasingly complex, but also when we have greater
strength, greater awareness and more instruments to
respond to problems and find solutions — which, like
today’s world, are increasingly global and in which we
are all committed to participating.

The General Assembly will now consider draft
resolution A/63/L.74, as orally revised. In view of the
desire of members to dispose of this item
expeditiously, I should like to consult the Assembly
with a view to proceeding immediately to consider
draft resolution A/63/L.74. In that connection, since the
draft resolution was only circulated this morning, it
will be necessary to waive the relevant provision of
rule 78 of the rules of procedure which reads as
follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I will take it that the
General Assembly agrees with this proposal. It is so
decided.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.74,
entitled
“Situation
in
Honduras:
democracy
breakdown”, as orally revised. I should like to
announce that the following countries have now joined
the list of sponsors: Barbados, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Canada, Cape Verde, Colombia, Guyana
and the United States of America.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.74, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/63/L.74, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 63/301).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now hear an address by the President of the
Republic of Honduras.
Mr. José Manuel Zelaya Rosales, President of the
Republic of Honduras, was escorted into the
General Assembly Hall.
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to
the United Nations His Excellency Mr. José Manuel

12

This resolution is historic and significant, and it
empowers every last citizen of the world to fight for
these great conquests of humankind. There are some
who scorn those conquests. They believe that the use of
force and violence should continue to prevail over the
peace and harmony advocated by the United Nations.
We have not the slightest doubt that always advocating
the common good and always appealing to our highest
wishes are the guiding principles so that we can attain
the objective of a better world, for which we are all
committed to fight.
In defence of ourselves, our children and future
generations, the United Nations, along with nearly all
organizations of the Americas, have adopted a
resolution on this matter. Those organizations include
the Organization of American States, which acted
unanimously; the Caribbean Community, the
organization of the countries of the Caribbean, many of
which are great friends of Honduras; and the countries
of the Union of South American Nations, which also
unanimously condemned the barbarity and regression
that a small faction of usurpers has sought to impose
on our country. The Rio Group, which brings together
all Latin American countries, yesterday adopted such a
resolution. At a significant meeting with observer
States yesterday, the countries affiliated with the bloc
of Central American countries — Guatemala,

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and the
Dominican Republic — also adopted such a resolution,
expressing condemnation and rejection, and calling for
respect for the democratic decisions taken in Honduras.
Also at the forefront of these efforts is the
organization of Central American, South American and
Caribbean countries called the Bolivarian Alternative
for the Americas (ALBA). In addition, Mesoamerica —
which includes Mexico, Central America, the
Caribbean and Colombia — has also officially
expressed itself in the same vein, in a most able
manner.
Europe, through the presidency of the European
Union, the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Prime
Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero and His
Majesty the King, have expressed to us the same
forward-looking positions with regard to any act of
aggression attacking democracy and the sovereign will
of the people.
Today, with this decision, which joins those taken
by the countries of the Americas, we have not only
ratified what we had already declared, but we have sent
a signal of what the future must hold for our societies
and for humanity. All countries of the Americas
without exception have expressed themselves with
dignity, loudly and clearly with regard to the atrocious
acts that occurred on Sunday, 28 June 2009.
Starting with the United States, with emphatic
resolutions along the same lines, all the dignitaries and
ministers of the Americas paid me the honour of
speaking to me on that day, as they were completely
outraged by the usurpers of power in Honduras.
We have received calls from President Michelle
Bachelet of Chile; President Cristina Kirchner of
Argentina; President Tabaré of Uruguay; President
Fernando Lugo of Paraguay; President Lula of Brazil;
President Alvaro Uribe of Colombia, who was in
Washington, D.C., the day after the events in Honduras
that were so tragic for the democracies of the world;
and President Felipe Calderón Hinojosa of Mexico.
The latter chaired yesterday’s Managua meeting of the
Rio Group, which included all countries members of
the Group. That emergency meeting was convened with
the express purpose of presenting the Group’s views on
the swipe at democracy that took place on 28 June in
Honduras.

We also heard from all the Central American
Presidents: President Mauricio Funes of El Salvador;
President Álvaro Colom of Guatemala; and President
Óscar Arias of Costa Rica, who extended his
hospitality to me on the day when I was practically
thrown out of an aeroplane at the San José airport at
6.30 on the morning of the coup d’état in Honduras.
We heard from President Daniel Ortega of
Nicaragua, who was the host of the Central American
Integration System (SICA) meeting; President Martin
Torrijos of Panama, who also participated directly in
all of these events; and President Rafael Correa of
Ecuador, who travelled to Managua with the single aim
of standing with the democracies of the world, because
fighting for democracy is not the work of a single
country or a single people. When one defends a
country or a people, one is also defending all countries
and all of humanity.
We heard from President Hugo Chávez Frías of
Venezuela, who was engaged from the very outset,
when it was first announced that this conspiracy, this
plot against Honduran democracy was being planned.
This was made known nearly a week ahead of time, as
there were already obvious signs that the principles of
dictatorship were at work, that preparations were being
carried out and that this plot — which resulted in a
bloody coup d’état — was being pushed ahead.
We heard from President Evo Morales of Bolivia,
who undertook, on behalf of the indigenous peoples of
the world, to make known the voices of protest and the
prevailing sense of deep unease. Indeed, all Presidents
have moments of weakness when we are in office, and
we all feel undermined at certain times. Many times
these threats are only threats. But when, through the
use of force and the use of bayonets, they become
reality, this means that we, in this twenty-first-century
world, have not yet made enough progress.
The world is becoming increasingly aware that
we cannot use violence to resolve problems that can be
resolved peacefully and legally. We have the necessary
instruments at the international level and at the
national level in all of our countries, in our laws and
Constitutions, to engage in dialogue and seek to
resolve, through legal institutions, any kind of problem
that could bring about a shortcoming, a crime or any
type of activity that could undermine our country.
I would like to recognize all the Presidents of the
countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),

09-38696

13

A/63/PV.93

whom I will not name because their English names are
difficult for me to pronounce. I would, however, like to
mention in passing President Raúl Castro, who was
with us in Havana. For the past 27 years he had not
visited Central America, but he was with us yesterday,
condemning this outrage perpetrated by such a crude
military group. That group was doing nothing more
than establishing an elite standing in the way of change
and transformation, as has always been the way of the
world. There has always been a conservative group
wishing to keep everything the way it is, to maintain
the status quo and to keep the establishment inviolable.
There will always be those who fight for change,
and such change comes with a cost. Nothing comes
free of charge for the peoples of the world who are
fighting to find a place for themselves, to gain rights
and to develop instruments to defend those rights. The
United Nations is one such instrument, which upholds
democracy and freedom. Today, I would like to
applaud this Organization, which is the guarantor of
democracy in the world. I am indebted to this
Organization and I would like to express my thanks. I
thank all members, and I thank you, Mr. President.
A number of charges have been levelled against
me in Honduras, but nobody has put me on trial.
Nobody has called me to the stand to defend myself.
Nobody has told me what my crime is. Nobody has
indicated what my error is. No accusations have been
made by any judge. I assumed the presidency on
27 January 2006, after a very tough election was held
in 2005. I had a margin of 3 to 5 per cent over my
rival, who was from the incumbent Government, while
I was from the opposition.
We have launched a new era in our country,
devoted to highly democratic, social and peaceful
principles with one single emblem — that of citizen
participation. This is an assembly, and a nation is an
assembly. Participation must be an assembly.
Participation is not a group of elites issuing laws or a
group of politicians with particular interests or who
defend only certain interests of the ruling leadership.
Only citizen participation in the assembly gives
democracy transparency, which is what it needs.
I had thought that the twenty-first century would
be a time for strengthening democracy. I never
imagined that we would have to fight for it once again,
as we did in the primitive Stone Age, nor did it cross
my mind that such things could happen. I believed that

14

when I spoke here at the United Nations three years in
a row, denouncing national and regional deficiencies at
the economic level — such as those revealed in recent
months — and with respect to the long-standing
requirement for democratic participation in order to
improve democratic systems within our countries and
in international bodies; when I came here to condemn
the unjust trade among the various regions of the
world; when we came seeking genuine improvements
in trade conditions in order to redress the asymmetries
of the small countries of Oceania, Africa or Latin
America versus the great Powers of the world, I never
thought that I was committing a crime. I never thought
that my words in defence of the human rights of
emigrants here would be considered by the Honduran
elite as an attack on the system of privileges that they
upheld. I was simply exercising a human right — the
freedom of thought, expression and conscience.
I never thought that increasing the minimum
wage of workers to the cost of living in Honduras
would be seen by the proud elites of the country as an
attack on economic development. I only asked the
Ministry of Labour to tell me what the cost of living in
Honduras was. They told me that the cost of living was
about $230 for food alone, not including transportation,
rent, or public services. They told me that the cost of
living to support an individual was $230. Thus, no
person should be contracted for less than that amount,
because if a family contracts for less, it is not going to
be able to eat, go to school or be healthy. At least, let
us give it food. I immediately received 180 petitions
from the country’s most conservative circles because
the workers were being given food.
As a dignitary of a nation, it is the least that I can
do. I do not deny that I have struggled vigorously
through the media for the freedom of the press in
Honduras. If a report has been authorized by the State,
we must enjoy the right of reply that has been
categorically denied. I have struggled for freedom of
information, for if there is a fact, let it be published
and subsequently commented on, but let it not be
manipulated in a way that is harmful. Facts are
constantly being distorted in a treacherous,
manipulative way. Even so, I have summarily respected
that right. Although they lie and manipulate, we have
been incapable of touching even one member of those
organizations that have such a terrible impact on
society because they manipulate thought, which is the
foundation of the human presence on this Earth.

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

Thought is the only thing that distinguishes us from
other beings, so it must be respected.
As a great French personality once said, I may
not agree with what you say, but I would give my life
for your right to speak. Well, we, too, have accepted
such flaws, but we have condemned them in all forums.
For three years, I have waged a brutal attack to
repudiate absolutely everything that is being done in
the country. I do not deny that I am pleased to say that,
when I entered office, 6 of every 10 Hondurans were
living in poverty, and had been for decades and
centuries. In my first two years, we succeeded in
reducing the level of extreme poverty by 10 per cent
with social programmes, achieving economic growth in
the private sector; we grew by 7 per cent in two years.
That, together with all the social programmes that we
established nationally, reduced poverty.
We did not know that that was a crime. The
problems began because some people make a living on
the rhetoric of poverty and, if poverty is reduced, they
worry because they have nothing to talk about. We did
not know that we would upset many people by working
directly for the poor by raising the minimum wage, as I
mentioned, or by raising money to feed the poor. We
set up programmes directly geared to their needs. They
said that we should not give them money, because that
makes them idle loafers. But they were dying of
hunger; there were 2 million people who ate only once
every two or three days and whose malnourished
children did not go to school. I had to divert money
from a bridge and give it to the poor.
But they said that I was a populist, that I was
becoming a Communist and ruining the country. In
Honduras, there is much injustice, and injustice arises
more than anything from inequality and laws that make
human beings unequal. Human beings are born
unequal. Small and large nations are unequal. Some
have everything and others have very little. I do not
know who did the distribution. When I was born, the
world was thus. But it is understood that systems,
organizations
of
countries
and
international
organizations exist to reduce those inequalities, not to
intensify them.
However, it happens that in Honduras, most of
the laws, all of which I have respected, intensify those
inequalities, perpetuate them and set them in
everlasting stone. I condemned that state of affairs and
submitted draft laws to Congress that have been

09-38696

shelved, but it would seem that such acts are criminal.
For example, one law languished before Congress for
eight months, which is why there was bad blood
between us. I submitted a bill to make it mandatory for
the employers of domestic workers — of whom there
are half a million and possibly almost a million — to
register them with the social security so that they and
their children had the right to health care. It stayed
before Congress for eight months, and they say that
registering domestic workers in the social security
system is confronting Congress.
That is why we are in this situation today. To
make a long story short, I believe that the Honduran
people have the right to participate in their democracy,
not just to elect men and women who, when they take
up their posts, sell out to special interests. Not all of
them do so. There are some good and competent
people, but many take up their posts and betray those
who elected them — the people. They begin to merge
with the elite, the group of the privileged.
The Honduran people have the right to speak out
on the economy, social progress and development. To
our surprise, this past week, Congress enacted a
plebiscite and referendum law.
That law stipulates that the referendum process
may be involved in Honduras for any reason except
questions involving budgetary, tax, fiscal or economic
matters or international treaties, or social problems.
what, then, was the point of approving the referendum
law? Was it simply to be used to ask whether it is day
or night, or whether one is hot or cold? I had hoped at
the time to act according to the law — the very first
law adopted by my Government on the first day we
came to power. On the day I came to power I told
Congress that if the law was not in effect by evening
then in the morning I would be unable to assume my
functions, because that instrument was necessary in
order to govern.
Certainly Congress made changes to the law that
night, and I was sworn in at the national stadium the
next day. The law on the participation of citizens
stipulates that the citizens of Honduras have the right
to request the Government to examine questions of
general interest that involve or affect them.
Pursuant to the law, I received 400,000 requests
from individuals who asked to be consulted on possible
constitutional reforms in the country — reforms which
I cannot carry out because they will extend beyond my

15

A/63/PV.93

Government’s mandate. I swore to discharge my
mandate by 27 January next year, and I remain
President of Honduras until that day, even if that group
does not recognize me.
I applied that law and responded to those
requests, and began the process of launching a poll to
seek the opinions of the Honduran people; that, too,
was considered a crime. The results of the poll would
not have been binding. The survey is similar to those
that professional polling companies such as Gallup and
the Arturo Coralles company have carried out in my
country. Such surveys are carried out to take the public
temperature, to gauge trends and find out what people
are thinking.
The poll was not binding, State-sanctioned or
coercive. Although it was based on the law, a judge
declared it illegal. His arm was twisted to do so
because the plot was already under way. A judge
cannot repeal a law; only Congress can do that. That is
democracy and the law complements it by guaranteeing
human rights. All the constitutions of the world, in all
countries including the United States, always contain
an article indicating that no law, mandate or resolution
can undermine the guarantees that a constitution grants
to the citizens of that country. Those guarantees are an
inherent part of our natural rights because people have
shed blood for centuries to make them the law and no
one can change them. The United States Congress
cannot change the fundamental rights of the citizens of
that country. No Congress — much less a lower court
judge who does not want to have to answer to his
superiors — can declare a civic survey illegal. He
cannot undermine our rights or equivocate with our
constitutional guarantees, which is illegal. In this
instance, that decision was part and parcel of the coup
d’état.
By order of a judge, I was arrested and violently
expelled from my country. The armed forces rose up
and kept the country in a state of paralysis for nearly
three days. Buses carrying passengers have been fired
upon. As of yesterday, some 160 people had been
injured and arrested on the street. Government
ministers have been arrested and sent into exile. As of
yesterday 140 people had been beaten and injured. The
people have taken to the streets. The workers have
declared a general strike that has paralysed business;
transportation has been voluntarily shut down; taxi
drivers have shut down the city; teachers have stayed

16

home and declared a general strike until rule of law for
which they voted and in which they believe is restored.
The airports have been taken over by the military.
The radio stations are all controlled by camouflaged
military personnel and only broadcast music or issues
of no importance, remaining silent on the situation.
The country is in a state of shock. A crime against
humanity has been publicly committed in Honduras —
a crime that all reject no matter where they come from.
Whenever brute force prevails over reason, humankind
returns to its primeval state. Men return to their
primitive lives in caves and the law of the jungle,
whereby everything is decided by force.
Today I have responded to the invitation of the
Assembly and feel ever more deeply committed to
humankind. I do not believe that man is his own worst
enemy. It is true that we struggle and compete among
ourselves, but I believe in the Christian credo that all
men are brothers. We must not lose sight of the sacred
character of each person. There are, however, those
who seek to awaken the wickedness, villainy and
perversity that lie within each individual, and those
people must not go unpunished. They must be firmly
sanctioned to ensure that such acts are not repeated
anywhere in the world.
Last Sunday, 15,000 cardboard boxes were
distributed to collect the polling slips from the
voluntary public survey. Such a survey requires a
massive effort in Honduras. We hoped to reach
1.5 million individuals, but there are no telephones or
post offices in the rural areas of Honduras, as there are
perhaps in Sweden and Switzerland. If I were in
Stockholm, I could poll by telephone or post, but in
Honduras there are remote areas, small villages and
hamlets that are difficult to reach in the sparsely
populated countryside, where people lack access even
to written means of communication. How were we to
survey their opinions when the armed forces refused to
distribute the material necessary for the survey? They
control all the logistics, as they have for the past
30 years. They refused to do so and rose up. So we said
we would not carry out the poll.
At the same time, however, the people themselves
rose up — workers, union members, farm workers,
civil groups, indigenous peoples — and said: “We will
conduct the presidential survey. Give us the materials”.
I set the process in motion, and again I was told it was
a crime, although there is freedom of movement in the

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

country. I led a march of 1,000 citizens to take back the
electoral materials from the Honduran air force. When
I arrived, I was reassured by the military, who told me:
“Commander, you were elected by the people. We
respect that. What can I do for you?” I said: “Return
the survey materials”. They said: “No problem”. They
let me in and gave me the material. I so informed the
people, and within 24 hours, that which had required
six months of planning had been distributed throughout
the country.
On Saturday, 37 observer countries came to
Honduras, including from the Organization of
American States (OAS). Congress met and declared
that OAS was not welcome — because it was there to
observe the polling process — and neither were the
37 observers from the countries who arrived Saturday.
I met with the ambassadors from all over the
world who were accredited in Honduras, and with the
representatives of the 37 countries, on Saturday night. I
was then on a television programme until 2 a.m.,
giving instructions on how the poll would proceed.
There would be peace. There would be no violence. I
practice non-violence. I am not a person who uses
weapons. I have always opposed violence because of
my personal convictions.
I was on television at 2 a.m. I left at 2 a.m., and
went directly to speak to the people who were going to
conduct the exit polls. They do an exit poll survey at
10 a.m., one at 2 p.m. and another at 4 p.m. I went to
see how they were going to compile the results — first,
the unofficial results, then, at 8 p.m., the final numbers
of the preliminary results that would determine the
trend of votes for and against.
What was the question on the slip of paper? The
question was: “Do you wish to see a fourth ballot box
used in the next elections?” In other words, it was to
determine whether there would indeed be elections. In
Honduras, the first ballot box is for the President, the
second for mayors and the third for members of
Parliament. The fourth was to be used for questions of
national interest, such as citizen participation, through
a possible constituent assembly, in the next
Government, since the fourth ballot box would be used
in the next elections. I will not be there for those
elections. I will be leaving office, but I wish to leave
behind a legacy of reform, to leave the people engaged
in participation with full rights and, even more, to
leave the people newly empowered by those rights.

09-38696

Three and a half years ago, my election slogan
was “empower citizens” — that is, how can we
empower citizens and ensure their rights? Clearly, that
can be done through more education, better health and
more literacy programmes. That is how to achieve
citizen empowerment, and the poll was for that
purpose. The very first law that I adopted was to meet
that objective.
I always made it perfectly clear that we could
make up for the shortcomings in our democracy and
the inequality in our laws by strengthening the
participation of our citizens. When you have strong
citizens, a strong civil society and people who are selfaware, the hierarchy that has always governed loses its
power and justice begins to prevail. Of course, even the
just will sin, given the chance. If you give them free
rein, they will abuse their power. Give power to the
people; do not be afraid of them. Popular participation
was opposed in the French Revolution because they
knew the people could not read or write and they
thought, “How can such humble people govern when
they cannot read or write? How can they govern?”
We made up our minds back then. We decided
that the voice of the people is the voice of God and that
it must be respected. If we do not believe that, then let
us not speak of democracy. For heaven’s sake,
democracy is the people! All those who study this
subject have come to the conclusion that people must
go beyond merely electing representatives and must
begin to truly participate in issues.
The question was: “Do you wish to see a fourth
ballot box at the upcoming elections so that the people
can be consulted?” The fourth ballot box was not for
taking decisions, but for consulting the people on the
possibility of establishing, a constitutional assembly in
the next Government that would revise the
constitutional framework and ensure open participation
for the Honduran people, since people in Honduras are
not allowed to participate directly in governance. The
Constitution limits and prohibits such participation.
I had already explained the referendum to them.
Some articles of the Constitution are set in stone and,
according to legislators, cannot be altered. Of course,
even stones can be transformed, but some people’s
minds are firmly closed to certain ideas. This question,
therefore, did not create any new obligations for the
State. If the people answered “yes”, that would simply

17

A/63/PV.93

make it an option to ask Congress to approve the fourth
ballot box.
I explained all of this on television and radio
broadcasts, speaking until 2 a.m., after meeting with
the pollsters. I then left for home. It was almost 4 a.m.
by the time I got home. I wished to be the first to
vote — the first to offer my opinion, as they used to
say — at 7 a.m., to launch, on national broadcasts, the
opinion poll.
As a result of all this work, I slept very little,
maybe an hour, until 5.15 a.m. I live in a middle-class
house in the heart of Tegucigalpa, in a neighbourhood
with many houses. My house is only 14-by-20 metres.
It is a small house. It is where I have always lived and
where I will always live. I have no other house in
Tegucigalpa. I do have a ranch, since I come from a
rural area. I own land there. I work the land. I have
been a farmer and a cattle rancher there, but in
Tegucigalpa, that house is all that I and my family
own. So that is where I sleep. My house looks directly
onto the street.
At about 5.15 a.m., still half-asleep, I began to
hear shouts, blows, hammering against the front door
below and terrified screams. I got up, still in my
nightclothes. I went to the window, opened it and saw
an entire battalion of hooded men, armed with rifles,
pushing my guards into the street, tying them up and
engaging them in hand-to-hand combat. These are
moments I do not wish to remember, because it breaks
my heart to see humanity regress.
I raised my eyes to heaven and asked the Lord,
“What is this? Is this why you brought me into this
world, to pit me against barbarity yet again?” I said —
may the Lord forgive me — “Lord, you have betrayed
me. What do you want from me?” I was staring down
the barrel of the rifles.
That is when the machine gun fire began. They
began to ring my doorbell and destroyed the locks on
my front door. They overcame the 10 or 15 guards who
protect me every day. They tied them up, subdued them
and beat them. There were indeed people who were
beaten, but they were taken away to the barracks, so no
one knows how they are faring. They then began to
break down the front door of my house.
The only ones in the house were my 21-year-old
daughter, in another room, her maid, and the servants
on the bottom floor. I ran downstairs immediately in

18

my nightclothes. I went down the stairs and hid from
the bullets, because bullets were flying all around me. I
could hear shots fired — and these were loud shots,
from large-calibre weapons. I hid behind one of the air
conditioning units outside. Once the locks had given
way and they broke down the door, they entered and
they restrained me. I still had my mobile phone in my
hand because I had been talking to reporters to see if
they could denounce what was happening. I had a
reporter on the air. They held me at gunpoint, with over
eight heavy rifles pointed at me, including one at my
face, held by men in balaclavas with only their eyes
showing, in helmets, fully armed, in vests, with rifles,
pistols and knives. With their guns trained on my chest
and face, they said, “Drop that mobile phone or we will
shoot! This is a military order. Drop the phone! Drop it
or we will shoot you! Drop the phone!” They
surrounded your humble servant.
One of them finally approached me and ripped
the mobile phone from my hands. I said: “If you have
been ordered to kill me, then shoot. I cannot stop you.
Do it. If you have orders to assassinate me, do it now.
Do not make me suffer any longer, just do it now”. One
of them grabbed my left arm, one my right, and they
said “We are taking you away”. They grabbed me and
put me in a vehicle and, 15 minutes later, into an
airplane. Forty-five minutes later, I was in Costa Rica.
They opened the door of the airplane and dropped me
at the airport in Costa Rica, still in my nightclothes.
My daughter — I cannot talk about it or I will choke
up from the pain and the anger.
President Óscar Arias went to the airport and
attended to me personally. Costa Rica is a country
where there are no coups d’état. It is a democratic
country and perhaps the oldest democracy in the
Americas, other than the United States, and it does not
have an army. I began to receive telephone calls from
many Presidents, as I mentioned earlier. But I
wondered: Is this the democracy we are fighting for —
this barbarity, this backsliding? Are we reverting to the
age of the dictatorship?
In the 1980s I fought for the return of
constitutional order to my country after the
dictatorship. As of next year we will have had
democracy for some 28 to 30 years. I fought for it
because I was opposed to disappearances. In our
country, there are hundreds of disappeared families that
have yet to be found. There are mothers and orphans
who are fighting to find the remains of their loved

09-38696

A/63/PV.93

ones, whose bodies have never been found. I fought
dictatorships because dictatorships repress.
That is the case in Honduras today. Dictatorship
and repression have been re-established in the country.
I fought for the new system and the people supported
it, but the elite rejected it. They live on that repression.
As soon as they feel pressured, instead of trying to find
a legal and correct path they resort to brute force. The
country regresses and the State resumes its criminal
behaviour. I am here first and foremost, to condemn
those acts.
I do not want to be seen as a President who seeks
to return to his country just to be President. In my
view, the presidency is nothing more than a tool for life
and the struggle on behalf of society, and to serve the
people. It has no significance.
The Honduran poet, Alphonso Guillén Zelaya —
with whom I share the same family name, as he is my
ancestor — said that what counts in life is not to be a
poet, an artist or a philosopher; it is to have the dignity,
joy and the pride of one’s labours and to do things well
at any level as long as one feels satisfied by one’s
actions.
To be President is an important opportunity to be
of service, but I demand that the rights I fought for be
returned, because they are the tools that my children,
grandchildren,
great-grandchildren
and
future
generations, even if they are poor, will use to fight for
their rights.
The Salvadoran poet Roque Dalton said that the
world’s problem is that laws are always enacted by the
rich and powerful, and that is why there are so many
poor. The poor do not participate. The day when the
poor make the law is the day poverty will end and we
will all live in better conditions.
We firmly condemn with all of our strength the
acts that occurred in Honduras — but not because I am
a President who was abducted and forcefully exiled
from my country. If this becomes a precedent, one can
only imagine how presidents elsewhere will feel,
fearing that their armies might violently rise up against
them if they say something or do something to which
they are opposed.

09-38696

There is not one single law in my country
allowing for the ouster of a president. There has been
no trial to condemn a president. A referendum should
be held on the possibility of impeachment, and that is
one of the reforms we had envisioned for the next
Government. If a president fails he must go, but it is
the people who should fire him, as I have asserted.
They are the sole arbiters.
In my country, Congress cannot appoint a
president. That would be aberrant. Congress may not
appoint a deputy or mayor or senator. Only the people
have that right. The Congress of the United States does
not appoint the president. The president is elected by
the people here. Your humble servant was elected by
the people. The people, the dignity of Honduras, those
of us who participate directly in decision-making, and I
myself must be respected. We are mandated by the
people, on behalf of the people, to serve and to aid the
people.
Crimes must not go unpunished. I am a Christian
and I always forgive and always pardon. I do not wish
to look with hate upon anyone. I always forgive even
those who have hurt me, but history, the people and the
dignity of nations will not forgive the act of barbarism
that occurred in our country and exposed us to the eyes
of the world, and which has undermined the gains we
achieved with such effort, love and care.
In the Gettysburg Address, Abraham Lincoln said
that “government of the people, by the people, for the
people, shall not perish from the earth”. That is what
we citizens of the twenty-first century desire. It is what
the citizens of the world and all its countries have
come here today to defend.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
everyone for their generous participation in this
meeting with President Zelaya, who came here to
address the General Assembly. I believe this has been a
truly historic and important meeting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 20.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

19
