Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Territories, and to report to the Genera,} Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3157 (XXVIII). Question of Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat,
Turks and Caicos Islands and United States
Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, Briti-h
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and
Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 65
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, con•
taining the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions relating to the
Territories listed above, in particular resolution 2984
(XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Noting with concern that many of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, as
well as the related recommendations of the Special
Committee, remain unimplemented as regards those
Territories, in particular with respect to the establishment of a specific time-table for the exercise by the
peoples of those Territories of their right to selfdetermination and independence,
Deploring the continued refusal of the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, in contravention of the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, to co-operate with
the Special Committee in its examination of the Territories under that Government's administration,
Deeply deploring the attitude of the administering
Powers concerned, which continue to refuse to allow
United Nations missions to visit the Territories under
their administration,
Concerned that the economies of those Territories
are based mainly on fluctuating activities such as
tourism, land sales and tax haven arrangements,
Bearing in mind that recent visiting missions to small
Territories have demonstrated their usefulness, and
reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories is indispensable for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to the political, economic and social
conditions in the Territories and to the views, wishes
and aspirations of the people therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Decclaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
1111 Ibid., chaps. II and XXIII-XXV.

107

Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos Islands
and United States Virgin Islands; 66
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals
set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, a
specific time-table for the free exercise by the peoples
of the Territories of their right to self-determination
and independence;
4. Reaffirms its conviction that the questions of
territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
5. Calls upon the Governments of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America, as the administering Powers
concerned, to reconsider their attitude towards the
receiving of United Nations visiting missions to the
above-mentioned Territories and to permit access by
such missions to Territories under their administration;
6. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom. as an administering Power, to participate in the
relevant proceedings of the Special Committee concerning the Territories under its administration and, in
particular, to report to the Special Committee on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all possible steps to diversify the economics of
the Territories listed above;

8. Urges the administering Powers to safeguard the
inalienabl.e right of the peoples of those Territories to
the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the rights of the
peoples to own and di~pose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
9. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors
of the national life of those Territories;
10. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 3164 (XXVIII) of 14 December '.~,7~, to
pay particular regard to the need to intensi· widespread dissemination of information on the pi, ~·~ss of
decolonization in respect of the Territories listed above
and. in particular, to consider intensifying the activities
of the information centres concerned;
11. Requests the Special Committee to c;>ntinue to
give full consideration to this question, including in
M Ibid., chaps. XXIIT-XXV.

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Seasion

108

particular the dispatch of visiting missions to those
Territories, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3158 (XXVIII). Question of the Seychelles
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Jpecial Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 57
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,,
Recalling also its resolutions 2985 (XXVII) of
14 December 1972 concerning the question,
. Reaffirming that the Seychelles should accede to
~ndep:ndence without any prejudice to their territorial
mtegnty,
Deploring that it has not been possible to send a
special. mission of the United Nations to the Territory,
as envisaged under General Assembly resolution 2866
(XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
!he Seychel_Ies 1£? self-determination and independence
m conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as
the administering Power, to take all necessary meas~res
to enable the people to exercise that right without
further delay;
. 2. Request~· .the administering Power, in accordance
with the prov1s1ons of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of
the United Nations envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI) and to make the necessary arrangements in
consultation with the special mission, for the holding as
soon as practicable of a referendum on the future
status of the Territory;
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
~nd P~ople~ to co~tinue its examination of the question,
mcludmg m particular the dispatch of the special
mission referred to above, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3159 (XXVIII). Question of Brunei
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brune~,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
n Ibid .. chaps. III, V and X.

to the Implernen,tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 58
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its resolution 2978 (XXVII) of
14 December 1972, whereby it reaffirmed inter alia
that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has
attained a full measure of self-government in terms of
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the
administering Power concerned should continue, to
transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
with respect to that Territory,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Brunei to self-determination in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Brunei;59
3. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the recommendation of the Special Committee,
to furnish such information as may be required by the
Special Committee and, in partirular, to participate, in
conformity with the provisions of related resolutions of
the General Assembly, in the relevant proceedings of the
Special Committee, as well as to receive in the Territory
a United Nations visiting mission composed of members
drawn from the Special Committee;
.4. Req_uests the Special Committee to report on
this question to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3160 (XXVIII). Question of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas)
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland
Islands ( Malvin as),
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 2065 (XX) of 16 December 1965, in which it invited the Governments of
Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Nort~e~n Ireland to proceed without delay with
the negotiat10ns recommended by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with a
view to finding a peaceful solution to the problem of
the ~~lkland Isla~ds (Malvinas), bearing in mind the
prov1s1ons and obJectives of the Charter of the United
Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV) and the interests
of the population of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
58 Ibid., chaps. III and XXI.
11 9 lbid., chap. XXI.
