.,
tal.

I NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

-

~~

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FIFTEENTH

850

YEAR

th MEETING: 26 JANUARY 1960

eme SEANCE: 26 JANVIER 1960
QUINZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SiCURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TAB L E

OF

CON TEN T S

Page

"Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/850) . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . •

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President, to the retiring
members, and welcome to the new members of the Security
Counc il. . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Admission of new Members:
(~) Letter dated 13 January 1960 from the Prime Minister
of the State of Cameroun addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/4256);
(b) Letter dated 20 January 1960 from the Permanent Representative of France addressed to the President of the
Security Council (Si 4257)
.

4

G

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

TABLE

•

•

•

•

•

DES

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

"

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

MATIERES

Ordre du jour provisoire (Si Agenda/850)
( 2() p.

•

.

1

)
S/pv.850

..

TAB LED E 8 M A TIE RE 8

(suite)

Pages

Remerciements au Pr6sident et aux membres sortants et souhaits de bienvenue aux nouveaux membres du Conseil de s6curit~. .' ~
.

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

4

.

Admission de nouveaux Membres:
~) Lettre, en date du 13 janvier 1960, adress6e au 8ecr6taire
g6n6ral par le Premier Ministre de l'Etat du Cameroun

President: Mr.

(8/4256);
~) Lettre,

en date du 20 janvier 1960, adress~e au Pr6sident du Conseil de s~curit6 par le repr6sentant permanent de la France (8/4257)
.

4

Present: Th
States: Argenti
Italy, Poland,
Republics, Uni
Northern Irelan
Provisi

1. Adoption of

2. Admission of
(a) Letter da
- Minister
to the Sec
Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings of
the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official Records,

(b) Letter dat
- Represent
President

Symbols of United Nations documents are composedolcapita1letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

Expression of th
reti ring member

*

*

the Security eou

*

Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de s€lcurite sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents offi;;iels.

Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent de
lettres majuscules et de chiHres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte
signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

I, The PRES
Before we begi
thanks on the
representative
Security Counci
2. Permit me
pressing our gJ
sentative of C
sentative of Japa
of Panama, who
their countrie8
an active part i
contribution to i
3. It is also
Security Counc
Ecuador and Po
Council.
4. It is a partic
of the Union of S
the representat"
Union is bound
friendship and j
society. Sir C
Ceylon, Mr. Mic
and Mr. Correa
already well kno
United Nations 0
ment as their
Security Council

•
EIGHT HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 26 January 1960, at 10.30 a.m.

!,

HUIT CENT CINQUANTIEME SEANCE
Tenue cl New York. le mardi 26 janvier 1960, cl 10 h 30.
President: M. A. A. SOBOLEV (Union des R~publiques
socialistes sovietiques).

President: Mr. A. A. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following
States: Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France,
Italy, Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of Amex:ica.

Presents: Les representants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan Chine, Equateur Etats-Unis
d' Am~rique, France, Italie, Pologne, Royaume-Uni de
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
I

Provisional cgenda (SI Agenda/8,~O)

I

Ordre du jour provisoire (SI Agenda/850)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Admission of new Members:

2. Admission de nouveaux Membre,:

(a) Letter dated 13 January 1960 from the Prime
- Minister of the State of Cameroun addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/4256);

!!:)

Lettre, en date du 13 janvier 1960, adressee au
Secretaire g{meral par le Premier Ministre de
1'Etat du Cameroun (S/4256);

(b) Letter dated 20 Jamlary 1960 from the Permanent
- Representative of France addressed to the
PrE:lsident of the Security Council (S/4257).

~

Lettre, en date du 20 janvier 1960, adressee au
President du Consell de securite par le representant permanent de la France (S/4257).

Remerciements au President et aux membres sortants et
souhaits de bienvenue aux nouveaux membres du Conseil

Expression of thanks to the retiring President, to the
reti ring members, and wel come to the new members of
the Security Council

de securite

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russirn):
Before we begin our work, I should like to express
thanks on the Council's behalf to Mr. Slim, the
representative of Tunisia, who was President of the
Security Council for December 1959.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Je voudrais
tout d'abord, au nom du Consell de securite, remercier
M. Slim, representant de la Tunisie, qui a assure la
presidence du Conseil en decembre 1959.

2. Permit me also to take this opportunity of expressing our gratitude to Mr. Ritchie, the representative of Canada, Mr. Matsudaira, the representative of Japan, and Mr. Illueca, the representative
of Panama, who for the past two years, representing
their countrie8 on the Security Council, have taken
an active part in the Council's work and made their
contribution to its activity.

2. Je saisis egalement cette occasion PQur exprimer
ma gratitude h. M. Ritchie, representant du Canada, h.
M. Matsudaira, representant du J apon, et h. M. lllueca,
representant du Panama, membres sortants du Conseil
de securite qui, pendant ces deux derniE:!res annees,
ont participe activement et utilement aux travaux du
Conseil.

3. It is also my pleasant duty to welcome to the
Security Council the representatives of Ceylon,
Ecuador and Poland as newly elected members of the
Council.

3. J'ai aussi l'agreable devoir de souhaiter la bienvenue aux representants de Ceylan, de 1'Equateur et
de la Pologne, nouveaux membres elus du Conseil.

4. It is a particular pleasure for me, as representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, to welcome
the representative of Poland, to which the Soviet
Union is bound by the closest ties of brotherhood,
friendship and joint effort in the building of a socialist
society. Sir Claude Corea, the representative of
Ceylon, Mr. Michalowski, the representative of Poland,
and Mr. Correa, the representative of Ecuador, are
already well known for their successful work in other
United Nations organs, and we welcome their appointment as their countries' representatives on the
Security Council.

4. En ma qualit~ de repr~sentant de 1'UNION DES
REPUBLIQUES SOCIALISTES SOVIETIQUES, je suis
particuli~rementheureux d'accueillir le repr~sentant
de la Pologne, pays avec lequel 1'Union sovietique entretient les relations les plus etroites de fraternite
et d'amitie dans leur ceuvre commune d'edification de
la societe soclaliste. Sir Claude Corea, representant
de Ceylan, M. Michalowski, representant de la Pologne,
et M. Correa, representant de 1'Equateur, sont bien
connus pour le precieux concours qu'ils ont apporte
aux travaux d'autres organes de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Nous sommes heureux de les voir
representer leur pays au Conseil de securite.
1

..

5. Mr. LODGE (United states of America): The
United States wishes to take advantage of this first
meeting of the Security Council in 1960 to welcome
the representatives of the three new members of the
Council, Mr. Wijegoonawardena ofCeylon, Mr. Correa
of Ecuador and Mr. Michalowsld of Poland.

5. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d' Am~rique) [traduit de
I 'anglais 1 : A cette premi~re s~ance du Conseil de
securit& en 1960, la d€ll€lgation des Etats-Unis tient ~

souhaiter la bienvenue aux representants des trois
nouveaux membres du Conseil, M. Wijegoonawardena,
de Ceylan, M. Correa, de l'Equateur, etM. Michalowski
de Pologne.

6. Let me also, on behalf of the United States, say a
word of appreciation for the distip.guished contribution
to the work of the Security Council by the three
members whose terms expired on the last day of
December 1959. To Mr. Ritchie of Canada, Mr.
Matsudaira of Japan and Mr. Illu-lca of Panama go our
thanks and our admiration for a job well done.

6. Je vOlldrais dire ausst, au nom des Etats-Unis.
cambien nous avons apprecie l'importante contribution
qufont apportee aux travaux du Conseil de securite les
trois membres dont le mandat a expire ~ la fin de
decembre 1959. M. Ritchie, representant du Canada,
M. Matsudaira, representant du Japon, et M. lllueca,
representant du Panama, ont droit ~ nos remerciements et ~ notre admiration pour leur excellent travail.

7. Mr. Mongi SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from
French) : Mr. President, it is with real pleasure that
I join you, on behalf of the Tunisian delegation, in
congratulating the representatives of Caylon. Ecuador
and Poland on their taking seats in the Security Council.
My own country, which has very friendly relations with
these three nations, was most gratified at the choice
made by the General Assembly at its fourteenth session
in filling vacancies on the Council. Through the contacts
which my delegation had during the last session of
the General Assembly, with Sir Claude Corea,
Mr. Jerzy Michalowski and Mr. Jose Correa, we were
able fully to appreciate their personal qualifications
which, we are convinced, will prove of great value to
the Council.

7. M. Mongi SLIM (Tunisie) : Monsieur le PreSident,
c'est avec un reel plaisir qutau nom de la delegation
tunisienne je me joins ~ vous pourfeliciterles representants de Ceylan, de 1tEquateur et de la Pologne de
leur entree au Co~seil de securite. Mon pays, qui
entretient des relations sinc~res d'amitie avec ceS
trois pays, s'est beaucoup felicite du choix quIa fait
I' Assemblee glmerale, ~ sa quatorzi~mesession, pour
renouveler la composition du Conseil. Les rapports
que ma delegation a entretenus au cours de la derni~re
session de l'AssembIee generale avec sir Claude
Corea, M. Jerzy Michalowski.et M. Jose Correa nous
ont permis d'apprecier hautement leurs qualites personnelles qui, nous en sommes convaincus, ne pourront
manquer d'etre preciouses au Conseil.

8. I should like to express my delegation's appreciation of the valuable co-operation given it last year
by the outgoing delegations of Canada, Japan and
Panama. I am sure that, in like manner, we will be
able to count on the co-operation of the representatives
of Ceylon, Ecuador and Poland in 1960.

8. Qu'il me soit pelmis, enfin, de dire combien ma
delegation a apprecie la precieuse cooperation que les
dlHegations sortantes du Canada, du J apon et du Panama
nous ont apportee llan dernier. Je suis certain que
nous pourrons, de meme, compter en 1960 sur semblable cooperation de la part des representants de
Ceylan, de l'Equateur et de la Pologne.

9. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translatedfromSpanish):
Mr. President, I am deeply grateful to you, and to the
members of the Security Council who have spoken
before me, for the cordial words of welcome addressed
to the delegation of Ecuador, as it formally takes its
place on the Council.

9. M" Correa (Equateur) [traduit de l'espagnol] : Je
vous remercie vivement, Monsieur le PreSident, ainsi
que les membres du Conseil qui ont pris la parole
avant moi, des souhaits de bienvenue que vous avez
adresses ~ la delegation de l'Equateur lorsqu'elle est
venue prendre sa place au Conseil de securite,

10. Today Ecuador begins its second term of office
as a non-permanent member of the Council. The
mandate which we have received from the General
Assembly confers upon us, within the framework of
the Organization, duties and functions directly and
specifically aimed at the fulfilment of the Council's
prime responsibility of maintaining international peace
and security.

10. Aujourd'hui commence le second mandat de
l'Equateur en tant que membre non permanent du

Conseil de securite. Le mandat que nous a confere
l'AssembIee generale nOlls charge, dans le cadre de
1'Organisation, de fonctions et de devoirs precis qui
ont directement pour objet l'accomplissement de la
t1tche principale du Conseil : le maintien de la paix et
de la seourite internationales.

11. To that end, the Charter authorizes us to act on
behalf of all the Members of the Organization and
requires us, in the discharge ofthese duties, to proceed
in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the
United Nations.

11. A cette fin, la Charte nous autorise ~ agir au nom
de tous les Membres de 1'Organisation et noUB prescrit,
dans I' accompUssement de nos devoirs, de nons conformer aux buts et principes des Nations Unies.

12. Ecuador-by tradition a peaceable and lawabiding country, with an eminently democratic outlook-has taken the Purposes and Principles of
the United Nations as a rule of conduct, and is
convinced that their implementation constitutes the
surest basis for the maintenance of international
peace and security. TIns will be the central consideration governing our action in the Council.

12. L'Equateur, pays traditionnellement pacifique,
respectueux du droit et d'esprit €lminemment d€lmo-

cratique, a pris les buts et les principes des Nations
Unies pour r~gle de conduite; notre pays est convaincu
que la mise en ceuvre de ces principes est le fondement
le plus soUde de la paix et de la securit€l internationales. C 'est cette id€le qui guidera notre conduite au
Conseil.

13. Faithful to those Purposes and Principles, the
Ecuadorian delegation will likewise make every effort

13. Fid~le h. ces buts et principes, la d€llegation de
l'Equateur s'efforcera egalement d'appuyer et de
2

to suppo
the Coun
Council c
act firml
efficacity
the aim
the Unite
of this
world ex
shall cont
14. We
situation
made by
in the ca
that thes
Security
atmosphe
at the ri
Charter
the Unite
for peace.
15. All
paid to t
the Coun
eminent r
that Ecua
now occup
with the
allocated
special w
rendered
presentati
16. In

c

colleague
honour an
of United
to begin
17. Mr.
dent, Ish
for your

thank, fur
their kind
they are
my Amba
to hear t
away fro
here toda
of welco

18. Per
special 0
the Secur
conscious
the Memb
it. Though
independe
qualify it
quately in
It is, ther
the caus
privileged
today to r
19. Mr.
country's

le
le
~

ls
!t,

d
~,

m
lS

le
!l.,
i,

:-

1.

t,
In

le
11
:s

It
,r
:s
'e

le

IS

It

,a

s
a
e

,e

e
li
e

z

It

,e
u
€I

e

li

a

it

"

1

t

1

to support and preserve the authority and prestige of
the Council, in full awareness of the fact that the
Council cannot repudiate its responsibilities andmust
act firmly and effectively in order to ensure the
efficacity of a system of collective security which is
the aim of, and to some extent the justification for,
the United Nations. The road towards the achievement
of this aim may be rough, but the peoples of the
world expect, and are entitled to expect, that we
shall continue steadily to follow it.

maintenir l'autorite et le prestige du Conseil, car elle
sait que les responsabilites du Conseil sont ineludables
et que c 'est de son action ferme et constructive que
depend le bon fonctionnement du syst~me de securite
collective qui est le but et, en quelque sorte, la raison
d'(;tre des Nations Unis. IT se peut que le chemin pour
y parvenir soit ardu, mais c 'est en veillant ~ ne pas
nous en ecarter que nous repondrons aux legitimes
aspil'ations des peuples du monde.

14. We have reached a stage in the international
situation Where serious efforts are being made, and
made by permanent members of the Security Council,
in the cause of peace. I would like to voice my hope
that these efforts will be successful, and that the
Security Council may help in the creation of an
atmosphere conducive to their fruitfulness and play,
at the right moment, the part assigned to it, by the
Charter and by the general desire of the Members of
the United Nations, in the execution of a programme
for peace.

14. NOlls nous trouvons en un moment de 1'histoire
du monde oil. de serieux efforts sont faits pour maintenir la paix, par des pays qui sont, preciseruent,
membres permanents du Conseil de securite. Que ce
soit pour nous l'occasion de souhaiter le succ~s de
ces efforts et d'exprimer 1'espoir que le Conseil de
securitt'l pOllrra contribuer ~ creer une atmosph~re
qui loor permette de porter leurs fruits et qu'n pOllrra
egalement, le moment venu, jouer, en mettant en
reuvre un programme de paix, le role qui doit etre le
sien conformement ~ la Charte et aux vreux de tous
les Etats Membres.

15. Allow me to associate myself with the tributes
paid to the work of the tht"ee retiring members of
the Council-Canada, Japan and Panama, whose
eminent representatives have set an example of conduct
that Ecuador will strive to follow. Since my country
now occupies one of the two seats which, in accordance
with the principle of geographical distribution, are
allocated to Latin America, I should like to say a
special word in praise of the distinguished service
rendered by my predecessor, Mr. Illueca, the representative of Panama.

15. Permettez-moi, Monsieur le President, de
m 'associer aux felicitations qui ont ete adressees,
pour la tliche qu'ils ont accomplie, aux trois membres
du Conseil dont les mandats sont venus ~ expiration:
le Canadr., le Japon et le Panama, dont les eminents
representants ont etabli une ligne de conduite que
l'Equateur s'efforcera de suivre. Mon pays occupant
1'un des deux si~ges qui, d'apr~s la repartition geegraphique, ont ete attribues ~ l'Amerique latine,
qu'il me soit permis d'insister tout particuli~rement
sur le role brillant qu'a joue mon predecesseur,
M. mueca, representant du Panama.

16. In conclusion, I should like to assure my
colleagues on the Council, with whom I have had the
honour and pleasure .;f co-operating in other branches
of United Nations activity, that! consider it a privilege
to begin this new form of association with them.

16. Je voudrais enfin donner l'assurance aux membres du Conseil, avec quij'aieul'honneuret le plaisir
de participer ~ d'autres activites de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies, que clest pour moi un honneur que de
me trouver ~ nOllveau ~ leurs cotes.

17. Mr. WIJEGOONAWARDENA (Ceylon):Mr. President, I should like to take this opportunity to thank you
for your kind words of welcome. Also permit me to
thank, through you, the members of this Council for
their kind words of welcome. You can be assured that
they are very much appreciated. I know how happy
my Ambassador, Sir Claude Corea, would have been
to hear them. It so happens that at the moment he is
away from New York and is unable to be present
here today. I also lmow how very much these words
of welcome will be appr'.ciated in my country.

17. M. WIJEGOONAWARDENA (Ceylan) [traduit de
l'anglais] : Je voudrais, Monsieur le PreSident, profiter de 1'occasion qui m fest offerte pour vous remercier de votre aimable accueli. Permettez-moi egalement, par votre intermediaire, de remercier les
membres du Consen de leurs cordiales paroles de
bienvenue. Volls pouvez etre certains que j'y suis tres
senSible. J e sais combien 1'ambassadeur de mon pays,
sir Claude Corea, aurait ete heureux de les entendre.
Actuellement absent de New York, n n'a pu assister
~ la seance de ce matin. J e sais aussi combien ces
paroles de bienvenue seront appreciees dans mon pays.

18. Permit me, Mr. President, also to say on this
special occasion, when Ceylon has taken its seat on
the Security Council for the first time, how very
conscious my country is of the responsibility that
the Member States of the United Nations conferred on
it. Though young in terms of years, of newly regained
independence, its long history and cultural heritage
qualify it to discharge its responsibility most adequately in the present stage of the history of mankind.
It is, therefore, with a renewed sense of dedication to
the cause of the United Nations that I have been
privileged to take this seat on the Security Council
today to represent Ceylon.

18. Permettez-moi, Monsieur le President, de dire
aussi, en cette occasion speciale oil Ceylan si~ge
pour la premiere fois au Conseil de securite, que mon
pays est pleinement conscient de la responsabilite que
les Etats Membres de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
lui ont confiee. Bien que peu d'annees se soient
ecoulees depuis que Ceylan a recouvre son independance, sa longue histoire etsonpatrimoineculturellui
dorment les qualites requises pour s'acquitter dignement de ses responsabilites ~ 1'epoque que nous traversons actuellement. C 'est done avec un sentiment
renouveIe de devOllement ~ la cause des Nations Unies
que j'ai l'honneur d'occuper aujourd'hui le siege du
representant de Ceylan au Conseil de securite.

19. Mr. MICHALOWSKI (Poland): May I first, on my
country's behalf and on my own behalf, thank you,

19. M. MICHALOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de 1'anglais] : Je voudrais tout d'abord, au nom de mon pays
3

...
Mr. President, for the very cordial and warm words
of welcome which you, both as President and as
representative of the Soviet Union, have extended to me
on this occasion. I wish to thank also all our colleagues
who welcomed the entry of Poland to the Security
Conncil.

et en mon nom personnel, vous remercier, Monsieur le
Pr6sident, des paroles c, lrdiales de bienvenue que VOllS
venez de m 'adress~r en votre qualite de President du
Conseil et de representant de l'Union sovietique. Je
tiens egalement 1l. remercier tous nos coll~gues qui ont
aimablement accueilli la Pologne au Conseil de securite.

20. We consider it both an honour and a duty to be
able to serve on this most important organ of the
United Nations. After ten yea:rs Poland, an eastern
European country, is once again represented among the
non-permanent members of the Security Council. We
consider this to be an encouraging symptom which
seems to signify the return to the gentleman's agreement, the emergence of a realistic political outlook
and an atmosphere of international relaxation of
tension.
21. The United Nations Charter imposes upon the
Security Council very important duties and upon its
members very serious responsibilities. It seems to us
that the period of international relaxation and coexistence upon which we are now entering gives the
Security Council good possibilities of fulfilling these
duties. I would like to assure you that during its term
of office the Polish delegation will do its utmost to
strengthen the authority of the Council and to contribute
to its successful work within the framework of the
Charter.

20. C'est 1l. la fois pour nous un honneur et un devoir
de servir dans cet organe extrtlmement important de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies. Apr~s un intervl:llle
de 10 ans, la Pologne, pays d'Europe orientale, est
une fois de plus representee parmi les membres non
permanents du Conseil de s6curite. C 'est 11l. un
symptome encourageant qui semble presager un retour
au gentleman's agreement, l'apparition d'une attitude
politique r~aliste et une detente dans les relations
internationales.
21. La Charte des Natic'lls Unies impose au Conseil de
s13curite des devoirs de la plus haute import.ance et 1l.
ses membres des responsabilit6s tr~s graves. A notre
avis, 1'81'e de detente internationale et de coexistence
dans laquelle nous entrons dolt permettre au Conseil
de securlt6 de s'acq ltter de ces devoirs. Je puis
assurer les membres du Conseil que pendant la duree
de son mandat la delegation polonaise fera tout son
possible pour affermir l'autorlte du Conselletcontribuer au succ~s de ses travaux dans le cadre de la
Charte.

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members

Admission de nouveaux Membres

(!!) Letter dated 13 January 1960 from the Prime Minister of
the State of Cameroun addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/4256);
(2) Letter dated 20 January 1960 from the Permanent
Representative of France addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/4257)

!:!.) Lettre, en date du 13 janvier 1960, adressee au Secre-

22. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian) : An
application by the State of Cameroun for admission to
membership in the United Nations was addressed to
the Secretary-General by Mr. Ahidjo, the Prime
Minister of Cameroun, on 13 January 1960 and was
circulated to members of the Security Council [S/4256].

22. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : La demande
d'admission de 1'Etat du Cameroun 1l. I 'Organisation
des Nations rnies a ete adressee au Secretaire general
le 13 janvier 1960 par M. Ahidjo, premier ministre
du Cameroun, et a ete distribuee aux membres du
Conseil de securlte [S/4256J.

taire general par le Premier Ministre de I'Etat du Cameroun
(S/4256);
Q) Lettre, en date du 20 janvier 1960, adressee au President
du Consei! de securite par le representant permanent de
la Franc~ (S/4257)

1

29.
Unit
the
it is

a s
take
Sec
rep
reas
clos
co
hirt

23. Conformement 1l. la procedure suivie ces der-

23. In accordance with the procedure adopted by the
Security Council in similar cases in past years, I would
like to suggest that the Council should decide, as
provided for in rule 59 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to examine this application by Cameroun
directly, without referring it t6 the Committee on the
Admission of New Members.

ni~res annees par le Conseil de securite dans des cas

semblables, je vouc!rais proposer au Conseil de
decider, comme le prevoit l'article 59 du r~glement
interieur provisoire,. d'examiner lui-meme cette demar.de sans la renvoyer au Comite d'admission des
nouve::l.UX membres.

It was so decided.

11 en est ainsi decide.

24. The delegations of France and Tunisia have submitted a draft resolution [S/4258 and Add.1].

24. Un projet de rllsolution [S/4258 et Add. 1] a 13te
presente par les del€lgations de la Frauce et de la
Tunisie.

25. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
I should like first of all to associate myself briefly
with the words which the President addressed to those
of our colleagues who are leaving the Security Council,
the ~9presentatives of Canada, Japan and Panama, and
also with the words he addressed to our departing
President, our colleague and friend Mr. Mongi Slim.

25. M. BERARD (France) : Je voudrais d'abord
m 'associer en deux mots aux paroles que vous avez
adressees, Moml'!eur le President, 1l. nos coll~gues
sortants du Conseil de securite~ les representants du
Canada, du Jap<Jn et du Panama, ainsi qu'aux paroles
que vous avez adressees 1l. notre President sortant,
notre coll~gue et ami M. Mongi Slim. J'aimerais
4

31.

the
by
whic
Trus
fulfil
ent
wish
Nati
when
evol
11
Comm
form.
Fourt

Insieurle

I should also like to tell our colleagues from Ceylon,

~quevous

Ecuador and Poland how very pleased we are to have
them seated at our table.

aident du
:tique. Je
es quiont
,ll de se-

ID devoir

ortant de
ntervl.llle
ltale, est
.bres non
st Hi un
llnretour
~ attitude
relations

onseilde
ance et 11
I. A notre
lxistence
j Conseil
Je puis
laduree
tout son
ltcontriire de la

au SecreCameroun
President
nanent de

demande
lnisation
~general

ministre
lbres du
ces der) des cas
naeil de
~glement

Jette de',sion des

.1] a ete

et de la
d'abord
(JUs avez

ausSl dire 11 nos coll~gues de Ceylan, de l'Equateur et
de la Pologne tout le plaisir que nous avons ~ les
avoir desormais ~ notre table.

26. The French delegation asked for this meeting to
submit a draft resolution to the Security CowlCil
recommending the admission of Cameroun to membership in the United Nations.Insodoing,llly Government
is fulfilling its obligation towards the new State ai1d is
acting in accordance with the assurance which its
representatives gave to the General Assembly at the
resumed thirteenth session. My Government is particularly happy to have this opportunity of giving
Cameroun proof of its constant friendship at this
solemn moment in that country's history.

26. La delegation franQaise a provoque la presente
reunion pour soumettre au Conseil de securite un
projet de resolution recommandant l'admission du
Cameroun comme Membre de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. En prenant cette initiative, mon gouvernement s'acquitte de ses engagements 11 l'egarddu
nouvel Etat et se conforme aux assurances que son
representant avait donnees 11 l'Assemblee generale
lors de la reprise de sa treizi~me session. nest
surtout heureux d'avoir ainsi l'occasion d'apporter
au Cameroun, 11 un moment solennel de son histoire,
un temoignage de sa constante amitie.

27. In full agreement with the French Government,
the Head of the Government of Cameroun told the
members of the Fourth Committee last year:

27. En plein accord avec le Gouvernement frangais,
le chef du Gouvernement camerounais avait declare
l'an dernier aux membres de la Quatri~me Commission:

"The transfer of sovereignty will be complete on
1 January 1960. No ppwers will be reserved. Our
sovereignty will be full and entire. We shall immediately apply for admission to the United
Naticns. " ]J

"Au 1er janvier 1960, le transfert de souverainete
sera total. n ne comporteraaucunealienation.Notre
souverainete sera pleine et enti~re. Nous demanderons immediatement notre admission il l'Organisation des Nations Unies !J.'"

28. Resolution 1349 (XIII) of 13 March 1959 gave
approval to that programme and the International
Trusteeship System thus ceased to exist on 1 January
1960, the day on which the independence of Cameroun
was proclaimed.

28. La resolution 1349 (XIII) du 13 mars 1959 avait
sanctionne ce programme et le regime international de
tutelle a ainsi cesse d'exister le 1er janvier 1960,
jour de la proclamation de l'independance du
Cameroun.

29. This event is of special significance to the
United Nations and France, and I would like to draw
the attention of members of the Council to it. Indeed,
it is the first time that a Trust Territory has become
a sovereign State. The ceremonies which have just
taken place in Cameroun in the presence of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and of the
representatives of almost all nations were for that
reason of historic importance. The United Nations has
closely followed the steady progress of this African
country and may now congratulate itself upon the
birth of a free, independent and democratic state.

29. Cet evenement comporte, pour 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies et pour la France, une signification
particuli~re sur laquelle j'aimerais attirerl'attention
des membres du Conseil. En effet, c'est la premi~re
fois qu'un territoire sous tutelle devient un Etat
souverain. Les ceremonies quiviennentd'avoirlieuau
Cameroun en presence du Secretaire general de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies et des representants
de presque toutes les nations ont revetu, de ce fa:~,
une importance historique. Notre organisation, qui a
suivi de pr~s les progres constants de ce pays africain,
peut se feliciter d'y constater aujourd 'hui la naissance
d'un Etat libre, independant et democratique.

30. This event proves moreover that independence is
not necessarily won in opposition to another country,
as was believed in the days of that "obsolete romanticism" which the t-amerounian Prime Minister recently denounced before his guests, but that it may be
acquired in friendship and co-operation as a result of
purposeful development in accordance with the wishes
of both parties.

30. Cet evenement prouve, d'autre part, que l' independance ne se conquiert pas necessairement contre
un autre pays, suivant ce "romantisme desuet" que
denonQait recemment devant ses hates le Premier
Ministre camerounais, mais qu'elle peut s'obtenir
dans 1'amitie et la cooperation, aux termes d'une evolution raisonnee et mutuellement souhaitee.

31. The attainment of independence by Cameroun is
the climax of mutual efforts over the last forty years
by the Camerounian people themselves and by France
which first under the Mandate and later under the
Trusteeship Agreement left no stone unturned to
fulfil the mission which the international community
entrusted to it. France feels that it has fulfilled the
wishes of the authors of the Covenant of the League of
Nations and of the United Nations Charter by fostering,
whenever circumstances were favourable, the rapid
evolution of the Territory towards the basic objectives

31. L 'av~nement du Cameroun i\ l'independance est
le couronnement des efforts deployes en commun
depuis 40 ans par le peuple camerounais lui-meme
et par la France qui, aux termes du Mandat, puis aux
termes de l'Accord de tutelle, n'a rien neglige pour
remplir la mission que la communaute internationale
lui avait confiee; elle a conscience d 'avoir pleinement
repondu aux vreux des auteurs du Pacte de la Societe
des Nations et de la Charte des Nations Unies, en
favorisant, chaque fois que les circonstances s 'y
pretaient, l'evolution rapide du Territoire vers les

V This statement was made at the 849th meeting of the Fourth
Committee, the official record of which is published only in summary
form. See Official Records of theGeneral Assembly, Tr.irreenth Session,
Fourth Committee, 849th meeting, para. 19.

11 Declaration faite a la 84geme seance delaQuatrieme Commission,
dont les comptl's rendus ne sont publies que sous forme analytique. Voir
Documents officiels de l'Assemblee generale, treizieme session, Quarrieme session, Quatrieme Commission, 84geme seance, par. 19.

oll~gues

ltants du
paroles
sortant,
limerais

5

fins essen~elles que l'Article 76 assigne au regime
de tutelle.
32. En proclamant l' independance de son pays,
Mo Ahidjo, chef du Gouvernement camerounaie, a
dllclarll:

laid down for the Trusteeship System in Article 76 of
the Charter.
32. In proclaiming the independence of his country,
Mr. Ahidjo, the head of the CamerounianGovernment,
stated:
IISince the far-off time when our free but divided
tribes tested their strength in war, a nation has been
forged and has emerged from a patchwork of races,
religions, beliefs, and customs .•• ".

"Uepuis la lointaine €lpoque oil nos tribus libres,
mais divisees, l'ivalisaient de vigueur guerri~re, une
nation s'est forgee, s'est dllgagee de lamarqueterie
des races, des religions, des croyances, des coutumes••• "

33. The troubles and difficulties which certain elements are now trying to stir up cannot endanger the
unity and stability of the country nor slow down its
march towards progress and democracy. 'The Camerounian people may well be proud of the work it has
done; I wish to congratulate its representative
Mr. Kuoh Moukouri who is present in this room.
France herself is happy to have contributed to this
work, for the Camerounian elite was trained in French
universities and schools and it is in institutions
created by France that the Camerounians have been
prepared for self-government in accordance with the
precepts of democracy. Camerounian deputies who
participated in the work of French parliamentary
assemblies have received help and advice from
organized political groups in a climate free of all
discrimination. The political education of the Camerounians was pursued by the establishment in 1946 of
an Assembly with ext'ilDsive powers and this body
produced the first political leaders of the country.
Finally, the gradual transformation of Camerounian
institutions made it pOl3sible for the cOlmtry to be
provided in May 1957 with a responsible Government
controlled by an Assembly elected by universal and
direct suffrage of all inhabitants of both sexes, and
later on 1 January 1959 to attain complete internal
self-government.

33. Les heurts et les difficultes que certains ~lements
tentent actuellement de provoquer ne sauraient compromettre 1'unite et la stabilite du pays, ni ralentir sa.
marche dans la voie de la democratie et du progr~s.
Le peuple camerounais peut etre fier de l'reuvrequ'il
a accomplie; j'en felicite ici son representant, M. Kuoh
Moukouri, present dans cette salle. La France ellsm~me est heureuse d'avoir contribue 1l. cette reuvre.
C 'est, en effet, dans ses universites et dans ses ecoles
quIa ete formee l'elite camerounaise; c'est clans le
cadre des institutions creas par elle que les Camerounais ont ete prepares 1l. se gouverner eux-m~mes,
selon les r~gles de la democratie. Des elus camerounais ont trouve, au cours de leur participation aux
assemblees parlementaires franc;aises, l'appui et les
conseils de groupes politiques organises, clans un
climat exempt de toute discrimination. L 'education
politique des Camerounais a ete poursuivie par
1'institution, en 1946, d'une Assemblee disposant de
pouvoirs etendus, d'oil sont issus les premiers cadres
du pays. Enfin, la transformation progressive de leurs
institutions leur a permis d'etre dotes, d~s mai 1957,
d'un gouvernement responsable, sous le controle d'une
Assemblee elue au suffrage universel et direct de tous
les habitants, hommes et femmes, et d'acceder, d~s
le 1er janvier 1959, ~ 1'autonomie interne totale.

M. At the conclusion of the Trusteeship System,
Cameroun not only had political institJ ' tions and
administrative and democratic structures but its
economy was transformed and renovated.

34. Au terme du regime de tutelle, le Cameroundispose, non seulement d'institutions politiques et de
structures administratives et democratiques, mais
enoore d'une economie transformee et renovee.

35. The position of Cameroun at the time when its
administration was entrusted to France under Mandate
from the League of Nations could be summarized in
a few figures: foreign trade did not exceed 20,000 tons
of goods; communications consisted of only 300 kilometres of rough track and 150 kilometres of
railway line. The whole Territory had no more than
ten schools and a few medical posts.

35. La situation du Cameroun, au moment oill'administration en a ete confi~ ~ la France par le Mandat
de la Soci€lte des Nations, se resumait en quelques
chiffres: le commerce ext€lrieur ne depassait pas
20.000 tonnes; 1'infrastructure se llmitait ~ 300 kilom~tres de pistes et 150 kilom~tres de voies ferrees.
Dans l'ensemble du Territoire, on ne comptait que
10 ecoles et quelques postes medil.aux.

36. Today Cameroun ha;:; one of the best road
networks in tropical Africa; its railway!} transport
1,216,000 travellers and 650,000 tons of goods per
year. The air network covers the whole country and
the international airport at Douala handles 60,000
passengers and more than 10,000 tons offreight. Total
traffic passing through the port of Douala exceeds
800,000 tons.

36. Aujourd'hui, le Cameroun dispose d'un des
meilleurs reseaux routiers d'Afrique tropicale; ses
chemins de fer transportent chaque annee 1.216.000
voyageurs et 650.000 tonnes de marchandises. L'infrastructure aerienne couvre 1'ensemble du pays et
1'aerodrome international de Douala rec;oit 60.000
passagers et plus de 10.000 tonnes de fret. Un trafic
global de plus de 800.000 tonnes transite par le port
de Douala.

37. Cameroun has become one ofthe principal African
producers of bananas, cocoa, timber, coffee and oil
seeds. The range of its products has been extended by
the planting of rubber, cotton and ground-nuts.

37. Le Cameroun est devenu un des principaux producteurs africains de bananes, de cacao, de bois, de
caf~ et d'ol~agineux. La gamme de ses productions a
ete compllltee par 1'installation de plantations d'heveas, de coton et d'arachides.

38. At the same time, mining research has been
continued and important industries started, with the
result that there is now at Edea a combined hydro-

38. Dans le meme temps ont ete poursuivies les
recherches mini~res, tandis que d'importantes industries etaient implantees. C'est ainsi qu'il exist.e
6

:igne au regime

electric and indust>:'ial plant with an annual production
capacity of 1,200 million kilowatt hours and 45.000 tons
of aluminium.

aujourd'hui II Edea un ensemble hydro-electrique d'une
capacit!l de production annuelle de 1 milliard
200 millions de kilowattheures et de 45.000 tonnes
d'aluminium.

39. In the social field, there has been considerable
progress also. In a population oh little over 3 million,
there are more thiUl 300,000 pupils enrolled in public
and private schools, that is to say, a school enrolment
of 65 per cent. More than 9 million visits Were
recorded at the 438 medical centres in the country.

39. Dans le domaine social, des progr~s considerabIes ont et~ egalement enregistr!ls. Pour un'3 population leg~rement supl§rieure II 3;millions d'habitants,
on compte plus de 300.000 eleves inscrits dans les
!lcoles publiques et priv€les, ce qui correspond II un
taux de scolarisation de 65 pour 100. Plus de 9 millions
de consultations sont donn~es par ailleurs dans les
438 formations m!ldicales du pays.

40. Such economic and social development would not,
of course, have been possible if Cameroun had had
only its own resources or private investment to count
on. To q~lCte only one figure, during the period
1947-1958, more than 115,000 million francs of public
funds were made available to Cameroun by the
Administering Powers.

40. Ce dllveloppement economique et social n'aurait
evidemment pas ete possible si le Cameroun n'avait
dispose que de ses l'eSsources propres ou d'investissements prives. Pour ne citer qu 'un chiffre couvrant
la periode de 1947 11 1958, plus de 115 milliards de
francs de fonds publics ont Pot;;' mis ~ la disposition du
Cameroun par la Puissance administrante.

41. For many years my country has given llrJ.Btinting
assistance to the under-developed territories for which
it was responsible. Its aim has been their political
emancipation, combined with economic and social
progress.

41. Depuis des annees, mon pays n 'a pas menage son
assistance aux territoires sous-developpes dont n
avait la charge. n s'eat assigne pour but l'emancipatlon politique auss! bien que 1;essor economique et la
promotion humaine.

42. In Cameroun, it found a people that was aware of
the Jhanges that were necessary and ready to make
them. The res~lts achieved are proof of this.

42. n a trouve au Cameroun une population consciente
de 1'evolution necessaire et prete h. la favoriser. Les
resultats obtenus en temoignent.

43. Cameroun now has full sovereignty. For instance,
it is now responsible for its international relations,
and a Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been created at
Yaounde. The State of Cameroun has been recognized
by many Member States of the United Nations and it
has exchanged or intends to exchange diplomatic
representatives with several States. A Secrewriat
of state for National Defence has been established, as
well as a national army. which will soon be able to
car-ry out the duties required of it.

43, Le Cameroun possede desormais sapleine souverainet!l. n exerce notamment toutes ses responsabilites internationales et un minist~re des affaires
etrangeres a ate cree 1l. Yaounde. L'Etat duCameroun
a ete reconnu par de nombreux Membres de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies et i1 a echange, on se propose
d'~changer, des representations diplomatiques avec
plusieurs Etats. Un Secretariat d'Etat a la defense
nationale a ete crM, ainsi qu 'une armee nationale qui
sera bientot en mesure de re:c:J.plir les missions qui lui
incombent.

44. The permanent institutiollE of this democratic
State, which has already proved its respect for the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Charter
of the United Nations, are due to be established by
next April.

44. La mise en place des institutions definitives de
cet Etat democratique, qui ~ d'ores et dejll donne la
preuve de son respect de la ~clarationuniverselle des
droits de 1'homme et de la Charte des Nations Unies,
est prevue pour le mois d'avrn prochain.

45. There can be no doubt that Cameroun is a peaceloving State, that it accepts its obligations under the
Charter and that it is both able and willing to fulfil
these obligations. And while the French Governmentis
particularly well placed to bear this out, the United
Nations itself expressed its full confidence on this
point on 1j March 1959. On th.atdate, in resolution 1349
(XIII), the General Assembly not only noted the forthcoming independence of Cameroun but specially
recommended that it should be admitted to Membership
of the United Nations.

45. Que le Cameroun soit un Etat pac:1fique, qu 'n
accepte les obligations de la Charte, qu 'n soit capable
de remplir ses obligations et dispose ~ le faire, nul
ne saurait en douter. Si le Gouvernement frangais est
particulierement bien place pour en temoigner, 1'Organisation des Nations Unies elle-m~me a dejll exprime le 13 IT'~.rs 1959 sa pleine confi.ance II cet
egard. A cet! date, l'Assemblee generale a non
seulement pris acte de la prochaine independance du
Cameroun, mais specialement recommande son admission comme Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies dans sa rllsolution 1349 (XIII).

rincipaux proao, de bois, de
I productions a
lntations d'he-

46. And so nothing could be more normal or more
legitimate than the wish of Cameroun to avail itself of
the earliest opportunity to occupy its seat in the
United Nations, under whose trusteeship it has been
until now and of which it is now thoroughly worthy
to become a Member.

46. Rien, par consequent, de plus normal ni de plus
legitime que le Cameroun souhaite venir aussitot que
possible occuper la place qui lu! revient au sein d'une
Organisation dont il ~tait hier le pupille et dont
aUjourd'hui n merite pleinement d'~tre 1'un des
Membres.

oursuivies les
)rtantes indus:i qu 'n exist.e

47. The Camerounian Government made a point of
asking France to sponsor its admission to the United
Nations, a mark of confidence which my Government
greatly appreciated. It is therefore in this role of

47. Par une marque de confiance a laquelle mon
gouvernement a ete senSible, le Gouvernement camerounais a tenu a demander le parrainage de la Fl'ance
pour son admission au sein des Nations Unies. C 'est

de son pays,
:amerounaie. a

s tribus libres,
~ guerri~re,une
la marqueterie
mces, des cou·

rtains fllements
sauraient comB, ni ralentir sa
l et du progr~.s.
le 1'ceuvre qu 'n
entant, M. Kuoh
,a France eUe1l. cette reuvre.
dans ses ecoles
; crest dans le
e les Cameroulr ellX-memes,
€llus camerou·
rticipation aux
I, l'appui et les
!lises, dans un
m. L 'education
poursuivie par
le disposant de
remiers cadres
~essive de leurs
, d~s mai 1957,
econtrole d'une
et direct de tous
d'acceder, d~s
lletotale.
Cameroun dieolitiques et de
ratiques, mais
renovee.
!lent oill'admi, par le Mandat
it en quelques
depassait pas
tait h. 300 kilovoies ferrees.
l comptait que
ose d'un des
tropicale; ses
nnee 1.216.000
landises. L'inole du pays et
reqoit 60.000
fret. Un trafic
~ite par le port

7

r
[

I

•

.
.
•

~

•

,

,..

.(
",0#

•

..'

~.

-

..'

~

<)

....'.
.

'.

~)"'"
~

~

,

•

~

.

.

,

'.
'

.. '

.'

,

'~

.

I

. . . . , , , . , . . . . .

'.

.

•

•

..
ll. ce titre que ma dllIllgation a 1'honneur de presenter

sponsor that my delegation has the honour to submit
to the Council a draft resoll'tlon recommending the admission of Cameroun. Tunisia, as an Mrican
State and a member of the Council, has expressed the
wish to co-sponsor tlus draft resolution. In view of the
many and lasting ties which unite our three States , we
wore happy to agree to this.

au Conseil un projet de r6solution en vue de l'admission du Cameroun. La Tunisi13 en tant qu'Etat africain,
membre du Conseil, a exprime le voou de s'associer 11
ce projet. Tenant compte en particulier des affinites
multiples et durables existant entre noS trois Etats,
nous avans bien volontiers acc6d6 A. ce voou.

48. I:un sure that the Security Council cannot but
endorse the wish expressed by the General Assembly
in resolution 1349 (XIll) by unanimously adopting the
draft resolution we are submitting. Thus the General
Assembly \vill be able to take as soon as possible,
that is to say, as soon as it meets again, a definite
decision on the recommendation it adopted last March.

48. Le Conseil de s€lcurite, j'en suis assur€l, ne peut
manquer de faire sienlevoouexprim€lparl'Assembllle
gllnllrale dans sa r€lsolution 1349 (XIII) en adoptant ll.
l'unanimit€l le projet que nous lui soumettons. Ainsi
dans les d€llais les plus brefs, c'est-ll.-dire d~s qu'elle
se rOOnira, l'Assembllle glin€lrale pourra transformer
en decision dMinitive les recommandations qu'elle
avait adoptees au mois de mars dernier.

49. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
The Tunisian delegation is genuinely pleased
to welcome today the application of Cameroun for
membership in the United Nations. Placed under
international trusteeship by the Agreement of 13
December 1946, the Camerounian people have long
wished to recover full sovereignty in all fields.
Fr:Ulce, as the Administering Power, submitted
several reports to the Trusteeship Council on the
economic, cultural and political advancement of the
Territory and, two years ago, the Administering
Authority established a system ofinternal autonomy in
Cameroun, under wWch it held general elections. The
resulting Government, wWch reflected the true aspirations of the Camerounian people and France, the
Administering Authority, have, in agreement with the
United Nations, led Cameroun towards full and
complete independence wWch became effective on
1 January 1960.

49. M. SLIM (Tunisie): Crest ~vec un rllel plaisir
que la d6l6gation tunisienne accueille aUjourd'hui
la demande formuMe par le Cameroun pour son
admission comme Etat Membre de 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Placll sous tutelle internationale
par 1'Accord du 13 dllcembre 1946, le peuple camerounais a, depuis fort longtemps, aspirll ll. recouvrer la
plllnitude de sa souverainet€l dans tous les domaines.
La France, Puissance admillistrante, a soumis
plusieurs rapports au Conseil de tutelle all sujet de
son evolution daus les domaines economique, culturel
et politique, et, il y a deux ans, I'Autorite administrante a etabli un regime d' autonomie interne au
Cameroun et a procede, dans ce cadre, 1.1. des elections
generales. Le gouvernement qui en est issu, traduisant
les aspirations profondes du people camerounais, d'une
part, 1'Autorite administrante, la France, d'autre part,
ont, avec 1'accord des Nations Unies, conduit le Cameroun vel'S son independance pleine et enti~re,
devenue effective le 1er janvier 1960.

50. My delegation is glad to congratulate the Camerounian people on the realization of its legitimate
aspirations. The Tunisian delegation is also pleased
to congratulate France, its friend. on the manner in
which it led ilis people towards emancipation, in
accordance with the spirit of the Charter.

50. Ma del€lgation est heureuse de feliciter le peuple
camerounais pour la realisation de ses aspirations les
plus legitimes. La delegation tunisienne se fait un
plaisir de feliciter aussi la France amie pour la
mani~re avec laquelle elle a conduit ce peuple 11 son
emancipation.. conformement 11 1'esprit de la Charte.

51. At the resumed tWrteenth session, wWch was
specially devoted to Camerounian matters, my delegation made clearly known its views regarding the
best manner in which independence could be aeWeved
on a basis wWch would ensure a stable and peaceful
future. Following a strong appeal by the French delegation, the General Assembly did not see fit at that
time to follow our advice, although it was the advice
of an essentially Mrican people which had gone through
a similar experience.

51. Lors de la reprise de la treizi~me session, qui
a ete specialement consacree aux affaires camerounaises, ma delegation avait expose sans ambiguite
aucune sa conception de la meilleure mani~re qui
permette d'asseoir 1'accession 11 1'independance sur
des bases assurant un avenir stable et serein. Sur les
instances de la delegation frangaise, alors, I'Assembllle generale n 'avait pas cru devoir suivre notre avis
qui est POUrt3!lt celui d'un peuple essentiellement
africain, ayant suivi une experience analogue.

52. However, it is no use discussing the past.
Cameroun, which yesterday was under French administration, now enjoys full sovereignty. We hail this
event, the first. in this year 1960, of a series of
happy events which will affect at least three other
African peoples and perhaps more.

52. J'estime qu'il est inutile de revenir surlepass€l.
Le Cameroun, hier sous administration f:'"angaisl:.. est
aujourd'hui pleinement souverain. Nous saluo,J,s cet
6v6nement, le premier, en cette ann,6e 1960, d'tL",e s6rie d'ev6nements heureux qui toucheront au moins
trois autres peuples africains et peut-8tre plus.

53. At the first meeting of this Council which we
had the honour to attend as a member, the Tunisian
delegation stated:

53. Lors de la premi~re reunion 1.I.laquelle nous avons
eu 1'honneur de participer en tant que membre de ce
conseil, la delegation tunisienne avait dit:

"Tunisia as an African State cannot remain indifferent to the profound aspirations, based on the
principles of the Charter, wWch inspire the peoples
of that continent and of other parts of the world and
wWch most unfortunately have given rise to serious
upheavals and convulsions.

"Etat d'Mrique, la Tunisie ne saurait demeurer
insensible aux profondes aspirations, conformes aux
principes de la Charte, qui animent les peuples de
ce continent et d'autres parties du monde et qui, on
ne saurait trop le regretter, ont donne lieu 11 des
heurts et 11 des convulsions graves et serieuses.
8

"My country, wWch is
those aspirations, has do
its utmost to ensure thei
friendship, which is the
fruitful international co-o
that a peaceful Africa in w
their own destinies will be
consolidation of world pea
the nations. " [845th m
54. This Mrica is now on tl
peoples have achieved in
moving towards their eman
with the Administering Pow
today a happy example. It
not always the case in M
south and from east to wes
identity and hoping to make,
a useful contribution to inte
would indeed have been well
achievement of independenc
negotiation which has had s
Cameroun. Much misunder
thus have been avoided. The
to demonstrate the advantag
larly in connexion with the i
Mrica. It was in this spir
President Bourguiba addres
nations with responsibilitie
round table with the indep
order that they might toge
appropriate and most peace
the complete dacolonization
friendship and justice.

55. Since, as I stated pre
an Mrican country, we are
affecting the African contin
deeply moved today in wele
family of independent nation
honour to submit, togetheJ
delegation of France, the dl
the Council. We are convin
adopted unanimously and th
in its turn, will unanimously 1
brothers.
56. We would like to expr(
Cameroun, like many other
independence, will by then
porary difficulties and achi
fraternity among its people.
57. In congratulating once
France for the developme
approving, I should like to s
moved we are on this occasi
58. Mr. BEELEY (Unite
pressing the views of the
subject of today's agenda
associate my delegation with
speakers have paid to the I'
Japan and Panama, who we
1958 and 1959. I would li
welcome to the newly-electe
Ceylon, Ecuador and Polan
are sitting with us round
first time today. We have w
Mr. Michalowski in other or

"My coontry, which is convinced of the justice of
those upirations, lwi done and will contimIe to do
its utmost to ensure their realization in peace and
friendship, which is the only buis for healthy and
fruitful international co-operation. We are convinced
that lI. peaceful Africa inwhichallthepeoples govern
their own dellltinies will be a determiningfactor in the
couolidation of world peace and friendship between
the nations. It ( 1145th meeting, puras. 5 and 6.]

"Convaincu de lour 16gitimit6, mOD pqa IlL IRYI'i
et e<m.timlera ~ le faire pour que lour r6aliAtf.OD lIIIIil
fasse dans la paix et l'amiti6, swle eonditiOD t:I'imG
same et f6conde coopfiratiOD internatioule. NWlIIl
sommes cODvaincus qu'une Afrique paisible et cl
les peuples BOnt martres de leur desti. sera un
facleur d6terminantpour la. consolidation de la. paix
dans le monde et de l'amit€l entre nations.·
(M~me s6aw:e, par. 5 et 6.J .

54. This Africa is now on the march. Anumber of its
peoples have achieved independeooe. others are
moving towards their emancipation, in full agreement
with the Administering Powers. Ofthese,Cameroonis
today a happy example. It is \mfomnate that this Is
not always the cue in Africa which, from north to
soutll. and from eut to west. is growing aware of its
identity and hoping to make, in friendship and dignity,
a useful contribution to international co-operation. We
would indeed have been well advised to facilitate their
achievement of independence by the friendly method of
negotiation which has had such a successful outcome in
Cameroun. Much misunderstanding and tragedy would
thus have been avoided. The cue of Cameroonserves
to demoutrate the advantages of negntiation, particularly in connexion with the inevitabledecolonizationof
Africa. It wu in this spirit that, on 6 March 1~59.
Preside
slucere appealto all
President BourKUiba aclcliessed
addressed a sincere
nations
ibilities in
in Africa
t meet at a
nations with responsibilities
Africa to
rroond table with the independent
ndependent States
in
States of
of Africa,
Africa, in
0order that they might together
together decide
decide upon
upon the
the most
most
appropriate and
and most
most peaceful
measures for achieving
appropriate
peaceful me
the
complete decolonization
decolonlaation of
CO
our continent
in peace,
the complete
of our
friendship and justice.

85.
stated previously,
prevlously, we
are essentially
essentlally
55. Since,
Since, as 1I stated
we are
an African
country, we
concerned witballmatters
are concerned
with all matters
African coontry,
we are
affecting the
African continent.
is why
why we
affecting
the African
continent. That
That is
we are
are
deeply moved
moved today
in welcoming
welcoming Cameroun
into the
the
deeply
today in
Cameroun into
family
of independent
in
nt nations,
nations, aad
it a great
and we
we deem
deem it
great
family of
honour to
suhm:?, together
the distinguished
dlstinguished
honour
to subml~,
together with
with the
delegation of
of France,
the draft
draft resolution
resolution now
before
France. the
now before
delegation
tbe Council.
Council. We are
are conVinced
convinced that
that this
draft will
Will be
this draft
be
the
adopted
unanimously and
and that
that the
Assembly.
adopted Unanimously
the General
General Assembly.
in
turn, will
Will unaulmously
our Camerounlau
in its
its turn,
unanimously welcome
welcome our
Camerounian
brothers.
brothers.
56.
would like
to express
fervent hope
hope that
that
56. We
We would
like to
express the
the fervent
Cameroun, like
like many
other States
States on
the threshold
threshold of
Cameroun,
many other
on the
independence, Will
then have
have overcome
overcome its
its temtemindependence,
will by
by then
porary difficulties
difficultles and
and achieved
full unity,
porary
achieved full
unity, peace
peace and
and
fraternlty among
among its
people.
fraternity
its people.

54. Cette Afrique est en pleine murche. Un certain
nombre de ses peuples sont devenus ind6pendlmts.
D'aub:es 6voluent vel'S 1001' 6mancipation. en pleln
accord avec les puissances administrantes. Le Cameroon en est aUjourd'hui un heureux exemple. nest
regrettable qu'll n'en soit pas touiours ainsi sureette
terre d'Afrique qui, cm nord au sut!, de l'est a l'ouest,
a pris conscience d'elle-mGme et aspire a apporter,
guit6, une
dans 1'amiti6 et la digni16,
une contribution
contribution précieuse
pr6cieuse
ll. la coop6ration
Combien aurait-on
aurait-on 6t6
616
ration internationale.
internationale.
Combien
cession a~ l%d6penbien inspir6 de faciliter cette accession
1'ind6penn6gotiation qui
qui ont
ont
dance par les voies amiables de laa n6gotiation
si bien abouti et r6ussi au Cameroun.. Que
Que de
de malentenmalentenait-on ainsi
dus et de drames auralt-on
ainsi 6vlt6.
€lvit6. L’exemple
L'exemple du
cm·
Cameroon vient nous rappeler
rappeler les
les vertus
vems de la
la négon6gociation,
particul~rement en
en matiare
mati~re de d6eolonid6coloniciation, plus
plus particul73rement
satfon,
sation. cette
eette ln6vitable
in6vitable d6colonisation
d6colonisation de 1Xfrique.
1'Afrique.
dans cet
cet esprit
esprit que
que le
le pr6sident
pr6sident
C'est d'ailleurs dans
mars 1959,
1959, un
le 68 mars
un fervent
fervent et
et
Bourgniba avait lanc6,
lanc6, le
les nations
sincilre appal ~5 toutes
toutes les
nations assumant
assumant des
des
autour d'une
d%me
se réunir
r6unir autour
responsabllit6s en
en Afrique,
Afrique, ~à se
avec les
les Etats
en
Etats indépendants
ind6pendants d’Afrique
d'Afrique en
table ronde avec
mieux approwe de définir
dMinir en
en commun
commun les
les voies
voies les
les mieux
approses,
les plus
la d6pri6es, les
plus paisibles
paisibles aussi,
auesi, pour
pour r6aliser
r6aliser la
d6colonisation compl~te
compl&te de notre
notre continent,
continent, dans
dans lapa&
la pa:lx,
colonisation
l%miti6 et
l'amiti6
et la
la justice.
justice.
55.
Etant uu
essentiellement
africain, comme
comme
55. Etant
un pays
pays essentiellement
africa.in,
nous le
le disions
déjk, tout
tout ce
qui touche
neus
disions d6jll,
ce qui
touche l’Afrique
l'Afrique est
est
n8tre.
C’est pour
pour céla
que notre
est grande
n6tre. C'est
cela que
notre bmotion
6motion est
grande
aujourdsui
concert
aujourd'hui d’accueillir
d'accueillir le
le Cameroun
Cameroun dans
dans le
le concert
des
c’est pour
nousungrand
des nations
nations ind6pendantes.
ind6pendantes. Et
Et c'est
pournousungrand
pr6senteq avec
avec 1'honorabled616gatlon
l’honorable d616gation
honneur que de pr6senter,
rojet de r6solution
est soumis
soumis au
r6s01ution qui
qui est
au
fran9aise, le projet
Conseil. Nous
Nous sommes
sommes convaincus
convaincus que ce projet
projet sera
sera
Conseil.
adopt.6 l%
l%manimit6 et
et que
cette unanimit6
unanimit6 se
seretrouadopt6
~ 1'unanimit6
que cette
retrouvera
l’Assembl6e g6n6rale
générale pour
pour accuellUr
accueillir nos
vera ~a l'Assembl6e
nos fraree
fr~res
camerounais.
camerounais.
56. Nous
Nous est-il
esM1 permis
de formuler
formuler 1'espoir
l’espoir ardent
ardent
56.
permis de
que le
Cameroun, comme
comme tant
Etats lî~ 1'01'60
l*or6e
que
le Cameroun,
tant d’autres
d'autres Etats
de leur
ind6pemiance, aura
aura alors
surmont6 ses
ses diffidiffileur ind6pendance,
alors surmont6
de
cult6s Passag&es
et aura
réalis l’unit6 totale
totale entre
entre
passag~res et
aura r6alis€ll'unit6
cult€ls
ses flls,
fils, dans
dans la
la concorde
et la
la fraternit6.
fraternit6.
ses
concorde et

57. In
In congratulating
congratulating
once again
and
57.
once
again hoth
both Cameroun
Cameronn and
France for
for the
the developments
which we
we are
are today
France
developments which
today
approving, 1I should
should like
like to
to say
say how
deeply gratified
gratifi ed and
and
how deeply
approving,
moved we
we are
are on this
thls occasion.
occasion.
moved
88. Mr.
Mr. BEELEY
BEELEY
(United Kingdom):
Eingdom): Before
Before exex511.
(United
pressing the
the views
views of
of the
the United
United Kingdom
Eingdom on the
the
pressing
subject-of
today’s agenda,
agenda, I1 should
should like
Ïlke first
first to
to
subject of today's
associate my
my delegation
delegationwlththetributewhichprevious
associate
with the tribute which previous
saeakers have
have paid
naid to
to the
the representatives
reuresentatives of
of Canada,
Canada,
speakers
Japan and
and Panama,
Pa&na, who
who were
were our
our colleagues
colleagues during
during
Japan
1958 and
and 1959.
1959. I1 would
would like
like also
also to
to extend
extend a warm
warm
1958
welcome to
to the
newly-elected members
members ofthe
of the Council,
Council,
welcome
the newly-elected
Ceylon, Ecuador
Ecuador and Poland,
Poland, whose
whose representatives
representatives
Ceylon,
are sitting
sitting with
wlth us
us roond
round the
the Council
Council table
table for
for the
the
are
first time
time today.
today. We
We have
have worked
worked with
withMr.
Correa and
and
first
Mr. Correa
ichalowski in
in other
other organs
organe ofthe
of the United
Unlted Nations,
Mr. Michalowski
Mr.
Nations,

57. En
de nouveau
Cameroun eUa
et la France
France
57.
En f6licitant
f6Ueitant de
nouveau le
le Cameroun
de 1'oeuvre
l’œuvre que
nous consacrons
consacrons iei,
ici, je
voudrais exexde
que nous
je voudrais
primer encore
encore la
la joie
l%motion qui
aujourd’hui
primer
joie et
et 1'6motion
qui sont
sont aUjourd'hui
les n6tres.
nôtres.
les
BEELEY (Royaume-Uni)
(Royaume-Uni) (traduit
[traduit de
de 1'anglais]:
l%mglais]:
58. M.. BEELEY
d%xprimer
l’opinion cm
du Royaume-Uni
Royaume=Uni sur
sur la
la
l'opinion
Avant d'exprimer
question inscnte
inscrite b.l'ordre
5 l’ordre cm
du jour,
je voudrais asaoassoquestion
jour, ievoudrais
cier ma
ma d616gation
d616gation b.5 1'hommage
l%ommage que
que lea
les oratoors
orateurspr&pr6eier
c6dents ont
out rendu
rendu aux
aux repr6sentants
repr6sentants cm
du Canada,
Canada, cm
du
c6dents
Japon et
et cm
du Panama,
Panama, qui
qui ont
ont si€lg€l
si6g6 au
au Consell
Conseil en
en 1958
1958
Japon
et 1959.
1959. Je
Je tiens
tiens €lgalement
egalement a
B souhaiter
souhaiter ehaleuroosechaleureuseet
ment la
la bienvenue
bienvenue auxnouveauxmembres
auxnouveauxmembres
duconseil
ment
cm
Conseil -Ceylan, 1'Equateur
ltEquateur et
et la
la .Pologne
Pologne -- dont
dont les
les repr6repr&=
Ceylan,
avons
sentants siilgent
siagent ici
ici pour la
la premillre
première fois.
foi Neus avons
sentants
travail16 aux
aux c6t6s
c6t6e de M. Correaet
CorreaetdeM.
owski
deM. Michalowski
travalll6
dans d'autres
d’autres organes
organes des
des Nations
Nations Unies
Unies et,
et, ~5 la
la
dans
99

-

,
and from our experience we are confident that they
will play a valuable part in the work of the Security
Council.

lumil'lre de catte exp€lnence, nous sommes convaincus
que leur concours sera des plus pr6cieux.

59. I am particularly happy to welcome the representative of Ceylon. This is the first time that Ceylo:l
has occupied the seat on the Council which is customarily alloted to the Commonwealth. I know that it
will faithfully fulfil this responsibility in the tradition
of service to the cause of peace which is shared by all
members of the Commonwealth. I hope that Mr.
Wijegoonawardena, whom I am happy to see with us
today, will also convey our welcome to Sir Claude
Corea.

59. Je suis particulil:lrement heureux de souhaiter la
bienvenue au representant de Ceylan. C 'est la premi~re
fois que Ceylan occupe au Consell le si~ge habituellement reserv~ h unmembre du Commonwealth. J e
safs qu'll s'acquittera fidMement de ses responsabilitlls, conformement aux traditions pacifiques qui sont
celles de tous les membres du Commonwealth.
Jlesp~re que M. Wijegoonawardena, que je suts heureux
de voir parroi nous aujourd'hui, voudra bien transmettre nos vreux de bienvenue 11. sir Claude Corea.

60. The United Kingdom is watching with sympathy the
emergence of new independent States in Africa. Indeed,
we have done more than watch; we have worked and
are working actively in the territories for which we
are responsible to further the political and economic
advancement of the peoples of Africa. The experience
we have gained of the problems which this development
involves enables us to appreciate the progress made
by our friends who have similar responsibility in other
territories. We welcome and support today the draft
resolutJon sponsored by France and Tunisia, which
invites the Security Council to recommend the admission of the independent State of Cameroun as a
Member of the United Nations.

60. Le Royaume-Uni observe avecsympathielanaissance de nouveaux Etats independants en Afrique.
D'ailleurs, nous ne nous sommes pas contentes d'observer ces llvllnements; nous avons activement travallle et nous travaillons toujours, dans les territoires
que nous administrons, 11. favoriser le progres politique
et economique des peuples d'Afrique. L'experience
que nous avons acquise des probl~mes que pose cette
evolution nous permet d'apprecier d'autant mieux les
progr~s realises par nos amis qui ont des responsabilites semblables dans d'autres territoires. Nous
appuyons sans reserve le projet de resolutionpresent€l
par la France et la Tunisietendant1l.ce que le Consell
de securite recommande 1'admission de 1'Etat independant du Cameroun 11. 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

61. The application for membership sent by the
Prime Minister of Cameroun to the Secretary-General
on 13 January 1960 is a milestone in the history of the
United Nations, for it is the first application for
membership received from a former Trust Territory.
It is true, I should add in parenthesis, that the people
of British Togoland, formerly under Trusteeship,
have also gained their independence, but they have
done so by inclusion in the independent State of Ghana.

61. La demande d'admission adresseepar le Premier
Ministre du Cameroun au Secr€ltaire g€lneral, le
13 janvier 1960, marque une date historique pour les
Nations Unies, car crest la premi~re fois qu'une demande d'admission emane d'un ancien territoire sous
tutelle. nest vrai que le peuple du Togo britannique,
autrefois place sous tutelle, a egalement acquis son
independance, mais il l'a fait par accession 11. l'Etat
independant du Ghana.

62. We have foll~'",edwithcloseattentiontheprogress
of the former F'rench Cameroun through the final
stages of trusteeship to independence. The path has not
always been smooth, but we in the United Kingdom
have been impressed by the spirit in which the leaders
and the peoples of Cameroun have faced their problems,
and we are confident that they will continue to conduct
their affairs with statesmanship and in so doing they
will enjoy the support of the international community.
The presence of a delegation from the United Kingdom,
headed by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. John Profumo, at the recent independence celebrations at Yaounde, was a symbol of the interest
taken by my Government in the future of the new
Republic.

62. Nous avons suivi de pr~s 1'€lvolution de 1'ancien
Cameroun franC;ais alors qu'il etait sur le point de
passer de la tutelle 11. 1'independance. La route n 'a pas
toujours €Ite facile, mais nous avons ete impressionnes,
au Royaume-Uni, par 1'esprit dans lequelles dirigeants
et les peuples du Cameroun ont su faire face 1I.leurs
probl~mes et nous sommes persuades qu'ils continueront de faire preuve de sens politique dans la gestion
de leurs affaires et qu'ils beneficieront tinsi de
1'appui de la communaute intern~tionale. La presence
d'une delegation britannique, ayant 11. sa tete le
Ministre d'Etat pour les affaires €Itrang~res, M. John
Profumo, aux ceremonies d'independance qui ont eu
lieu recE;mment 11. Yaounde est un symbole de 1'inter8t
que porte mon gouvernement 11. 1'avenir de la nouvelle

pecially to the devoti
the Cameroun.
64. We should also
of the Trusteeship C
and of the visiting
responsibility of the l
progress of this form
65. The application
membership of the
several which we ex
African countries dur
countrJ.es towards ind
ship of the United
the growing desire 0
their full part in th
of the understanding
desire has been met i
have been and still ar
the African continen
supports the applicati
of the United Nutions
for its future prosper
66. Mr. WIJEGOONA
it a welcome coinci
participation in the d
my country should b
the admission to the
had obtained its fre
country became a me
67. Af3 it has been s
Ceyloll supports the a
to the United Nations
pendence of this Te
the Fourth Committee
Corea, the Chairman
the position of the G<
"We look forward
Camerounian nation
year as a fully indE
of the United Nation.
We see today the firs
the fulfilment of that
68. Hence, by an int
first vote that Ceylon
in favour of the reco
the General Assembl
independent State to

69. Mr. CORREA (
nish) : The Ecuadori
for satisfaction in p
Cameroun IS applicatio
Nations. On the one
entry of Cameroun in
as a new independent
the other hand, this
a process whereby t
with the Camerounian
towards independence
objectives of the T

repub1iqu~.

63. nest heureux que le projet de resolution recommandant 1'admission du Cameroun ait ete presentll par
la France et la Tunisie. En tant que representant de
1'Afrique au Conseil, il est juste que la Tunisie soit
parmi les premiers 11. exprimer ce qui est, j'en suis
certain, notre sentiment unanime de satisfaction. Nous
tous, 11. 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies, sommes
reconnaissants 11. la France de la fac;on dont elle s'est
acquittee de ses responsabilites 11. l'egard de notre
organisation et du peuple camerounais. Le fait que
ce peuple soit maintenant prElt 11. prendre place au Bein
de la communaute des nations est dO. daDs une large
mesure aux ressources intellectuelles et materielles

63. It is a happy circumstance that the draft resolution
recommending the admission of Cameroun should
qta,ld in the names of France and Tunisia. As the
representative of Africa on the Council, it is fitting
that Tunisia should be among the first to express what
I believe is our unanimous feeling of satisfaction on
this occasion. To France, all of us in the United Nations
owe a debt for the manner in which it has carried out
its responsibilities to this Organization and to the
people of Cameroun. That this people is now prepared
to take its place in the community of nations is to
an important extent a tribute to the intellectual and
material resources contributed by France, and es-

Y This statement was m
Committee. the official reco
form. See Official Records of
Fourth Committee, 867th mee

10
I'
bJ

pecially to the devotion of French administrators in
the Cameroun.

offertes par la France, et surtout au d~vouement des
administrateurs franQais au Cameroun.

64. We should also at this time remember the work
of the Trusteeship Council, of the General Assembly
and of the visiting missions, ID. discharging the
responsibility of the United Nations for the welfare and
progress of this former Trust Territory.

64. Nous devons nous rappeler aussi le travail accompli par le Consen de tutelle.l' Assembl~eg~n~rale
et les missions de visite, qui se sont acquittlls des
responsabilitlls de 1'Organisation en ce qui concerne
le bien-~tre et le progr~s de cet ancien territoire
sous tuteUe.

65. The application of the State of Cameroun for
membership of the United Nations is the first of
several which we expect and hope to receive from
African countries during 1960. The movement of these
countrIes towards independence and towards membership of the United Nations is the outcome both of
the growing desire of the peoples of Africa to play
their full part in the affai:rs of the world and alBo
of the understanding and co-operation with which this
desire has been met in coUntries whose Governments
have been and still are responsible for large areas of
the African continent. The United Kingdom warmly
supports the application of Cameroun for membership
of the United Nutions, and we extend our best wishes
for its future prosperity and well-being.

65. La demande d'admission de 1'Etat du Cameroun
est la premi~re de plusieurs demandes que nous
attendons et que nous espllrons recevoir de pays
d'Afrique en 1960. L'accession de ces pays ~ l'independance et leur admission ~ 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies tllmoigneront du dllsir croissant des
peuples d'Afrique de participer pleinement aux affaires
mondiales, et aussi de la compr~hension et de la
cooperation qu'ont manifestlles ~ cet ~gard les pays
dont les gouvernements ont administr~et administrent
toujours de vastes r~gions du continent africain. Le
Royaume-Uni appuie chaleureusement la demande
d'admission du Cameroun ~l'OrganisationdesNations
Unies et nous exprimons ~ cet Etat nos meilleurs vreux
de prospllritll et de bien-~tre.

66. Mr. WIJEGOONAWARDENA {Ceylon): I consider
it a welcome coincidence that the first instance of
participation in the deliberations of tIrls Council by
my country should be associated with the subject of
the admission to the United Nations of a country that
had obtained its freedom on the very day that my
country became a member of this Council.

66, M. WIJEGOONAWARDENA (Ceylan) [traduit de
l'anglais] : Crest, me semble-t-il, une heureuse
coihcidence que, la premi~re fois que mon pays sillge
au Conseil de securitll, celui-ci traite de 1'admission
~ l'Organisation des Nations Unies d'un pays qui a
obtenu sa linerte le jour meme OU Ceylan devenait
membre de ce Conseil.

67. ,A l3 it has been stated already, the Government of
Ceyloll supports the admission of the State of Cameroun
to the United Nations. When the subject of the independence of this Territory was being discussed in
the Fourth Committee in March of last year, Sir Claude
Corea, the Chairman of the Ceylon delegation, stated
the position of the Government of Ceylon as follows:

67. Comme il a dej~ ete dit, le Gouvernement
ceylanais appuie 1'admission de l'Etat du Cameroun
~ 1'Organisation. Lorsque la question de 1'independance
de ce territoire a etll discutee ~ la Quatri~me Commission. en mars dernier, sir Claude Corea, chef de
la delllgation de Ceylan. a expose la position de notre
gouvernement en ces termes:

"We look forward with pleasure and pride to the
Camerounian nation taking its rightful place next
year as a fully independent and sovereign Member
of the United Nations." Y

-Nous attendons avec plaisir et fierte le moment
o~ la nation camerounaise prendra sa place legitime

71.
meet
Chart
Natio
resol
Tunis
of Ca

73.
applic
State
Afric
have
to ac
intern
Natio

de Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
pleinement independant et souverain Y. n

the fulfilment of that hope and we welcome it.

Sous nos yeux aujourd'hui cet espoir commence ~ se
realiser et nous nous en felicitons.

68. Hence, by an interesting sequence of events, the
first vote that Ceylon will cast in this Council will be
in favour of the recommendation by this Council to
the General Assembly of the admission of this r.ewly
independent State to the United Nations.

68. Alnsi, gr~ce ~ un heureux enchafuementd'ev€mements, le premier vote que Ceylan emettra au Consen
sera en faveur de la recommandation tendant ~ ce que
I' Assemblee generale admette ce nouvel Etat independant rt 1'Organisation.

69. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from Spanish) : The Ecuadorian delegation has a double reason
for satisfaction in participating in the consideration of
Cameroun's application for membership in the United
Nations. On the one hand, we warmly welcome the
entry of Cameroun into the international community
as a new independent State of the African Continent. On
the other hand, this entry marks the culmination of
a process whereby the United Nations has shared,
with the Camerounian people, in the efforts directed
towards independence In accordance with the basic
objectives of the Trusteeship System under which

69. M. CORREA (Equateur) [traduit de 1'espagnol] ;
La delegation de I 'Equateur est heureuse. pour deux

We see today the first step that is being taken toward

raisons, de participer ~ l'examen de la demande
d'admission du Cameroun comme Membre de I 'Organisation des Nations Unies. D'une part, nous eprouvons
une vive satisfaction ~ l'idee que le Cameroun va faire
partie de la communaute internationale en tant que
nouveau pays independant du continent africain. D'autre
part, cette admission dans la commaunaute internationale est l'aboutissement des efforts que les Nations
Unies ont deployes conjointement avec le peuple
camerounais, en vue de l'accession du Cameroun ~

Y Declaration fa ire 11 la 867eme seance de la Quatri~me Commission.
dont les comptes rendus ne sont publies que sous forme analytique. Voir
Documents officiels de l' Assemblee genera1e. treizi~me session, Quatri~me Commission, 867eme seance, par. 31.

Y This statement was made at the 867th meeting of the Fourth
Committee, the official record of which is published only in summary
form. See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session,
Fourth Committee, 867th meeting, para. 31.
11

76. M
to ass
congra
Ceylon
in our

Cameroun has been administered for the past fourteen
years.

I 'independance. compte tenu des fin essentielles du
regime de tutelle ccnformement auquelle Cameroun
a 6t6 adminlstre au cours des 14 derni~res annees.

70. The General Assembly, the Trusteeship Council
and the Members of the United Nations have witnessed
the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the Camerounian people and its progressive development towards self-government and independence. The United Nations, by the means opento it
for the fulfilment of its responsibilities in respect of
Trust Territories, has contributed to that people's
advancement and progress.

70. L'Assemblee g{merale des Nations Unies. le
Conseil de tutelle et les Membres de l'Organisation
ont assiste au developpement du Cameroun dans les
domaines politique et social et dans celui de I 'enseignement et ~ ses progrtls vers I 'autonomie et l'ind€!pendance. Par les moyens dont elle dispose pour
s'acquitter de ses responsabilites ~ I 'egard des territoires sous tutelle. I 'Organisation a contribue au
developpement et au progrtls du Cameroun.

71. Now that Cameroun, as an independent State,
meets the requirements laid down in Article 4 of the
Charter for admission to membership in the United
Nations, my delegation strongly supports the draft
resolution submitted by the delegations of France and
Tunisia, which recommends the admission of the State
of Cameroun to the United Nations.

71. Maintenant que le Cameroun, en tant qu'Etat
independant, remplit les conditions requises ~
l'Article 4 de la Charte pour etre admis ~ l'Organisation des Nations Unies. la delegation de I 'Equateur
appuie chaleureusement le projet de resolution prasente par les delegations de la France et de la Tunisie
et tendant ~ recommander ~ I 'Assemblee generale
d'admettre I 'Etat du Cameroun comme Membre de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

72. We are glad that this draft resolution has been
submitted by France since it represents to some extent
the culmination of the work of that country as
Administering Authority for Cameroun on behalf of the
international community. As representative of a State
Member of the United Nations, Ishouldliketo express
thanks and congratulations to France for its most
valuable contribution to the achievement, in Cameroun,
of the basic objectives of the Trusteeship System.

72. Nous sommes heureux de constater que ce projet
de resolution a ete presente par la France car c'est
l~, en quelque sorte, le couronnement de son oouvre
en tant que puissance chargee de 1'administration
du Cameroun au nom de le. communaute internationale.
Representant d'un Etat Membre de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies. je tiens ~ remercier et ~ feliciter
la France d'avoir contribue, dans une trtls large
mesure, il. realiser au Cameroun les fins essentielles
du regime de tutelle.

73. We are sure that when, after approval of" its
application by the Council and the Assembly, this new
State joins the United Nations, it will, like the other
African countries whose acc\3ssion to independence we
have witnessed, make its due contribution to the effort
to achieve international peace and security, and
international co-operation in other fields of United
Nations action.

73. Nous sommes persuades que lorsque la demande
d'admission du Cameroun aura l'§te approuvee par le
Conseil et l'Assemblee et que, de ce fait. le Cameroun
deviendra Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations. ce
nouvel Etat saura. comme les autres territoires
africains dont nouS suivons I 'evoiution vers 1'independance, participer comme il le doit aux efforts
accomplis. au sein de 1'Organisation. pour la paix et
la securite du monde et ~ la cooperation international ~s
clans d'autres domaines d'activites.

74. In supporting Cameroun's application for admission, I should like, on behalf of the Ecuadorian
people, to extend the handoffriendshiptothe people of
Cameroun and to express the fervent hope that, in the
stimulating atmosphere of independence and with the
support of an international warId based on the Purposes
and Principles of the United NatioIlB, the Cameroum.an
people will advance towards the fulfilment of its
historic destiny and towards high levels of social
progress and general living, within. an extensive
framework of freedom.

74. En appuyantla demande d'admission du Cameroun,
je tiens ~ offrir au peuple camerounais I 'amitie du
peuple equatorien et ~ formuler en son nom les vooux
les plus sinc~res pour que. dans le clima~ stimulant
que cr6e l'indl'§pendance et au sein d'une communautl'§
internationale s'inspirant des buts et principes de la
Charte des Nations Unies. le peuple camerounais
s 'achemine vers 1'accomplissement de son destin
historique et vers un haut degre de progr~s social et
des conditions de vie meilleures dans une liberte plus
grande.

75. May I in conclusion state our view that, in recommending the admission of Cameroun, the Council
will be taking a further step towards making the
United Nations universal. Each step in that direction
brings, we think, an addition of strength which in the
long run must benefit every Momber of the Organization.This is one reason more for supporting enthusiastically Cameroun's application for membership.

75. Qu'il me soit permis d'affirmer enfin qu'~ notre
avis, en recommmdant I 'admission du Cameroun,
le Conseil fait un pas de plus dans la voie de 1'universalite de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies; selon nous,
chaque pas dans cette voie se traduit par un nouvel
apport de force qui, ~ la longue, sera utile ~ tous les
Membres de I 'Organisation. C'est une raison de plus
pour appuyer avec enthousiasme la demande d'admission du Cameroun.

76. Mr. ORTONA (Italy)~ Permit me, first of all,
to associate myself with the words of welcome and
congratulation addressed to the representatives of
Ceylon, Ecuador and Poland who will sit from now on
in our Council. With all three countries Italy has had

76. M. ORTONA (ItaIie) [traduit de 1'anglais] : Qu'll
me soit permis tout d'aborddem'associerauxparoles
de bienvenue et aux felicitations qui ont ete adressees
aux representants de Ceylan, de 1'Equateur et de la
Pologne, qui siegeront dor{mavant au Conseil. Avec

12

traditional ties
is gratified to
sentatives in 0
aided by their p
they will take p
77. May I als
delegation for
sentative of
Council, and b
and Panama w
with whom my
and constructiv
78. Turning n
say that it is
Government an
other represent
of the State of C
79. Cameroun'
only makes the
association of
new important
80. It is one of
of our time to
emerge as a n
stage, step by
strength to the
emergence of n

81. The achiev
has taken place
with the purpos
happened unde
Council, a fac
Organization in
national goals.
change can be
concerned. Pro
dom through or
a nation able t
national comm
that the entry
membership of
happy beginning
life for its peopl
82. The United
foster, both in
economic fields
nations and the
orderly conduct
of these goals,
it a happy even
the dawn of a b
independence an
almost at the s
83. Neither c
congratulating F
enlightened poli
of Cameroun is
as a Member i
nation and of
defender of gre
and political wis
84. The partici
of the United

traditional ties of friendship, and the Italian delegation
is gratified to be able to work with their representatives in our Council, which will be very much
aided by their presence and by the wisdom with which
they will take part in our deliberations.

ces trois pays 1'Italie entretient des relations traditionnelles d'amitie, et la dlHegation italienne est
heureuse de pouvoir siegeI' aux cotes de leurs representants dont la pr~sence et la sagesse faciliteront
beaucoup nos travaux.

77. May I also express the great appreciation of my
delegation for the "'ork accomplished by the representative of Tunisia as last month's President of the
Council, and by the representatives of Canada, Japan
and Panama who have left the Security Council and
with whom my delegation has enjoyed the most pleasant
and constructive relationship.
78. Turning now to the item on our agenda, let me
say that it is a matter of real gratification to Italy's
Government and to the Italian people to join with the
other representatives in recommending the admission
of the State of Cameroun into our Organization.

77. Je voudrais dire aussi combien ma delegation
est sensible ~ 1'ceuvre accomplie par le representant
de la Tunisie en sa qualite de president du Conseil
le mois dernier, ainsi que par les representants du
Canada, du Japon et du Panama, membres sortants,
avec lesquels ma delegation a entretenu des rapports
extremement agr~ables et fructueux.
78. Passant maintenant ll. la question inscrite ll.
notre ordre du jour, je dirai que c'est avec une
satisfaction reelle que le Gouvernement et le peuple
italiens se joignent aux autres membres du Conseil
pour recommander 1'admission de 1'Etat du Cameroun
ll. notre organisation.
79. L' admission du Cameroun, outre qu'elle vient
renforcer une association toujours plus nombreuse de
peuples libres, marque une date importante dans
1'histoire de 1'Mrique.
80. C 'est 1'un des phEmom~nes les plus marquants
et les plus encourageants de notre epoque que de voir
ce continent vaste et puissant devenir une force nouvelle et agissante dans le monde. Etape par etape, pas
ll. pas, les peuples d'Mrique consolident la communaute internationale au fur et ~ mesure q\l 'apparaissent de nouvelles entites nationales.
81. L'accession du Cameroun ~ l'independance s'est
fait grace ll. une evolution pacifique, en harmonie avec
les buts des ~\Tations Unies. Elle a eu lieu egalement
sous la conduite du Conseil de tutelle, ce qui souligne
le role de notre organisation, qui aide les jeunes
nations ~ atteindre leurs objectifs nationaux. L 'evolution est la loi de 1'histoire, mais il n'est pas de
changement durable sans le consentement des interesses. Progr~s par 1'evolutionpacifique,liberte dans
1'ordre: tels sont les principes essentiels qui permettent ll. une nation d'apporter sa contribution ll. la
commm:Rute internationale, et nous sommes sinc~re­
ment convaincus que 1'admission du jeune Etat du
Cameroun ~ 1'Organisation des Nations Unies marquera le debut heureux d'une vie nationale nouvelle et
prosp~re pour son peuple.
82. Les Nations Unies ont beaucoup fait pour souligner, h la fois dans 1'opinion publique et sur les
plans juridique et economique, le besoin d'independance pour toutes les nations et 1'importance de
1'interdependance pour la bonne marche des affaires
internationales. Dans le cadre de ces objectifs, comment les Nations Unies ne se rejouiraient-elles pas
que la Republique du Cameroun soit h l'aurore d'un
grand jour de son histoire en accedant hI 'independance
et en devenant presque en meme temps Membre de
J 'Organisation.
LAce propos, nous ne pouvons manquer de feliciter
chaleureusement la France pour son noble comportement et pour la politique eclairee qu'elle a suivie h
1'egard du Cameroun. Que 1'Etat du Cameroun soit h
meme, aujourd'hui, de devenir Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies est h la fois la preuve de sa
maturite en tant que nation et du role que la France
a joue pour garder et defendre de grandes traditions
faites de liberalisme et de sagesse politique.

79. Cameroun's membership in the United Nations not
only makes the Organization an ever-growing world
association of free peoples, but it also sanctions a
new important development in the history of Mrica.
80. It is one ofthe foremost and heartening pheno' "'n.C
of our time to see this vast and powerful contin"nt
emerge as a new active force in the world. Stage by
stage, step by step, the people of Mrica are adding
strength to the international community through the
emergence of new national entities.
81. The achievement of independence for Cameroun
has taken place through peaceful evolution in harmony
with the purposes of the United Nations. This has also
happened under the guidance of the Trusteeship
Council, a fact that emphasizes the role of our
Organization in helping young nations to attain their
national goals. Change is the law of history, but no
change can be lasting without the consent of those
concerned. Progress through peaceful evoluticTI, freedom through order, are the main principles whi(;h make
a nation able to bring its contribution to the international community, and it is our sin<:ere conviction
that the entry of the young State of Cameroun into
membership of the United Nations will mark the
happy beginning of a new and prosperous national
life for its people.
82. The United Nations has done a great deal to
foster, both in public opinion and in the legal and
economic fields, the need of independence for all
nations and the importance of interdependence in the
orderly conduct of foreign affairs. In the framework
of these goals, the United Natiom: cannot but consider
it a happy event that the Republic of Cameroun sees
the dawn of a bright day in its history by acceding to
independence and to membership in the United Nations
almost at the same time.
83. Neither can we rejoice without very warmly
congratulating France on its noble behaviour and its
enlightened policy towards Cameroun. That the State
of Cameroun is able today to enter the United Nations
as a Member is both the proof of its maturity as a
nation and of France's role as the guardian and
defender of great traditions in the field of progress
and political wisdom.
84. The participation of Cameroun in the activities
of the United Nations will make it easier, we are

84. En participant aux activites des Nations Unies,
le Cameroun, nous en sommes persuades, saura mieux

13

rllsoudre les probl~mes qui se posent h lui. De meme
qu'une mer agitlle est la meilleure llpreuve pour un
bon navire, de m~me une p6riode difficile constitue
la meilleure pierre de touche de la vitalite et de la
santll d'une nation et de sa capacite h accomplir des

sure, for this nation to solve the problems with which
it is confronted. As a rough sea is the best test of
a good ship, so are occasional difficulties the touchstone of vitality, of health and ofthe ability of a nation
to strive forward.

progr~s.

85. May I say again, in this context, that the ideals of
the United Nations are not only made up of rights and
of duties; they entrust to the community of free
peoples the task of helping the new and less developed
members, of assisting them on the pat.h towards a
larger share of the world's wealth, in order to
increase the standards of life for all and to help
realize the hopes of mankind for a better tomorrow.
It is with these feelings that we are happy to welcome
the State of Cameroun into the United Nations.

85. A cet egard, qu'll me soit permis de repeter que
les ideaux des Nations Unies ne sont pas faits
seulement de droits et de devoirs; lls confient h la
communaute des peuples libres la t§che d'aider les
nouvea1.Ul: Membres peu developpes, de les assister
dans leurs efforts, pour leur permettre d'acceder h
une plus grande part des richesses du monde, en vue
d'elever le niveau de vie de tous et de contribuer a. la
realisation des espoirs de I 'humanite en des lendemains meilleurs. C 'est dans cet esprit que nous
sommes heureux de souhaiter la bienvenue au
Cameroun au sein des Nations Unies.

86. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): Less
than a month ago I had the honour of visiting Cameroun
as President Eisenhower's representative to the
ceremonies marking the independence of this new
State. I visited the capital, Yaound~, and also the principal port city of Douala. It was a memorable experience to see the many achievements of Cameroun
under French trusteeship and to meet the able men
who have been duly chosen to lead them in independence. France is clearly entitled to congratulations
for all that she has done, and in Cameroun one is
struck by the rest. rvoir of human and material resources the countr:r possesses. This is matched by
a sense of vitality and purpose. It was also gratifying
to see the signs of friendship for the United States
and the interest in the work of the United Nations.

86. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglais] : J'ai eu l'honneur, II y a un mois h peine,
de me rendre au Cameroun en qualitli de representant
du prlisident Eisenhower pour assister aux ceremonies
qui ont marque 1'independance de ce nouvel Etat. J'ai
visite la capitale, Yaounde, ainsi que le grand port de
Douala. Ce fut pour moi une experience memorable de
voir tout ce qui alltefaitauCameroun sous l'administration fran9aise et de rencontrer les hommes de
tal'.3nt choisis pour conduire le pays h l'independance.
La France a manifestement dr oit h nos felicitations
pour l'oouvre qu'elle a accomplie. Au Cameroun, on
est frappe par fes ressources materielles et humaines
du pays, qui vont de pair avec la vitalite et la resolution. En outre, j'ai etll heureux de noter des marques
d'amitie h l'ligard des Etats-Unis et un vif inter~t
pour les activites de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

87. The State of Cameroun has the distinction of
being the first of a number of African nations to
achieve independence in 1960, a year which will
certainly go down in history for the unprecedented
number of States which will achieve independence
through peaceful negotiations and in many cases
through the working of the United Nations Trusteeship
System.
88. We have before us the letter r~/4256] which
Prime Minister Ahidjo has written to ..ue SecretaryGeneral and which contains a solemn undertaking to
comply with the obligations of the Charter. The United
States gives great weight to these assurances. We will
be glad to cast our vote in favour of the draft resolution
introduced by the representatives of France and
Tunisia, recommending the admission of Cameroun to
membership in the United Nations.

87. Le Cameroun presente cette particularite d'@tre
le premier des pays d'Afrique h acceder h l'independance en 1960, annee dont 1'histoire se souviendra
certainement comme de celle ou un nombre d'Etats
sans precedent auront obtenu l'independance h la
suite de negociations pl.'.cifiques et, dans bien des cas,
grace au regime de tutelle des Nations Unies.
88. Nous sommes saisis de la lettre [S/4256] adressee
au Secretaire general par M. Ahidjo, premier ministre
du Cameroun, qui declare que son pays s'engage
solennellement h se conformer aux obligations de la
Charte. Les Etats-Unis attachent une grande importance h cette assurance. Nous serons heureux de voter
pour le projet de resolution de la France et de la
Tunisie recommandant l'admission du Cameroun a.
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

89. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
next speaker on my list is Mr. Tsiang, on whom I
accordingly call.

89. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : L'orateur
suivant inscrit sur ma liste est M. Tsiang. Je lui
donne la parole.

90. Mr. TSIANG (China): I much regret that I have
to begin my remarks on this happy and harmonious
occasion with a protest. It is, I believe, the accepted
practice in all parliamentary bodies in the entir~
civilized world that a presiding officer should treat
all members of the body over which he presides with
equal impartiality and courtesy. In giving me the
floor, the President, instead of calling on the representative of China as he had called on the representatives of other countries, called me by my personal
name. This is discriminatory; it is discourteous, and,
furthermore, it is inaccurate because I speak not as

90. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de lranglais] :Je
regrette beaucoup de devoir en cette heureuse occasion, commencer par elever une protestation. nest
d'uilage, je crois, dans tous les organes parlementaires
du monde civilise que le president traite avec une impartialite et une courtoisie egales tous les membres de
l'assemblee qu'il preside. En me donnant la parole,
le Pr6sident, au lieu de la donner au repr6sentant de
la Chine, mra appel~ par mon nom, contrairement a
ce qu'il avait fait pour les representants d'autres pays.
n s'agit la. d'une attitude discriminatoire, discourtoise
et, de plus, non fondee, car je ne prends pas la parole
14

an individ
to record
91. Now
agenda. C
of France
for memb
vote for
France an
92. We in
nationhood
event, as
by the pe
proud. It
the Minist
to join i
Cameroun
of rejoicin
draft resol
93. It is
pendence
which fai
given to i
draft resol
leaders of
result.

94. The
Before cal
to reject IV
In calling
showed hi
sideration.
that we ar
representa
question w
deal on the
95. Mr.
Spanish): I
word of fr
Canada, Ja
seats on thi
96. I shou
which we w
to our com

97. As th
country, I
of welcome
dor. My d
during this
America in
to the Coun
countries,
the countrie

98. The A
itself with
approving
Camerouni
be admitted
will vote fo
representati
action is pr

99. Argen'
and in the f

le

11l

an individual but as a representative of China. I wish
to record this protest.

en mon nom personnel, mais en ma qualit~ de repr~­
sentant de la Chine. J e desire que cette protestation
soit enragistree au proc~s-verba1.

91. Now let me come to the matter on today's
agenda. China welcomes the initiative of the delegation
of France in this matter of the application of Cameroun
for membership in the United Nations. I shall gladly
vote for the draft resolution jointly sponsored by
France and Tunisia.

91. J'en viens maintenant au point inscrit 1l. notre
ordre du jour. La Chine se feUcite de 1'initiative prise
par la delegation frane:taise de recommander 1'admission du Cameroun 11. 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Je voterai avec plaisir pour le projet de resolution commun de la France et de la Tunisie.

92. We in China regard the attainment of independent
nationhood by the people of Cameroun as an important
event, as well as a happy event. It is an achievement
by the people of Cameroun of which they can well be
proud. It was for this reason that my Government sent
the Minister of Economic Affairs, Mr. Chi-tsengYang,
to join in the celebrations of independence in
Cameroun less than a month ago, anditis in this spirit
of rejoicing that my delegation today will vote for this
draft resolution.

En Chine. nouS considerons l'a,ccession du peuple
camerounais 11 1'in~pendance comme un ~v~nement
important et heureux. Le peuple camerounais peut
etre fier de cette realisation. C 'est la raison pour
laquelle mon gouvernement a delegue son Ministre des
. affaires ~conomiques, M. Chi-tseng Yang, pour assister aux ceremonies qui se sont deroulees 11 y a moins
d'un mois au Cameroun en 1'honneur de 1'independance
du pays. et c'est dans cet esprit que ma delllgation
votera pour le projet de resolution commun.

93. It is only fair to add that the attainment of independence by Cameroun is a great credit to France,
which faithfully and fruitfully fulfilled the trusteeship
given to it by the United Nations. In voting for the
draft resolution, I wish to congratulate the people and
leaders of both Cameroun and France for this happy
result.

n n 'est que juste d'ajouter que 1'accession du
Cameroun A 1'independance doit etre portae au credit
de la France. qui s'est acquitte 10yalement et avec
succ~s des charges de la tutelle que lui avait confiees
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. En votant pour le
projet de resolution, je tiens 1l. feliciter les peuples et
les dirigeants du Cameroun et de la France pour cet
heureux resultat.

94. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
Before calling upon the next speaker, I am compelled
to reject Mr. Tsiang's protest as utterly groundless.
In calling on him to speak in the Security Council, I
showed him all the necessary courtesy and consideration. At the same time it is my understanding
that we are not, today, discussing the question of the
representation of China in the United Nations. If that
question were to arise I could, of course, say a great
deal on the subject.

94. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Avant de
donner la parole 1l. 1'orateur sulvant,. je me vois oblige
de rejeter la protestation de M. Tsiang, qui est enti~rement denuee de fondement. En lui donnant la
parole au Conseil de securite, je lu! ai manifeste toute
la courtoisie et toute 1'attention necessaires. En outre.
je ne crois pas que noUB examinions aujourd'hui la
question de la representation de la Chine A 1'Organisation des Nations Un.ies. Si cette question etait soulevee. j 'aurais evidemment beaucoup 1l. dire 1l. ce sujet.

95. Mr. AMADEO (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): I wish, like other speakers, to address a
word of friendly farewell to the representatives of
Canada, Japan and Panama, who have vacated their
seats on this Council.

95. M. AMADEO (Argentine) [traduit de 1'espagnol] :
Comme les autres representants. je voudrais exprimer
ma sympathie 1l. 1'egard des representants du Canada, .
du Japon et du Panama dont le mandat est venu 1l.
expiration.

96. I should also like to express the pleasure with
which we welcome the delegations ofCeylon and Poland
to our company.

96. Je voudrais dire egalement lasatisfactionquema
d€llegation €lprouve 1l. accueillir parroi nous les delegations de Ceylan et de la Pologne.

97. As the representative of a Latin American
country, I ask permission to address a special word
of welcome to Mr. Correa, the representative of Ecuador. My delegation is happy to shoulder with him,
during this year 1960, the task of representing Latin
America in the Security Council and communicating
to the Council, not only the message of our own two
countries, but also the aspirations and feelings of all
the countries sharing with them a common origin.

97. En qualite de representant d'un pays d'Amerique
latine, je voudrais souhaiter tout particuli~rementla
bienvenue 1l. M. Correa, representant de 1'Equateur.
Je serai heureux de representer avec lul. au cours de
l'ann~e 1960, l' Amerique latine au Conseil de securit~;
je serai heureux €lgalement non seulement que nous
soyons les porte-parole de nos pays respectifs. mais
aussi que nous fassions connaftre les aspirations et
l~s sentiments de peuples qui onto avec les notres. des
origines communes.

98. The Argentine delegation wishes to associate
itself with those who have just spoken in favour of
approving the request, made by the Head of the
Camerounian Government, that the State of Cameroun
be admitted to membership in the United Nations; it
will vote for the draft resolution, submitted by the
representatives of France and Tunisia, in which that
action is proposed.

98. La delegation argentine souhaite s 'associer aux
declarations qui ont et€l faites enfaveur de la demande
d'admission du Cameroun comme Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies presentee par le chef du
Gouvernement camerounais; elIe votera pour leprojet
de resolution redige en ce sens par les representants
de la France et de la Tunisie.

99. Argentina, which has always advocated both here
and in the former League of Nations that the inter-

99. L'Argentine. qui s'est toujours prononcee ici,
comme 1l. la Societ€l des Nations, enfaveur du principe

ie

a

es

ie

ts
la

es

Elr

1l.

le

la

El-

lS
iU

:le
e,
nt

ai

le
le

le
e.

IS

III

IS
LIS

~t

"'e
l-

'a
;s

a
I,

e
e

e
a
r

a
1l.

r
.i

92.

93.

El

t

s
e

e
i

e

15

.-

.

national Organization should be universal in character,
welcomes most warmly the admission of new States
into the United Nations. In the present case our
gratification is, if anything, greater in that the
country concerned is at the same time beginning its
existence as an independent State. Moreover, Cameroun's admission to membership represents the final
stage in a process which has been taking place under
the authority and auspices of the Organization. We
therefore have special grounds for congratulating
ourselves on the successful completion of that process.

de 1'universalite, accueille avec une vive satisfaction
1'admission de nouveaux Etats 11 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies. En 1'occurrence, la satisfaction qu 'elle
eprouve est meme encore plus grande, car il s'agit
d'un pays qui, en meme temps, entre dans sa vie d'Etat
independant. D'autre part, 1'admission du Cameroun 11
l'Organisation des Nations Unies represente 1'aboutissement d'un processus qui s 'est deroule sous 1'autorite etles auspices de 1'Organisation. C 'estpourquoi,
nous devons nous feliciter tout particuli~rementque ce
processus ait ete mene 11 bonne fin.

100. We should also offer very special congratulations
to France, not only on its work as Administering
Authority, but also on the important part which it has
played in this final, welcome development. Nothing
could give us greater pleasure than to record, and
publicly to recognize, the decisive contribution which
France has thus made to the extension of the principle
of self-determination throughout the world and particularly in the African Continent.

100. Nous tenons egalement 11 adresser nos felicitations tout particuli~rement11 la France. non seulement
pour l'oouvre qu'elle a accomplie en tant qu'Autorite
administrante. mais egalement pour la mani~re dont
elle a contribue 11 cet heul'eux €lvenement. Rien ne
saurait nous etre plus agreable que de constater
publiquement ici le r61e determinant que la France a
jou€l pour etendre le champ d'application du principe
de 1'autodetermination dans le monde et. en particulier,
sur le continent africain.

101. Like any free nation which, emerging from
guardianship, is starting to work out its own destiny,
Cameroun will doubtless meet with difficulties and
problems. Those difficulties and problems should
not, however, cause us to regret the step we are about
to take-for absolute independence represents the
best, if not the only, guarantee that the solutions found
will be in accordance with the new State's national
interests,

101. Comme toute nation emancipee qui commence 11
accomplir seule son destin, le Cameroun se heurtera.
sans nul doute, 11 des difficultes et devra regler bien
des probl~mes. Mais ces difficultes et ces probl~mes
ne doivent pas nous faire regretter la decision que nous
anons prendre. En effet, 1'independance absolue represente la meilleure garantie, sinon la seule, que les
solutions recherchees serviront les inter~ts nationaux
du nouvel Etat.

102. It only remains for us to wish the Camerounian
people prosperity and happiness in its new life as a
sovereign nation, and to look forward to an effective
contribution from it, as a Member of the United
Nations, in the service of peace.

102. n ne nous reste plus, pour terminer. quIll souhaiter au Cameroun une vie heureuse et prosp~re en
taut qu'Etat souverain et 11 exprimer l'espoir qu'en
tant que Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
il accomplira une reuvre constructive au service de la
paix.

103. Mr. MICHALOWSKI (Poland) : I feel extremely
pleased that the first occasion on which I, as the
representative of Poland, am taking the floor in this
Council is with regard to the admission of a new
Member and the recognition of the sovereignty and
independence of a country which has just emerged
from trusteeship, This is an occurrence to. which we
attach the greatest importance.

103. M. MICHALOWSKI (Pologne) [trad..I it de 1'anglais] : Prenant la parole pour la premi~re fois au
Conseil, en tant que representant de la Pologne, je me
felicite que ce soit 11 1'occasion de 1'admission d'un
I. mveau Membre, alors que nous reconnaissons la
souverainete et 1'independance d'un pays qui etait
place tout recemment encore sous le regime de tutelle.
C 'est un evenement auquel nous attachons beaucoup
d'importance.

104. The emergence of new, formerly dependent
nations and the simultaneous disintegration of the
colonial system happens to be one of the most fu..'1damental political phenomena of our times. This process
takes an uneven course, struggling with both political
and economic difficulties and overcoming obstacles and
hindrances which are very often being thrown across
its way by interested colonial Powers. We witnessed it
in Asia not so long ago, and now it is Africa which has
become the territory where the principles of selfdetermination and of political rights are being realized
by whole nations which for centuries have been
dependent. Within the last four years, six new independent States h'lve thus emerged in Africa. Cameroun
is the seventh.

104. La naissance de nations nouvelles. anciennement
dependantes, et la desintegration concomitante du syst~me colonial se trouvent etre 1'un des principaux
phenom~nes politiques de notre epoque. Ce processus
suit un cours malaise se heurtant 11 des difficultes politiques et economiques et devant surmonter divers
obstacles qui. bien souvent, sont jetes en travers du
chemin par les puissances coloniales interessees.
Nous avons vu cela en Asie il n 'y a pas tr~s longtemps,
et c' est en Afrique maintenant que les principes d 'autodetermination et de droits politiques sont appliques
au b€mefice de pays dependants depuis des si~cles. Au
cours des quatre derni~res annees, six nouveaux Etats
independants sont ainsi apparus en Afrique. Le Cameroun est le septieme.

114.
Sovi
Cam
pros
of i

105. We Imow that before the end of the year a number
of other countries will gain independence. We believe
that others, which are still fighting for their rights,
will soon follow. We Imow well that thif' is a trend
which nothing can stop and that the principle of selfdetermination provided in our Charter will become a
reality in spite of obstacles and difficulties.

105. Nous savonsqu'avantlafindecetteanneeun certain nombre de pays accederont 111 'independance. Nous
croyons que d'autres, qui luttent encore pour faire
reconnaftre leurs droits. suivrontbient6t. Nous savons
fort bien qu'll s'agit III d'une tendance que rien ne
saurait arreter et que le principe du droit des peuples
1:1. disposer d'eux-memes, prevu par la Charte, devien-

115.
for
ship
that
acti
dam
Cha

108.
Gen
sent
PUB

109.
the
stub
nati
110.
C

112.
reco
save
mati
hope
deve
the i
of in

113.
pend
coun
and
prob

16
LJ

tisfaction
ation des
onqu'elle
~ il s'agit
Tie d'Etat
,merounfl
:e l'abouous l'aupourquoi,
entque ce

: felicita:eulement
:'Autorite
d.~re dont
, Rien ne
constater
France a
, principe
rticulier,

amence fl
b.eurtera,
gler bien
roblemes
.que nOlls
llerepre, que les
aationaux

=IU'fl soulSpere en
:>ir qu'en
ms Unies
vice dela
de l'ane fois au
ne,je me
sion d'un
:ssons la
qui etait
letutelle.
beaucoup
mnement
:edusys~incipaux

rocessus
ll1tes po'r divers
'avers du
ressees.
agtemps,
s d'autolppliques
~cles.Au
!LUX Etats
,eCame-

~un cerlce.Nous
IUr faire
lssavons
~ rien ne
: peuples
, devien-

dra realite en depit de tous les obstacles et de toutes
les difficultes.
106. These difficulties are often very considerable
and real. As an example, I should like to mention the
case which we are presently debating, the case of
Cameroun, in which the first period of independence
causes some anxiety. However, we consider it our
duty to help the new country in the first steps in its
development and to contribute to its growing strength.
We believe that Cameroun will overcome all initial
difficulties and will unite all its forces for the
development of independent statehood. The admission
of Cameroun to United Nations membership should
contribute to this end.

106. Ces difficultes sont souvent considerables et

tres reelles. Je mentionnerai fl titre d'exemple lecas
qui nOlls occupe en ce moment, celui du Cameroun,
dont les debuts en tant qu 'Etat independant suscitent
quelque inquietude. nest cependant de notre devoir
d'aider ce nouvel Etat sur la voie du developpement o~
il vient de s'engager, et de contribner fl accroftre sa
force. NOlle sommes convaincus que le Cameroun saura
surmonter toutes les difficultes initiales etunirtoutes
ses forces pour assurer son independance politique.
L' admission du Cameroun fll'Organisation des Nations
Unies devrait y contribner.

107. Therefore, the Polish delegation will support
the draft resolution on the admission of Cameroun and
extends to the new state its most sincere wishes for
success, prosperity and, above all, unity and strength.

107. La delegation polonaise appuiera done le projet

108. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
Gentlemen, permit me to say a few words, as representative of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, on the question before us.

108. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Permettez-

109. The Soviet delegation salutes and congratulates
the people of Cameroun who, as the result of a long and
stubborn struggle, have secured their country's
national independence.

109. La delegation sovietique salue et felicite le
peuple camerounais qui a obtenu, fl la suite d'une
lutte longue et opiniatre, l'independance nationale de
son pays.

110. The formation of the independent State of
Cameroun represents the passing of another milestone
on the road to complete liberation of the peoples of the
African continent from colonial domination.

110. La constitution d'un Etat camerounais indepen-

111. The Soviet Union has always stood, and continues
to stand, at the side of the peoples who are asserting
their imprescriptible right to self-determination and
independence. It views with profound understanding and
unfailing sympathy the struggle of the Africanpeoples
lO'gainst colonialism and in the cause of national freedom.

111. L'Union sovietique a toujours ete et reste
toujours aux ccStes des peuples qui defendent leur
droit imprescriptible fll' autodetermination et fll'independance. Elle suit avac une profonde comprehension
et une sympathie inalterable la lutte que m~nent les
peuples africains contre le colonialisme et pour la liberte nationale.
112. L 'Union sovietique a annonce solennellement
qu'elle reconnaissait le Cameroun en tant qu'Etat
independant et souverain et qu'elle etait prete ~ etablir
avec lui des relations diplomatiques. Le peuple sovietique exprime l'espoir que des relations amicales
s'instaureront et se renforceront entre l'Union sovietique et le Cameroun, dans l'inter8t des deux pays et
au nom du developpement de la cooperation internationale.

de resolution tendant fl l'admission du Cameroun et
elle adresse au nouvel Etat ses vceux les plus sinc~res
de succ~s, de prosperite et, par des sus tout, d'unite
et de force.
moi, en ma qualite de representant de 1'UNION DES
REPUBLIQUES SOCIALISTES SOVIETIQUES, de dire
quelques mots sur la question en discussion.

dant est un nouveau jalon dans la voie qui m~ne fl la
compl~te liberation des peuples du continent africain
de la domination coloniale.

112. The Soviet Union has solemnly proclaimed its
recognition of Cameroun as an independent and
sovereign State, and its readiness to establish diplomatic relations with it. The Soviet people expresses the
hope that friendly relations will be successfully
developed between the Soviet Union and Cameroun in
the interests of both countries and ofthe strengthening
of international co-operation.
113. The attainment by Cameroun of national independence creates favourable conditions for the
country's all-round political and economic progress,
and for the solution of t',le Camerounian people's
problems with full regard for its aims and aspirations.

113. L'accession du Cameroun ~ l'independance nationale cree des conditions favorables au progres dans
tous les domaines de la vie politique et economique du
pays comme au r~glement des probl~mes que connart
le peuple camerounais, compte dfunent tenu de ses
aspirations et de ses vceux.

114. The Soviet delegation, in common with the entire
Soviet people, sincerely wishes all success to the
Camerounian people in its efforts to achieve national
prosperity and to ensure the democratic development
of its independe,t State.

114. La delegation sovietique et le peuple sovietique
tout entier soubaitent sincerement que les efforts deployes par le peuple camerounais permettront d'assurer la prosp€lrite de la nation et le developpement
democratique de l'Etat independant camerounais.

115. The Soviet delegation supports the application
for the admission ofthe State of Cameroun to membership in the United Nations, and expresses the hope
that Cameroun',s participation in the Organization's
activities will help towards giving effect to the fundamental purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.

115. La delegation sovietique appuie la demande d'admission de l'Etat du Cameroun ~ l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et exprime l'::;spoir que la participation
du Cameroun aidera i 'Organisation fl mettre en ceuvre
les bnts et principes fondamentaux de la Charte.

17

116. The Soviet delegation will accordingly vote in
favour of the draft resolution su.bmitted by the
delegations of France and Tunisia concerning the
admission of Cameroun to membership in the United
Nations.

116. La d€ll€lgation sovilltique votera donc pour le
projet de rllsolution de la France et de la Tunisie recommandant I 'admission du Cameroun hl'Organisation.

117. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I shall put to
the vote the draft resolution submitted by France and
Tunisia [S/4258 and Add.1].

117. ParIant de nouveau en ma qualite de PR ESIDENT,
je vais mettre aux voix le projet de rllsolution present€l
par la France et la Tunisie [S/4258 etAdd. 1].
11 es t procede au vote a main levee.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Votent pour: Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur,
France, Italie, Pologne, Tunisie, Union des R6publiques socialistes sovilltiques , Royaume-Uni de
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis
d'Amllrique.

In favour: Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France, Italy, Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Votent contre: neant.

Against: None.

118. Le PRESID:'NT (traduit du russe) : Le projet
de resolution est adopte A 1'unanimite. Le rapport du
Conseil de securite sera presente en ce sens 11
I 'Assemblee generale.

118. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
draft resolution is adopted unanimously. The relevant
report will be submitted to the Gem~ral Assembly
by the Council.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h 15.

18
Litho in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

7295-November 1960-1,675

u
