NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

I

YEAR
th

MEETING: 5 AUGUST 1,968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1434) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President and expression of welcome to the
new representative of the United States of America . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of welcome to Mr, Kutakov, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Security Council Affairs . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . I . . . . , .
Adoption of the agenda . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . , . , . . I . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/861 6);
(bl Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/86 17);
fc) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8721);
(dl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8724). . , . . . . . . . . .

SlPV.1434

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of suqh a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resoltitions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 5 August 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Jo50 August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

which he discharged his function as President of the
Security Council for the month of July,

tiesent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

2. I now call upon the representative of Algeria, Ambassador Bouattoura.
3. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (trunsluted j?om
French): Mr. President, may I first thank you for the very
kind words you have said about me? In my turn, I should
like to express the great confidence which my delegation
has in you and to welcome you both as the representative
of Brazil and as the President of the Security Council for
the month of August.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l434)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/86 16);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8617);
(c) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8721);
(d) Letter dated 5 August I968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8724).

4. I should be remiss in my duty if on this occasion I did
not welcome the active participation of the representative
of the United States, Ambassador George Ball. As an expert
on the theory of controlling power he will be practising
here with us the control of force, since, by its very nature,
this Council is called upon essentially to discuss problems
deriving and resulting from the use of force.
5. Mr.*President, you have mentioned the efforts we made
during the month of July. All we did was to try to live up
to the duty generally entrusted to the Security Council,
which is to safeguard international peace and security.
Strictly speaking, our sole aim was to ensure that they were
safeguarded or, at any rate, appeared to be so, and indeed
nothing seems to have disturbed international peace and
security during the month of July.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President and expression of welcome to the new representative of the United
States of America.

6. Once again, Mr. President, may I rea’ffirm the confidence my delegation feels that you, as President of the
Council, will not fail to guide our labours with all the tact
and courtesy with which we are already so familiar? We are
certain that the results of the Security Council’s work
during this month will be equal to our expectations.

1. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to the provisional
agenda for today’s meeting, may I be permitted to express
my personal satisfaction at being with you in the Security
Council and at joining you in this common endeavour for
peace and security under the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. All I can say is that I count on your
help and ceaseless collaboration and that I shall do my best
to pursue the constant effort of the Government of Brazil
towards reconciling thz actions of nations scl that conditions of peace and security shall prevail in the world at
large. My Government has extended to this Organization its
utmost support and unremitting collaboration, and will not
depart from this purpose and responsibility. May I aho
express my gratitude to Ambassador Tewfik Bouattoura of
Algeria, who bore the responsibility of presiding over the
Council during the month of July? Although the Council
did not meet during the month of July, Ambassador
Bouattoura was called on to engage in many active
consultations on important matters on the Councii agenda,
and I am sure that I speak for all members of the Council in
paying tribute to that tact, courtesy and statesmanship with

7. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Algeria
for his kind and generous words. May I also be allowed to
welcome to our proceedings the new representative of the
United States of America, Ambassador George Ball? It
would be superfluous to enlarge on the qualifications and
merits of a personality so well known to us all, a
distinguished diplomat who has occupied many high positions in the course of a brilliant career in the service ofhis
Government and his country. We are happy to see him
sitting among us today, and on behalf of all members of the
Security Council, I extend to him the hearty welcome he so
richly deserves.
8. I now call on the representative of the United States of
America, Ambassador George Ball.
I

members of the council. I regard this as an important and
indispensable condition for successful work in the Security
Council.

9. Mr. BALL (United States of America): Mr. President, I
am grateful for your gracious words of welcome to the
Security Council. Although we are both newcomers to this
body I, together with all of us here, am very well aware of
your long and distinguished diplomatic career. You have
served not only on the staff of the Permanent Mission of
Brazil to the United Nations and as a member of Brazilian
delegations to some eight General Assembly sessions,but
you have also been the Minister for External Relations of
your country. There is no doubt that this Council will be
guided effectively under your wiseleadership.

17. Allow me to express-the hope that under the guidance
of the Secretary-General, and with the mutual undecstanding and assistance of the members of the Council, I
shall be able to discharge satisfactorily the duties which
have been assigned to me.
Adoption of the agenda

10. I also feel it appropriate on this occasion to expressto
Ambassador Bouattoura of Algeria my deep appreciation of
his words of welcome, During his Presidency last month he
set a wise example as far as the formal meetings of the
Council are concerned. I thought, when I had served as
President of the Council for the last two or three days of
June, that I had by my inactivity greatly contributed not
only to the convenience of the members but to the cause of
peace. However, Ambassador Bouattoura made my efforts
in this regard seem quite insignificant: he managed to avoid
a Council meeting for the entire month of July.

18. The PRESIDENT: This meeting has been convened at
the urgent request of the representatives of Jordan
[S/8721] and Israel [S/8724].
We now come to the
adoption of the provisional agenda which is before the
Council in document S/Agenda/1434. Members of the.
Council will note that the provisional agenda lists under the
general heading of “The situation in the Middle East” four
letters from Jordan and Israel. The first two, listed as items
(a) and (b), are the letters which were placed on the
provisional agenda of the 1429th meeting on 5 June, which
was not adopted, as the Council decided to adjourn in view
of the tragic shooting of Robert Kennedy. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the agenda is adopted,

11. Although I profoundly regret the tragic events that
have brought us together today, I feel honoured to be
present in such distinguished company. I am aware that in
most legislative bodies of the world there is a tradition that
new members should maintain a decent reticence for a
certain period of time. I promise, Mr. President, to disregard that tradition conscientiously. This means, however,
that I must count on you, my colleagues, both for advice
and forbearance, and, from what my predecessor has told
me of your wisdom and compassion, I am confident that
such assistancewill be forthcoming.

The agendawasadopted,
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the PermanentRepresentative of Jordan addressedto the Presidentof the
Security Council (S/8616);
/W Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the PermanentRepresentative of Israel addressedto the Presidentof the
Security Council (S/8617);
(cl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representativeof Jordan addressedto the Presidentof
the Security Council (S/8721);
(4 Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representativeof Israel addressedto the Presidentof
the Security Council (S/8724),

12. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United States of America for his generous words.
Expression of welcome to Mr. Kutakov, Under-Secretary
General for Political and Security Council Affairs

13. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the Council, I also
wish to welcome to our midst the new Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Security Council Affairs,
Mr. Leonid Kutakov.

19. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the provisional
rules of procedure and with previous practice, I propose, if
there is no objection, to invite the representatives of Jordan
and Israel to be seated at the Council table.

14. The new Under-Secretary-General is well known to
most of us who have known him in the course of his
distinguished service in the Permanent Mission of the USSR
to the United Nations and have learned to respect his
ability, competence and learning. We all look.forward to a
continuation of the co-operation we enjoyed with his
predecessor.
15. I now call
Mr. Kutakov.

upon

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took pIacesa? the
Counciltable.

20. The PRESIDENT: I have just received letters from the
representatives of the United Arab Republic and Iraq
requesting that they be permitted to participate in the
Security Council’s discussion of this item, If I hear no
objection, I propose to invite the representatives of the
United Arab Republic and Iraq to be seated.

the Under-Secretary-General,

16. Mr. KUTAKOV (Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Security Council Affairs) [translated from Russian):
Mr. President, permit me to express my feelings of sincere
gratitude for the kind words you have addressed to me
here. The discharge of the complex duties which have been
assigned to me will be facilitated by the co-operation and
mutual understanding which I hope to receive from the

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Hilmy (United
Arab Republic) and Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq) took placesat
the Counciltable.

21. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Jordan, to whom I now give the floor.
2

22. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. President, let me at the
outset welcome you among us both as Ambassador of
Brazil and as President of the Security Council for this
month. We wish you every success in your new task. It also
gives my delegation great pleasure to welcome Ambassador
Ball, an outstanding American statesman, We know that the
task ahead of Mr. Ball is not easy but we are confident that
he will meet it with his usual insight, wisdom and
determination. Mr. Kutakov is assuming his duties in a new
capacity. He is not a newcomer to the United Nations. We
have experienced his ability as a diplomat during the past
few years and feel certain that he will assume his new tasks
with interest and dedication.

30. The information received so far indicates that 34
Jordanians were killed and 82 Jordanians seriously
wounded in yesterday’s attack.
3 1. The barbaric nature of the Israeli attack and behaviour
is reflected in the wicked manner in which they planned it.
During the operations they would cease their bombing for a
while until civilians had gathered to give first aid to the
injured and carry away the dead, then resume their attack
bombing the gathered groups and hence increasing the
number of casualties. Thus, first-aid vehicles of the Red
Crescent did not escape the Israeli shelling and bombing.
32. The Israeli fighters crossed over these tragic scenes of
the victims, leaving trails of white smoke behind them in a
sort of victory display: a victory against .the helpless, the
aged and the innocent. The Israeli Chief of Staff boasted at
a news conference in Tel-Aviv last night that all the Israeli
planes had,returned safely, and he gave the reason that no
Jordanian planes had been seen. He said that they had seen
only light Jordanian anti-aircraft fire. This is true. Jordan
had no planes with which to meet the Israelis, had no heavy
anti-aircraft equipment and was therefore an easy target for
an Israeli victory. However, a question arises: if all the vast
military equipment delivered to Israel for defensive purposes is used to murder our people, is it fair or just to
continue arming Israel to the teeth in order to be
intoxicated by its power? This is for the Security Council
to ponder, the organ primarily responsible for peace and
security in the area.

23, Once again we come to the Security Council to deal
with a situation fraught with danger. We find ourselves
compelled to bring to the Security Council a new flagrant
and premeditated attack by the Israeli forces against our
unarmed civilian population.
24. Yesterday’s Israeli aggression was carefully directed
against civilians in the city of Salt and its neighbouring area.
This is similar to the attack committed on 4 June 1968
against centres of civilians in the city of Irbid and its
surrounding villages. It may be recalled that the complaint
concerning the Irbid attack is still pending before the
Security Council, and I take it that the Council is convened
to consider both complaintsi As a result of the treacherous
Irbid attack, 59 Jordanians were killed and 121 injured;
most of them were elderly people, women and children.
Casualties were numerous; damages were very heavy. A
great number of stores, bus terminals, commercial centres,
harvested wheat and plantations were destroyed and completely burned.

33. While Jordan anticipated and warned against the
attack in the same way that it warned against the previous
attacks, it never contemplated that the Israelis would again
use its superior military air force against civilian populations, many of whom were rendered refugees for the second
and third time in less than twenty years.

25. Besides the destruction wrought upon the city of
Irbid, its suburbs and communications, the Israeli attack
extended to other areas and places of the Jordan Valley:
’ the Jordanian villages of Umm Qays, Al-Makheebeh,
Al-Fauqa, Malkiyya, Tayybat Bani Adwan, Al-Shaq-AlBarid and Kufor Asad were bombed and shelled.

34. The bombing and shelling of the civilian population is
an inhuman and barbaric act, At the Nuremburg Trials the
indiscriminate bombing of the civilian population was
included by the very big Powers sitting around the table in
the indictment of the German war criminals. What is before
the Council is, therefore, a charge of greater magnitude.
This is all the more so since the perpetrator of these crimes
is not only a Member of the United Nations, but also the
only Member that owes its very existence to this Organization.

26. Yesterday, at 1305 hours local time, Israeli military
aircraft attacked and bombed areas west and south of Salt
City nineteen miles from the capital of Amman. The Israeli
aircraft continued hitting the areas around Salt intermittently for over three hours. The civilian population,
innocent men, women and children were subjected to these
Israeli acts of lawlessness.

35. The IsraeIi representative in his letter to the Security
Council [S/8614] claims that Israel’s role in the Irbid
operation was to return the fire against the attacking
positions. But no matter how one looks at it, it is clear
beyond doubt that the Israeli aggression was pre-planned at
the highest levels. David Holden, of the Surlday Times of
London underlined this Israeli “get-tough” policy when he
wrote that “the Israelis are exceedingly tough and they are
embarrassingly frank about it.”

27. At 1545 hours local time and while the Israeli military
aircraft continued to bomb the areas around Salt, the Israeli
forces opened fire, using tanks at the area adjacent to
Prince Abdullah Bridge and Suamah in the south of the
Jordan Valley.
28. Shooting and artillery shelling stopped at 1600 hours
local time and bombing stopped at 1625 hours. The Israeli
forces opened fire again at 1705 hours at Saumah killing
5 persons, among them 2 women and 1 child; 20 civilians
were seriously wounded, among them 9 labourers working
on the.Al-Arda road.

36. On 26, April; the Israeli Defence Minister, Mr. Dayan,
warned Jordan that the Jordan Valley will turn into a
battlefield and that “there will not. be room there for
civilian life, for families, children, and agricultural cultivation.” Sure enough, Dayan kept his word, but this time he
did not content himself with the Jordan Valley. He

‘: 29. Later in the day, the Israeli forces resumed their
indiscriminate
shelling and bombing. The number of
casualties among the civilians has increased.
3

extended his aggression to the Heights as far away as the
City of Irbid, whose civilian population had already swelled
as a result of the repeated Israeli attacks-from a few
thousand to about 100,000 people, mainly women and
children, the expellees from the west bank and the Jordan
Valley.

the season’scrops, worth about $12 million. They are also
bound to lose their citrus and banana trees, which cannot
survive more than three weeks without irrigation, Some of
these banana trees were burned by napalm. The value of
these plantations amounts to $14 IdiOn.

Syrian borders.

46. I have presented the facts of the Israeli aggression to
this Council. These facts leave no room for doubt that the
Israelis planned both attacks 011 Irbid and Salt. They
adopted the same pattern in fixing the time for the
execution. Now, what is the other sinister aim behind these
Israeli crimes? Is it to intimidate Jordan into submission to
the expansionist designs of Israel and surrender to its will?
Is it to make Jordan agree to Israeli conditions? Or is the
bombing of civilians in the City of Irbid and the City of
Salt intended to cause a panic among the inhabitants of the
cities and their surrounding areas so that more people will
abandon their homes, either because of their complete
destruction or because of the repeated Israeli attacks, so
that a vacuum is created for further Israeli expansion and
aggression?

43. The East Ghor Canal irrigates about 30,000 acresin
37. Yesterday’s attack extended to Salt and its SUT- the valley, planted in citrus, bananas, tomatoes and other
crops. In addition to this area, 22,000 acresin the valley
rounding areas. The Israelis, after killing more women and
east of the river get water from other sources,such as wells,
children, reported their victory to the world, These are not
pumping from the river and small tributaries of the Jordan
isolated cases. They are deliberate. They are dictated by
River.
irresponsible leadership. They are motivated by the
arrogance of power. They are encouraged by the inaction
44. Because of previous Israeli attaCkS, farming in this area
and/or the indifference of Powersthat can afford to tell the
became impossible; and now, through their recent inhuman
truth and take an objective stand but which have failed to
bombing and shelling of the Salt area, the Israelis have
do so.
made farming in all these parts impossible. They have
38. On 3 June 1968, the Christian Science Monitor gave destroyed much of this irrigated area and burned the crops
in the peak of the season. This is of special significance,
the following report:
These areas are the most productive; they are the areason
“ . . . shortly after General Dayan’s speech, a steady which Jordan depends for its agricultural needs; these are
stream of reports, some from eye-witnesses,described the areas which feed half the population of the east bank.
heavy new Israeli troop build ups on the Jordan River’s 45. On 26 April 1968, the New York Post published
West Bank especially in the north, near the Seaof Galilee.
General Dayan’s statement in which he boasted that 70,000
civilians
had already left upper Jordan valley settlements,
“Tanks, half-tracks, self-propelled guns and armoured
while
in
Israel, border kibbutsim had been reinforced by
troop-carriers, were seen near Al-Hamma, ,a fragment of
civilians
and
youthful volunteers.
former Palestine at the junction of the Jordan-Israeli“There was also unusual military activity above
Al-Hamma on Syria’s Israeli occupied Golan Heights”.
39. It is worth noting that many of the Israeli shellings of
lrbid and other villages came from that position-from the
Golan Heights. Similar statements weremade by Mr. Bshkol
and Mr. Eban only the day before yesterday-the day
before that vicious attack on Salt. Other Israeli officials
made other statements last week, and surely enough these
hostile, aggressive pronouncements and premeditated
build-ups were the prelude to yesterday’s attack on the City
of salt.

40. What the Israelis did not occupy they are now
destroying. They aim at achieving more than one result:
47. These are all issues connected with the Israeli attacks
they want to destroy the agriculture on the east bank of
of yesterday and last June. They and the repeated attacks
Jordan; they want to terrorize, intimidate and expel the
of Israel against my small country impose on all Powers the
inhabitants of that area. Yesterday’s attack was another
duty to examine their consciences and see whether, by not
link in the chain of intimidation against Jordan, We have taking effective measures to stop Israeli attacks, they are
reminded the Council of this in previous circumstances. promoting peace in the area or inflaming the feelings of the
Aft.er rendering more than 450,000 people’homeless and people in Jordan.
refugees, they are now trying to do the same to the
residents of the northern area of the Jordan valley on the ‘48. As I explained earlier, the recent Israeli act of
aggression is not an isolated military operation, nor can it
east bank of Jordan. Their crimes of last June were not
be dismissed as a simple incident. The attack against my
completed, and now they are starting the processof a final
solution.
country is also a political one. It is meant to remind Jordan
that it is exposed to permanent danger of attacks from
41. The fact that the area subjected to yesterdax)‘sIsraeli
overpowering forces. In the past, in the face of these serious
aggression and the one attacked last June are purely
violations, we asked the question: how could the Council
agricultural ones and are considered the most successful remain indifferent? This is all the more pertinent since
projects in irrigated farming in Jordan proves beyond doubt
yesterday’s premeditated Israeli attack has already aggra
the sinister Israeli aim to destroy civilian life in the area,
vated the already inflammable situation existing in the [area.
42. Because of the heavy bombing and shelling by Israel,
the farmers of the east bank of the Jordan valley have lost

a49. Time and again, the Security Council has emphasized
to Israel that actions of military reprisal cannot be tolerated
4

and that if they are repeated the Security Council will have
to consider further and more effective steps as envisaged in
the Charter to ensure against the repetition of such acts. We
therefore are entitled to expect further and more effective
measures as envisaged in Chapter VII of the Charter. The
murderous Israeli campaign and continued acts of aggression should be met with an effective Security Council
response reflected in sanctions. It is very clear now that
Israel is intent on pursuing a course contemptuous of the
authority of the world Organization, contemptuous of its
decisions, contemptuous of the wishes of the Council
members, and contemptuous of world public opinion. If
this is the case, is it not incumbent upon the Security
Council to take more effective measures to cope with the
problem? Unless you take effective measures, we will have
to expect more of the same Israeli attacks and defiances.

during your tenure of office the cause of understanding and
peace in the Middle East will be strengthened and advanced.
58. I should also like to associate myself with the words of
welcome addressed at this table to Ambassador George Ball,
the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, and to wish him success in the discharge of his
great responsibilities.
59. May I also extend our best wishes to the new
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Kutakov?
60. Again we meet in the Security Council. We meet
because Arab aggression has not been brought to an end
and warfare against Israel is pursued from Jordanian
territory despite the obligations assumed by Jordan under
the cease-fire. In the last few months the Security Council
has twice discussed situations arising from Jordanian acts of
aggression and Israel’s defensive measures.

50. The inaction of the Council or its submission to any
pressure will frustrate the hope not only of Jordan, a small
country, but of all mankind. This will consequently destroy
the image of this great body, for this body is an organ of
peace intended to check aggression and liquidate the
consequences of aggression. Surely the Council cannot
afford to,be indifferent, because this amounts to condoning
Israeli crimes.

61. My delegation has addressed itself repeatedly to the
Council requesting effective action to stop Jordanian
violations of the cease-fire. We have appealed to the Council
to show understanding of the gravity of these violations. We
have explained that the cease-fire cannot be a screen for
Arab aggression, and that Israel must defend itself against
attack. We have emphasized the impact that Security
Council deliberations have on the area. We have said time
and again that resolutions lacking in equity would increase
intransigence, encourage extremism, breed additional
violence.

5 1. The Jerusalem Post reported that Israeli officials were
appraising the various forms of so-called reprisal action. The
paper went on to say that high Israeli sources pointed to
the fact that, while some reprisal operations like the
Karama action had led to international reaction, other later
actions did not.

62. The Security Council resolution of 24 March 1968
(248 (1968)/ deplored all violent incidents in violation of
the cease-fire and declared that violations of the cease-fire
could not be tolerated. Jordan promptly interpreted it as
non-applicable to Arab acts of hostility against Israel. On
4 April [1412th meeting] the Security Council expressed
its concern at the deteriorating situation. Jordan ignored it.
Since then, military attacks and armed incursions from
Jordanian territory have continued unabated.

52, The Israelis made an appraisal of the standards of the
Security Council vis-a-vis Israel’s crimes and discovered that
the Security Council did react on Karameh, did not react
on Shunah, did not react on Irbid, and this encouraged
them to go ahead, seeing a green light for more crimes.
53. What I have quoted raises many issues for members of
the Council to ponder.

63. In my letters to the President of the Security Council,
and in particular in those of 8 April [S/853.5], 23 April
[S/8556/, 4 June [S/8614/, 24 June [S/8651], 17 July
[S/8683] and 2 August [S/8716], I drew attention to this
grave situation. On 7 May I found it necessary to do so at
the Council table. On 5 June we called for a meeting of the
Security Council to consider the grave and continual
violations of the cease-fire by Jordan.

54. The Israeli attacks on both the City of Irbid on 4 June
and the City of Salt on 4 August were of the same
magnitude as the Karama aggression. All of them were
aimed at the destruction of civilian life. The international
inaction after the attack on Shunah on 29 March and the
postponement of international action with regard to the
Israeli large-scale aggression on Irbid seem to have whetted
the Israeli’s appetite for more and more attacks, and hence
their attack on the City of Salt and its adjacent areas.
/

64. Israeli villages were being shelled. Israeli citizens were
being killed and wounded by mines: Terror and sabotage
squads were being dispatched from Jordanian territory to
murder and maim.

55. The time has come to seek an effective and groper
international action. It is the task of the Security Council
today to refute such Israeli statements by adopting a strong
international reaction to such Israeli attacks and aggressio
7
56. The PRESIDENT: I call on the next speaker on my
list, the representative of Israel.

65. Jordan became the principal base for continued Arab
aggression against Israel. Special military camps were
established to train saboteurs, Recruiting centres were
opened in Amman. Officers and men of regular Egyptian
and Syrian army units were transferred to Jordan and
assigned to terror operations. Iraqi troops, openly sup
porting and participating in the continuation of warfare
against Israel, were given the free run of the country.

57. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr, President, allow me to
extend to you my delegation’s warm greetings and best
wishes in your capacity as Permanent Representative of
your great country and as President of the Security
Council. It is the ardent hope of all men of goodwill that

66. Warfare against Israel from Jordanian territory has
been conducted by two methods: terror raids and amred

5

begun, to order Israeli aircraft to take action in self-defence
and silence the sources of fire. Due to the configuration of
the area this was the only way to reach the well-protected
heavy-gun emplacements and to end their harvest of death.

attacks from military positions. Both these types of
aggression have been carried out from across the cease-fire
line. Both these methods were meant to offer maximum
immunity to their perpetrators. Both have been developed
because of the failure of the Arab Governments to use the
Arab inhabitants inside the areas under Israel control as
instruments in the pursuance of war.

75. It is regrettable that the Jordanian Government should
use inhabited centres such as Irbid as locations for their
artillery positions. It is this irresponsible action that is the
cause of inevitable civilian casualties resulting from Jordanian aggression and Israel counter-action.

67. As was reported in The New York Times of 2 June
1968:
“The terrorists cannot find shelter among the local
Palestinians. Of the 1,500 terrorists now -in Israel’s
prisons, many, perhaps most, were captured through
information given by Arab villagers and townfolk. . . . NO
one forces them to volunteer information. They do SO
because they themselves do not want the terror.”

76. Since then the tactics seem to have changed somewhat. Warfare from Jordanian territory was carried on in
particular by means of terror and sabotage raids. These
attacks have steadily increased in intensity and become a
daily occurence.
77. In July alone, 98 acts of aggression were committed
from Jordanian territory. I should like to mention some of
them.

68. Terror raids and attacks from military positions have
another element in common, Both of these methods of
warfare are directed primarily against civilians and civilian
localities.

78. On 2 July 1968, at approximately 0200 hours, an
Israeli patrol encountered a marauder unit two kilometres
east of Hamadya in the Beit She’an valley. In the ensuing
exchange of fire and pursuit which lasted until dawn, two
raiders were killed and the others escaped to the east bank.
While the pursit was taking place, Jordanian forces opened
fire to support the raiders. Seven Israeli soldiers were
injured in the clash.

69. Thus, having failed in its frontal aggression against
Israel in June 1967, Jordan has turned to that most
despicable type of belligerence, warfare by stealth, and to
attacks from the distance of well-protected gun emplacements.
70. The campaign of aggression from Jordan has singled
out as its primary targets such densely populated areas as
the Beit She’an and Upper Jordan valleys and the constantly used trails along the Jordan River.

79. On the same day at 1645 hours fire was opened from
the east bank on workers south of Tirat Zevi. The tire was
not returned.

71. The shelling of Israeli villages by Jordanian artillery
reached a climax in May and early June. From positions in
the hills on the east bank, dominating completely the
low-lying villages, Jordanian heavy guns rained fire and
death on Israeli territory and Israeli citizens. The villages of
Neve Ur, Tirat Zevi, Gesher, Beit Yosef, Ashdot Ya’aqov,
Sha’ar HaGolan, Ma’oz Hayyim, Yardena, Kefar Ruppin
became targets for daily wanton shelling,

80. On 3 July at 1540 hours Jordanian raiders opened fire
on an Israeli patrol travelling on the patrol trail in the
Damiyah Bridge area, west of the Jordan River. Jordanian
artillery joined in the attack. Fire was returned and directed
at the sources of th.e Jordanian fire. The exchange of fire
lasted until 1740 hours.
81. Again in the afternoon of 3 Jt-ly, fire was opened on
Israeli forces south of Kibbutz Gesher.

72. On the morning of 4 June a large-scale assault was
launched from Jordanian territory. At approximately 1040
hours local time, Jordanian military positions, mainly in the
vicinity of the police station at Manshiya, opened an
artillery barrage on the Israeli villages of Neve Ur, Gesher,
Yardena, Beit Yosef, Ashdot Ya’aqov, Afikim and
Menahamya, and then on the town of Beit She’an. Later
Jordanian artillery positions at Irbid joined in the shelling,
Fire was returned against the attacking positions. Extensive
damage was caused to the villages and to the central part of
Beit She’an. Ashdot Ya’aqov alone was struck by at least
250 shells. At Neve Ur one woman was killed and three
other persons were wounded,

82. On 4 July at 1130 hours a civilian truck was blown up
and damaged by an anti-tank mine laid at km. 65 of the
Arava Road linking Sdom to Eilat.
83. On 6 July at 0915 hours Jordanians opened machinegun fire on Israeli forces in the Urn Sus area. Some forty
minutes later machine-gun fire was opened by Jordanians
seven kilometres north of Urn Sidra in the Jordan Valley.
84. In the morning of 9 July two anti-vehicle mines were
discovered in a dirt track in the Neve Ur area, A patrol that
was removing the land mines was fired upon from the east
bank of the Jordan, from Jordanian military positions.

73. At 1500 hours one farmer was killed at Ashdot
Ya’aqov and two injured. A second man was killed there
ninety minutes later. By 1630 hours local time three Israeli
farmers had been killed and six wounded,

85. Later that morning a vehicle was blown up by a mine
one kilometre west of the Sdom-Eilat Road in the
Ein-Yahav area. One Israeli soldier was wounded.

74. In view of the persistence and intensification of the
Jordanian artillery barrage, it became necessary at 1505
hours, more than four hours after the Jordanian attack had

86. At the same time an Israel Defence Forces patrol ’
encountered armed raiders sixteen kilometres north-west of
Damiyah bridge. Four of the raiders were killed and one
6

captured. Klachnikov rifles, Karl-Gustav sub-machine-guns,
improvised bazookas and explosives were found in their
possession.

97. On 28 July Jordanian positions launched another
attack on Israeli forces and civilians, this time south-east of
Sha’ar HaGolan. Fire was returned and the exchange lasted
half an hour. Jordanian light arms fire was resumed later
that day and tire had to be returned again,

87. On 12 July at 081.5 hours an Israeli half-track was
subjected to fire by marauders south of Urn Shurt. The
pn’rol fired back, killed two saboteurs and wounded
another who fled to the east bank. While this was taking
place Jordanian military positions opened machine-gun fire
on the patrol to cover the retreat of the saboteurs. Fire was
returned, The exchange lasted until 1030 hours. The Israeli
forces suffered three wounded.

98. Still on 28 July an Israeli patrol clashed with a
marauder unit one kilometre east of Ma’oz Hayyim while it
was trying to penetrate into Israeli territory. During the
encounter fire was opened from Jordanian territory to
cover the retreat of the raiders. Fire was returned, The
exchange of tire lasted one hour. Two of the raiders were
killed.

88. On 17 July an Israeli patrol encountered armed raiders
seventeen kilometres north-east of Jericho. In the clash 13
raiders were killed, one captured, one escaped. One Israeli
soIdier was wounded. The saboteurs, who had penetrated
from the east bank at night, were dressed in spotted
uniforms, wore commando boots and carried sabotage
material in addition to their personal weapons.

99. on 31 July a bulldozer was blown up by a mine on a
track near Ein-Yahav, half a kilometre west of the cease-fire
line with Jordan. Two men operators were wounded.
100. On 1 August at 0530 hours a vehicle of the Border
Police was attacked with small arms and bazooka fire while
travelling on a trail along the Jordan River near the Israeli
village of Ma’oz Hayyim in the Beit She’an Valley. Fire was
returned. One Israeli soldier was killed, 3 border policemen
were wounded.

89. On 20 July at 1130 hours a military jeep was mined in
a dirt track three-and-a-half kilometres south-east of Fiq.
One Israeli soldier was wounded.

101. These are only some of the acts of aggression-98 of
them in a single month.

90. On the following day raiders from Jordan attacked
with small arms and fired a bazooka shell on an Israeli jeep
and command car at km. 79 of the Arava Road. The
passengers returned fire, and the raiders fled to Jordanian
territory.
One Israeli soldier was wounded. Three antivehicle mines were found on the spot.

102. These attacks have been accompanied by official
Jordanian pronouncements in support of continued warfare
against Israel. In a dispatch from Cairo which appeared in
The New York Times of 17 June 1968 we read: “King
Hussein has abandoned his former efforts to control or
suppress guerrilla operations from within Jordaniancontrolled territory.”

91. On 22 July at 1100 hours an Israeli patrol clashed
with raiders from Jordanian territory about seven kilometres north-west of Urn Shurt. Six of the marauders were
killed. Personal arms and bazooka shells were found in their
possession.

103. On 19 June the Christian Science Morzitor reported:
“Interior Minister, Ahmed Al-Kayed, the chief of Jordan’s
military intelligence, Mohammed al-Rasoul, and other
‘anti-fedayin’ figures in Jordan resigned and were replaced
in April. “The royal palace then appeared to have reached a
sort of tacit accord with the front and al-Fatah. Their
operations would not be hindered.”

92. On 23 July at 1300 hours a member of Kibbutz
Massada near the Jordan River was wounded when he
stepped on a shoe mine east of the village.
93. A few hours later a military command car was blown
up in the same area by a mine. Three soldiers were
wounded, one of them fatally. Still on the same afternoon,
a tractor was destroyed by a mine about three kilometres
south of Tirat Zevi.

104. In an interview on Cairo’s television, on 9 July 1968,
King Hussein stated that there can be no doubt at all
concerning his support for terror operations against Israel.
105. On 26 July, Jordan’s representative to the United
Nations, Ambassador El-Farra, declared in an interview
with the Lebanese daily Al-Muharrer: “The united fedayeen
activity is the only means in the present circumstances to
keep the ember of our cause burning.”

94. Jordanian positions attacked again on the following
day in the Massada area. Fire was opened on Israeli forces
and civilian workers north-east of the village, Fire was
returned, and the exchange lasted for about an hour.

106. Israel has repeatedly emphasized Jordan’s grave
responsibility for this unabated warfare and called on the
Jordanian Government to put an end to attacks by the
Jordanian Army and by terror groups overtly supported by
the Jordanian authorities and operating from Jordan.

9.5. On 26 July at 0800 hours raiders from Jordan clashed
with Israeli forces south-west of Damiyah Bridge. Two
IsraeIi officers were killed, and four Israeli soldiers were
wounded, one of them severely. Seven of the raiders were
killed and one captured. The raiders were dressed in khaki
and carried personal arms, Klachnikov rifles, hand grenades,
a bazooka and sabotage material.

107. This has proved to be of no avail. The attacks did not
end. On the contrary, they increased in number and
intensity. There was no peace, there was no cease-fire.
Israel’s security was in danger, its people, under constant
attack. There was no alternative for Israel but to resort to
self-defence.

95. On 27. July 2 Israeli policemen were wounded when
their vehicle struck a mine on a trail about 1.5 kilometres
from Kibbutz Gesher.
7

108. Y,,.sterday at 1300 hours local time Israeli aircraft
took action against the terror bases from which these
attacks against Israel emanate. The action was directed
against two terrorist bases in the Salt area, including the
central headquarters of the El-Fatah organization, stores of
ammunition and sabotage equipment, training facilities and
barracks. These were the only targets. The ‘town of Salt and
the Jordanian army camps in its vicinity remained outside
the scope of the action.
log. The Salt area has become known as the centre and
source of terror operations. In the Christian Science
&fonz%or of 14 June we find a report from Beirut, Lebanon,
describing the area in the following terms:
“Salt , , . a town astride the main road from Amman to
the Allenby Bridge, main crossing point to the ISraeli
occupied west bank of the Jordan River. Its approaches
bristle with training grounds and encampments of the
Jordan Army and guerrilla organizations.”
110. The following is from an official document published
following the interrogation of a raider captured by the
Israeli forces on 23 May 1968:
“On 23 May 1968 at 1100 hours, after a short exchange
of fi,re, a band of 6 saboteurs was captured some 15
kilometres north of Jiftlik. Israeli forces suffered no
casualties.
“The prisoners had in their possession 3 Russian
Klachnikov assault rifles, a F.N. rifle, a Seminov rifle,
6 improvised bazookas, 8 bricks of explosives, 23 fingers
of gelignite, equipment to detonate explosives and a
quantity of hand grenades.
“One of the arrested men, Mahamed Selin Geradi,
served in the 2nd Engineering Battalion under No. 24
Brigade of the Syrian Army which is stationed in Katana.
His personal serial number is 26337.
“Geradi told in his interrogation that on 23 April 1968
he wascalled to his Battalion C.O. Captain Suleiman Sass.
There Geradi and other soldiers were ordered to proceed
immediately
to the El-Fatal1 Training Camp at
Al-Hamma, and there join the sabotage organization.
“Geradi is not and never wasa Palestinian.

112. The Salt region became a state within a state, The
El-Fatah put up their own roadblocks. Special El-Fatah
passeswere necessary for movement through the area. The
terror organization even established an independent prison.
The terrorist bases in this area were destroyed in yester+
day’s action.
113. The Security Council is confronted time and again
with the same problelh. The Arab States having Iaunched a
war of aggression against Israel, having mounted last June a
military and political offensive with the avowed aim of
destroying Israel, the Arab States, disregarding the cease.
fire and persisting in warfare against Israel, come before the
Council to bewail Israel’s refusal to co-operate with their
deadly designs. Jordan, an active participant in this twenty.
year war, Jordan which had chosen to attack Israel last
June despite Israel’s peace appeal to it and now pursues
with tenacity its campaign of belligerency, fmds it appro.
priate to complain of the consequences of its own
aggressive policy and actions. Day after day, blow after
blow, Jordan continues to strike at Israel, Israeli villages,
Israeli civilians, Israeli forces. Then when, in desperation,
Israel fina!ly strikes back to stay the arm of aggression,
Jordan has the audacity to plead innocence and demand
sympathy for itself. Jordan’s policies and behaviour have
been replete with irresponsible adventures and fatal mis.
judgements. Yet after a war waged against Israel for two
decades, Jordan cannot but be aware of our determination
to ensure Israel’s right to security and Israel’s right to
peace.
114. We are a small people. The annals of our history are
filled with pages of oppression and martyrdom. We are firm
in our resolve that no one be allowed again to smite Jews
with impunity. We are a small people, and after the
annihilation of 6 million of our brethren in Euorpe, asthe
world watched in silence, we are smaller than ever before.
While Arab rulers may boast that they are ready to losea
million citizens in war, we shall do all in our power not to
sacrifice a single one. To us every Israeli, man woman or
child, wantonly murdered by the artillery sh&, the
terrorist’s bullet or the saboteur’s mine, is a living tissue cut
out from our body. It is time for Jordan to realize that no
Israeli citizen will find himself IqnteCted;
no Israeli
village will be undefended.
115. The attacks carried out from Jordanian territory are
expressions of a concerted campaign of warfare waged by
Jordan in open defiance of the cease-fire.

“In the framework of El-Fatah he was incorporated
into a band of saboteurs being organized in the Jordanian
town of Salt.

116. This is warfare pursued with vehemence, l.lalice and
cruelty and openly espoused by Jordan’s leaders.

“When the band reached the Jordan Valley they went
to the Jordanian Police Station north of the townlet
Craime and there, by means of a telephone conversation,
their crossing of the Jordan was co-ordinated with an
advanced Jordanian army position.”

117. Has not the time come to stop, to ponder, to
reappraise?
118. A year ago Jordan rejected our appeal to stay out of
the aggression that was being mounted against Israel.
Jordan’s reply to Israel’s exhortations not to attack wasa
Jordanian assault on Jerusalem and an offensive along the
entire front. We remember what Jordan had in store for us.
On 2 June 1967 King Hussein declared:

111. TWO centres were established by the terrorist organizations in the Salt area: one five kilometres south of the
town, the other, three kilometres to the west of it, Here
were the central headquarters of El-Fatah. Here hundreds
of raiders received their military training and arms. Here
they were given guides and Jordanian army transportation
to reach the Jordan River. From here they went out on
their missions of death against the people of Israel.

“Our increased co-operation with Egypt and the other
Arab States, both to the east and to the west, will enable
8

I
/
!

us to march forward along the right road leading to
the . . . liberation of Palestine .”

obligations and terminate all acts of aggression from its
territory directed against Israel,

“The hour for which YOU longed is here”, cried Radio
Amman. “Foiward to arms, to battle, to new pages of
glory. Oh Arabs, wherever you are ! Hit everywhere and
hit till the end. The end of Israel is in your hands.”

126. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Iraq.
127. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): May I first of all extend to
you, Sir, our warm welcome as the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations and as the President
of the Security Council for this month,

On 1 June Amman Radio broadcast:
“Citizens, workers, fellaheen! How long did we wait
and prepare for these hours of glory. . . . Prepare to meet
on the soil of eternal Palestine.”

128. We should also like to welcome Mr. George Ball, the
United States representative to the United Nations, on his
first appearance in the Council, and Mr. Kutakov, the new
Under-Secretary-General for Political and Security Council
Affairs.

119. This meeting was to take place after the complete
destruction of Israel, after the annihilation of its people.
Special units of the Jordanian army were assigned to raze
Israeli villages and towns to the ground and kill all their
inhabitants. Israel was saved from this fate only by the
courage and dedication of its people. They will never agree
that their sacrifice should prove to have been in vain.

129. I have asked to participate in this debate because of
the grave concern and deep anxiety of my Government and
our people over the continued acts of aggression and
lawlessness by Israel in the region which will undoubtedly
endanger peace and security and, if unchecked, are likely to
lead to a new outbreak of large-scale hostilities in our
region, thus destroying whatever hope there is for the
mission of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in the area.

120. Today, a year later, Israel turns to Jordan again and
exhorts it to forgo war, to abide by the cease-fire, to take
together the road towards peace. Israel exhorts Jordan not
to make again the mistake committed a year ago. Let us
scrupulously observe the cease-fire. Let us at long last have
peace and security in the Middle East.

130. Perhaps that is Israel’s intention. Apparently it can
only live and sustain itself by war and aggression. But the
Security Council cannot allow itself to be a party to such
odious designs.

121, There has been enough tragedy, enough terror,
enough violence and death and suffering in the region. It
has stemmed from a continuous denial of Israel’s basic
rights, from a concerted Arab campaign of hate and
incitement, from a macabre process of educating the young
to destruction and murder. This must no longer be. It is not
difficult to call for more hostility from the armchairs of
this hall. It is simple to preach war and slaughter from the
palaces of Cairo, Amman, Damascus and Baghdad. This
must end if further tragedy is to be averted. This can end if
the Arab rulers begin to think of their peoples rather than
of themselves.

13 1, More than four months ago the Security Council met
in almost identical circumstances. The Israeli armed forces
crossed into Jordanian territory and undertook the destruc.
tion of a town in Jordan with the killing of a large number
of civilians.
132. The same excuses, the same justifications and the
same arguments which we have heard this afternoon were
presented to this Council last March. I believe that by now
members of the Council are quite familiar with the
unchanging pattern and technique of Israel’s representation
of its case before the Council. It usually presents a
complaint immediately after an Arab country has presented
its complaint to the Security Council. It is strange, is it not,
that until this very day, in spite of this long list of alleged
provocations and acts against Israel, not once has Israel
come before the Security Council to complain of its own
will and volition, but only after Jordan or some other Arab
country had presented a complaint to the Council.
Obviously the presentation of such complaints is a screen
behind which Israel hopes to hide its own aggressive acts
against its Arab neighbours.

122. To the Security Council we appeal again to consider
the situation in the Middle East as it is. Formulations born
of the whims of those who deny Israel’s rights cannot
contribute to understanding nor prevent further deterioration of the situation. Only faithful and reciprocal
observance of the cease-fire and an effort by the parties to
reason together and work together ‘towards a peaceful
agreement can break the vicious circle of the twenty-year
war.
123. We ask the Security Council to understand that after
all these years of unabated belligerency and bloodshed, a
nation that has had to pay for its independence with the
longest war of this century cannot agree that the right of
every Israeli citizen to life and security become a plaything
of Arab warmongers.

133. I believe too that members of the Council are now
familiar with the ways in which the representative of Israel
presents his arguments. He tries, first of all, to quote from
various newspapers and other sources. Then he gives a
one-sided account of alleged incidents, which has no
substantiation in fact; we only have the word of the
representative of Israel as to whether they are true or not.
Then he mentions the desire of Israel for peace and goes
back to the old tune of a small people being threatened by
predatory neighbours.

124. We call upon the Security Council to raise its voice
against the sanguinary acts of aggression that are continuing
against Israel. We have waited for years to hear from the
Council that it condemns the murder of Israelis,
12.5. We appeal to the Security Council to ‘impress on
Jordan the vital need for it to abide by its cease-fire
9

134. I am sure that the Council must be tired of this
argument by now. It has heard it time and again, and it has
categorically rejected it time and again. The fact is that
Israel, depending upon its present air of superiority in the
region, is able to strike at will and to choose its time and
place against its Arab neighbours. This is hardly the
behaviour of a small country surrounded by powerful
neighbours bent upon its destruction. It is the other way
round.
135. As I have said, the representative of Israel repeated
all the arguments this afternoon without exception that he
presented last March when the Council met in similar
circumstances to discussanother act of aggression by Israel,
and the Council rejected those arguments and adopted
unanimously a resolution on 24 March [248 (1968/j which
said the following-and 1 believe we must examine the
present caseagainst the background of that resolution. First
of all, the resolution observed that the military action by
the armed forces of Israel on the territory of Jordan wasof
a large-scale and carefully planned nature. Is there any
doubt that the action taken by the Israeli air force
yesterday was of a large-scaleand carefully planned nature
by the selection of targets, by the scale of the attack, ancl
the time of the attack? Is there any doubt about the facts
of the situation? Is the Council in a position to d&ermine
whether an attack has occurred or not? Can we be told
today, as we were told last April, that because there are no
United Nations observersin the area it is not possible to
know who started the action? The fact of the matter is
that Israel itself has admitted that it sent its aeroplanes
against the town of Salt and bombarded it for severalhours,
causing great damage and loss of life.
136. Tnerefore, there is no doubt about the facts of the
situation. There is no doubt that this was a carefully
planned military action on a large scale.
137. In addition, the resolution of 24 March 1968
deplored all violent incidents and violations of the cease-fire
and declared that such actions of military reprisal-and I
believe that the representative of Israel this afternoon did
not conceal the fact that this wasan act of military reprisal
because of alleged infiltration from Jordanian territory into
Israel-and other graveviolations of the cease-firecannot be
tolerated, and that the Security Council would hqve to
consider further and more effective steps, as envisaged in
the Charter, to ensure against the repetition of such acts.
138. Therefore, it seems to me that the aggressiveacts
undertaken by Israel yesterday fall entirely within the
scope of the resolution of 24 March 1968, and since the
Security Council considered more than four months ago
that such acts of military reprisal could be tolerated and
t.hat it would have to consider further and more effective
steps against the repetition of such acts, the Council is now
placed in a situation where it has to take responsibility and
act in accordance with its past decisions. Because if the
Security Council fails today to h&our what amounts to a
warning by it, if it fails today to honour its undertaking
made, last March, then that will be the surest way to
encourage the aggressor to continue its acts of aggression
with all the, incalculable consequences for peace and
security in the area.
10

139. What I have said about yesterday’s attack on Salt
applies, of course, entirely to the attack on Irbid on 4 June
1968. So what is the Council to do? Should it satisfy itself
with another censure of condemnation? Should it satisfy
itself with merely an expression of sorrow at the loss of life
and property? Should it merely content itself with a
reaffirmatinn of its past resolutions? We have seen how this
inaction on the part of the United Nations has encouraged
Israel to continue its acts of violation. Let me give the
Council a few examples.
140. A few days after the adoption of the resolutibn of 24
March 1968, Israel attacked Jordan on 29 March with the
result that a meeting of the Security Council took place, On
8 April, Israeli troops crossed into Jordan in the Dead Sea
area. On. 12 May they attacked Lebanese villages. On 4 June
they attacked Irbid in Jordan. On 8 July they bombarded
the city of Suez with considerable loss of life,
141. At the same time they continued their policy of
expulsion of Arab civilians from the occupied territories:
from the Syrian heights, from Gaza. The obliteration af
whole villages continued-the bulldozing of homes, the
expropriation of properties. Last but not least, their refusal
to co-operate with the Secretary-General in having a special
representative of the United Nations sent to the area in
order to see for himself the situation of the civilian
population, in accordance with past resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly,
142. In Jerusalem their violation of the two resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council resolution
continues. The expropriation of property and the expulsion
of Arab civilians in the Holy City continues. We remember
only too well their utter disregard of the resolutions
adopted by this Council regarding the holding of a military
parade in Jerusalem and we remember too, their efforts to
undermine and ultimately nullify any possibility of success
of the mission of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
143. To this very day, they have not come out to say
clearly, unequivocally and unambiguously that they accept
the resolution of the Security Council adopted on 22
November 1967 /242 (1967)]. Undoubtedly, Israel was
encouraged to maintain this attitude of intransigence by the
knowledge that the Security Crmcil would remain power.
less in the face of its repeated aggressions and repeated
violations of the Council’s resolutions.
144. Now, the serious and ominous implications of this
attitude are not confined to the Middle East, but they have
the most adverse and serious repercussions elsewherein the
world. I have before me the latest issue of The Economist,
dated 3 August, and there is an item by its South African
correspondent which reads as follows:
“What is even more disturbing is that as South Africa
becomes more closely involved in the fighting in Rhodesia, the danger will increase of a counter-strike against
the guerrilla bases in Zambia and even Tanzania. The
mood in Pretoria has lost some of the long-headed
caution of Dr. Verwoerd’s day: Mr. Vorster is more a man
of blunt power. So the prospect is now quite openly
discussed. Three months ago Mr. Botha”-who is the

Defence Minister-“declared that South Africa regarded
assistance given to the guerrillas as an act of provocation-‘provocation can lead to hard retaliation in the
interest of self-respectand peace’.”
Almost the same words are being used by Mr. Tekoah this
afternoon. “Significantly’‘-and this is important-“he drew
the analogy of Israel’s raids against El-Fatah’s bases across
the Jordan.” Then he goes on to report that South Africa
was deeply impressed by the Israeli example and that “the
feeling is growing that the forces of the white south could
deliver a quick knock-out blow against the guerrilla
camps-an air raid perhaps-and get away with it. No doubt
a lot of dust would be kicked up at the United Nations, but
would anybody actually do anything about it? ”
145. This is what waswritten by the special correspondent
of The Economist in South Africa.

Middle East and a people determined to recover its
rights-there is not and cannot be peace in that region so
long as the Council is not convinced of the need to put into
effect the fundamental principles of law embodied in the
Charter.
152. Whether in the caseof the Middle East, or Rhodesia,
or South West Africa, only a firm determination on the part
of the Security Council to ensure the implementation of its
own decisions can bring to an end repeated aggressionsby
those well versed in the use of force, thereby sparing us the
need to meet regularly to try to find solutions to this still
unsolved problem. The frrst step towards a solution worthy
of the name lies in the application of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the general principles of law.
153. For several months now we have been drawing the
Council’s attention to Israel’s probable intentions with
regard to the territories east of the Jordan. We have pointed
out that, in view of the international situation and the
active complicity which Israel enjoys, it is to be feared that
Israel might show that it has further designs on other
territories besides those taken during the blitzkrieg of
5 June.

146. I have quoted this to show the ominous implications
towards peace and to the movements of national liberation
all over the world if that example of Israel, with which the
racist Government of South Africa was greatly impressed,
should continue unpunished and unchecked. Can the
United Nations afford to accept the theory of the right of
any State to take the law into its own hands and attack at
will other States for alleged provocations? What kind of
international order would there be if that theory and
concept were accepted and if any State, regardless of the
provocation, were given the right to take the law into its
own hands and attack its neighbours?

154. Following a traditional pattern, certain friendly
Powers are obviously more concerned with restoring peace
in the Middle East, on the basis, of course, of a realistic
point of view which would leave Israel in possessionof the
greater part of its conquests, than with seeing the Council
effectively fulfil the mission for which it wascreated. These
Powers havejust expressedthe point of view that a solution
must be worked out for the Middle Eastern problem which
could satisfy all the interests involved. The Members of the
United Nations and the Organization itself cannot be
guided by this attitude which is based on a permanent
compromise. If the Organization had been created in order
to find political solutions based on the application of this
kind of realism to the great problems of the moment, there
would have been no need to create the United Nations;
indeed, it would have been enough to evolve from the
Congress of Vienna to the Congressof Berlin;to quote only
classical instances.

147. Therefore, the Security Council is now faced with a
grave responsibility. The time has come for it to take the
effective steps to which it referred in its resolution of 24
March [248 (1968/J. Without taking such effective steps as
are envisaged in the Charter, then we shall be giving
encouragement and licence to Israel and also to its imitators
in the South African continent and elsewhere.
148. Mr,

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
We are well aware that an atmosphere of
disillusionment reigns over our meeting today which is
being held to consider the steps that should be taken to put
an end to the repeated aggressions of which Jordan is
periodically the victim.
French):

155. The United Nations was created in responseto other
needs, and in particular to that of protecting nations against
the greed of the strongest and most aggressive. The
Organization owes it to itself to apply that principle again
and to avoid such regrettable confusion as arises when,
following an all too frequent procedure, the complaints of
the victim and the shouts of the aggressorare merged in a
single agenda,

149. I say that there is a certain feeling of disillusionment
because it is somewhat difficult, in all honesty, to believe
that a solution can really be found until the Security
Council decides to fulfil its mission in accordance with the
principles of the Charter relating to the inadmissibility of
territorial acquisition by force, or, quite simply, in accordance with the principles of international law.

156. And what an aggressor! The latest of the great deeds
of Israel, whose inclination for beauty and reconstruction
has been much praised, has been-as the whole world has
seen-the systematic destruction of the only region of the
unoccupied part of Jordan which still servesas the source
of food for the population of that area. Everything has
been burned and, as the representative of Jordan has
pointed out, the wheat fields in particular, by intensive
aerial bombing which, we are cynically told, was SUPposedly a retort to the barrage fire from the Jordanian
sector. But this explanation, like other explanations and
justifications, does not surprise us in any way. It goes

150. No one here is unaware of what is at stake in our
debates and what interests are involved. On the one hand,
we have an aggressivepower firmly supported at all levels
by those whose interests might be endangered if peace,
which means first and foremost justice, were effectively
restored to the Middle East. On the other hand we have a
Palestinian nation which has been cruelly torn and scattered
for more than twenty years and which is no longer willing
to wait indefinitely for a peace that is constantly eluding it.
151. With these two opposing forces-an imperialism that
has resolutely given free rein to the aggressiveforces in the
11

broad acquaintance with international problems and the
recent impressions he has gained from trips to various
countries, including countries in the Middle East, will prove
extremely useful in the work of the Security Council.

without saying that Israel could not seriously worry about
the possibility that Jordan might commit acts of aggreSSiOn
against it. Time and time again, Israel has boasted that its
own armed forces are by themselves a match for all Arab
forces combined. Yesterday’s attack again really reflects the
need Israel feels to force Jordan to submit to its d&at. But
no real prospect of a solution can be found in such a diktat,
for colonial expansionism is pitting itself against the
determination of a whole people to resist the administrative
and totalitarian military occupation which Israel is in fact
forcing upon it.

I.

162. We, for our part, express our readiness to co-operate
both with the representative of Brazil and with the
representative of the United States in the task of maintaining international peace and security in general-the task
which is assigned to the Security Council under the United
Nations Charter-and particularly in liquidating the consequences of Israel’s aggression in the Middle East.

157. The struggle can only grow because nations will not
submit to the situation imposed upon them. That does not
mean that no solution which could lead to peace can be
envisaged. It means that we shall have to take into account
first the determination of certain Powers to maintain their
influence on and domination in the Middle East at all costs,
secondly, Israel’s warlike claims and its ever-growing hunger
for territorial gains, and lastly, the intensification of the
Palestinian people’s struggle to recover its sovereign rights, a
struggle which cannot cease until all its objectives have been
achieved.
158. The Security Council should have played and still can
play its vital role under the Charter. The Council should
allow the decisions taken at an earlier date-decisions which
have no chance of being implemented under the pressure of
military occupation and even less under the threat of
famine and destruction-to be applied effectively. Were the
Council to refrain from adopting such a decision and fail to
carry out its normal responsibilities in this field, it would
not make any contribution towards a final solution of the
Palestine problem, and would merely intensify further and
make more inevitable the struggle of the Palestinians
themselves to recover the national dignity of which they
have been deprived.

163. It also gives us great satisfaction to welcome our
compatriot, Mr. Kutakov, in his new post as !Jnder-Secretary-General of the United Nations. We of the Soviet
delegation, and many of the delegations here in the United
Nations know him through his work. We are certain that
now that he holds this responsible office in the international Organization, he will perform his duties with his
characteristic sense of responsibility and fidelity to the
lofty ideals of peace and the principles of the United
Nations Charter. We are profoundly convinced that his
broad knowledge and informed view of international
problems, together with his previous experience of work in
the United Nations, will enable him to be a worthy deputy
and assistant to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
164. The Security Council has been convened today to
discuss the question of the new aggressive acts committed
by Israel in violation of the Security Council resolution
calling for a cease-fire in the Middle East and despite the
repeated and solemn warnings by the Council that such acts
are resolutely condemned by the Council and that, if they
are repeated, the Security Council will have to take
measures in accordance with the Chart& to put an end to
them.

159. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, before passing on
to the substance of the matter, I should like to take this
opportunity to offer you a cordial welcome here in the
Security Council both as President of the Council and as
the distinguished representative of Brazil, a capacity in
which you are both ou; new, and at the same time our
former colleague. It gives us great pleasure to have this
opportunity to collaborate with you in the United Nations
where YOU are well known for your previous activity as a
distinguished diplomat whose wisdom has been enriched by
long experience in international affairs, and who has
brilliantly displayed his talents in serious diplomatic posts
and at several international conferences, including sessions
of the General Assembly, and also during discussions on
matters connected with disarmament problems. We are
certain that you will make full use of this experience in the
responsible and honourable office of President of the
Security Council, during the consideration of matters which
come before the Council for consideration and decision.

165. In the statement by the representative of Jordan, we
have heard a very detailed description of the nature of this
latest act of aggression committed by Israel against Jordan.
We have also heard the Israel representative’s speech of
justification. What can be more repugnant than a murderer
trying to justify his murder and looking for ways to
explain it?
166. We have heard the detailed speech by the representative of Iraq, who exposed the well-known techniques and
methods of the official representative of Israel-methods
which have already driven the Security Council to distraction. What more is there to say? The representative of
Israel has given the names of a few Israel casualties. But if
the representative of Jordan were also to begin listing the
killed and wounded, the Security Council would have to
double the length of our meeting merely to hear the list of
these victims, with their names and surnames. According to
the approximate figures for June alone, the Israel aggressors
killed 59 Arabs and wounded over 120. Now, during this
present aggressive action, there have been more than 30
killed and more than 80 wounded. These are the figures
which reveal the actual nature of this new, inhuman act of
the Israel aggressors.

160. I can only express regret that your Presidency begins
with such and unfortunate act of aggression.
161. We should also like to welcome to the Security
Council the new representative of the United States of
America, Ambassador Ball, and to express the hope that his

167. The representative of Israel mentioned that a bulldozer was blown up by a mine. But that bulldozer was
12

Working
in a border area which had been seized by Israel
forces on foreign territory. Is it any wonder, therefore, that
the Israel bulldozer was blown up by mines? Those mines
Were, or could have been, there in the border area long
before
5 June last year-that is, before the coming of the
foreign invaders, I could cite hundreds, thousands of cases
in which, in parts of my country’s territory occupied by the
invader, the occupier, the aggressor twenty-five years ago,
mines are exploding to this day, bulldozers are being blown
Up and people are being blown up by German fascist mines
Which
have been lying in the ground for more than a
quarter
of a century. The official representative of Israel,
by citing this accidental fact, hopes to convince the
Security
Council and wishes to blame it on the Arabs.
These are cheap tactics, unconvincing arguments. They only
go to prove that the Israel aggressor has no arguments to
justify
and defend his aggression and his aggressive policy.

occupation of Arab territories seized as a result of the
treacherous aggression in June last year constitutes a
violation of the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law and represents
a threat to the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Arab countries. The aggressor continues to
hold the occupied territory of neighbouring Arab countries
and to terrorize the population in the occupied areas; he is
trying to enslave it and crush its will to resist. But these are
vain hopes. Nobody can deprive the Arab population of its
lawful right to resist the invader and to fight for its
freedom.
173. The letters from the distinguished representative of
Jordan, submitted to the Security Council both in July and
in August, present factual information on the Israel
militarists’ activities. They contain information on the
intensive rocket bombardment of towns and inhabited
localities in Jordan by Israel armed forces. Not even the
representatives of Israel deny these new acts of aggression
by the Israel extremists.

f68.
Everybody, and especially the members of the
Security
Council, will remember very well that only a few
months
ago, in March of this year, the Security Council was
discussing
a similar serious situation created by an Israel
attack
on Jordan, an attack which the aggressor carried out
with large-scale land and air forces.

174. Judging by today’s reports in the United States press,
they are cynically bragging and boasting about these acts of
aggression. In essence Israel’s new aggression represents a
continuation of Tel Aviv’s aggressive policy which is
designed, by the arrogant use of military power and in
violation of all norms of international law, to further the
achievement of Israel’s imperialistic aims in the Middle
East, intimidate the neighbouring Arab countries by military blackmail, and force them to accept the results of
Israel’s military aggression.

169.
In its resolution 248 (1968) of 24 March 1968 the
Security
Council severely condemned Israel’s aggressive
actions.
These actions were described by the Council as a
flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. It
was also stated that “actions of military reprisal . . . cannot
be tolerated”.
In the same resolution of the Security
Council
it was stated in particular that “the Security
Council would have to consider further and more effective
steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against repetition
of such acts”.

175. The acts of the Israel extremists demonstrate that Tel
Aviv is not taking the Security Council’s warnings seriously
and is counting on impunity and even on the patronage of
certain major Western Powers, and is continuing its impudent defiance of the authority of the United Nations alld
the will of the overwhelming majority of States.

170.
Today the Council is confronted by the new fact,
that Israel has repeated its aggressive actions against Jordan,
by the fact that the Tel Aviv authorities have outrageously
ignored
the above-mentioned decision of the Security
Council. Moreover, Israel officials and the representatives of
Israel
here are advancing the monstrous theory that the
population
of the occupied territory has but one right: to
obey
the occupier, kneel down before him and kiss his
bloodstained
boot, Who originated this theory? Hitler and
his cIosest associates. Can Israel have sunk so low as to
propound
a Hitlerite theory, denying the population of
occupied territories the right to be honourable patriots of
their native countries and to fight for freedom? It is now
well known how Hitler met his end. Just a few days ago the
press of the entire world recalled that Hitler put an end to
his life-and his theory-cyanide. The same fate awaits any
aggressor
in our time. The peoples of the world riave
learned to prize their honour and are worthy of fighting for
their freedom and independence.

176. To this moment Israel continues to prevent a
peaceful political settlement in the Middle East and is
opposing by every possible means the implementation of
the resolution adopted by the Security Counci! on 22
November last year [242 (1967)].
177. The new acts of aggression against Jordan come
precisely at the time when the United Nations, through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, is entering a new round of consultations for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the Middle East.
This sort of action by Israel can only be considered a
deliberate and premeditated attempt to undermine the
success of Ambassador Jarring’s mission.
178. We cannot fail to note that this new act of aggression
was perpetrated only a few days after a visit by high-level
representatives of the United States to the Middle East.
Everybody may legitimately ask: what does this mean? IS
it the result of encouragement, or a manifest display of
disregard? This is a perfectly legitimate question. It will
occur to everybody who is following the development of
the situation in the Middle East attentively and who is
sincerely trying to bontribute to the success of Ambassador
Jarring’s mission.

171.
And this kind of aggressive theory will not help any
aggressor
anywhere, whether in the Far East or in the
Middle East.
172.
The Israel representative’s attempts to find pretexts
and justifications
for the aggression are groundless and
cannot
be considered. We know from history that the
aggressor
always tries to invent pretexts for his aggressive
actions. It is clear to the entire world that Israel’s continued
13

188. I wish to make it quite clear that my Government
does not condone the major military attack Israel made
upon Jordan on Sunday. There must be no doubt whatever
of United States opposition to this attack and to others
that have preceded it; but, at the same time, neither does
my Government condone those acts of terrorism and
sabotage that have been launched with increasing frequency
from Jordan during the past days and weeks, Those acts
should not be judged as isolated events; quite clearly they
are incidents in a concerted effort that cannot help but
have a cumulative impact. They clearly violate the cease-fire
resolutions of this Council, kill not Only military personnel
but civilians, and free the tension, fear and hatred that
frustrate the search for a peaceful settlement of this
problem.

1’79. The peace-loving States are endeavouring to assistthe
United Nations, the Secretary-General, and his Special
Representative in the Middle East, Mr. Jarring, in their
noble efforts to achieve a political settlement on a peaceful
basis.
180. The Arab States for their part, as we all know very
well, are also taking constructive steps. to create a more
favourable situation for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967).
181. Under these circumstances, no one can doubt that
Israel’s new provocations against Jordan have a specific
political purpose: to undermine the efforts being made by
the United Nations in the interests of a political settlement
in the Middle East and to continue the policy of sabotaging
the implementation of the Security Council resolution of
22 November 1967. Such action by Tel Aviv cannot be
tolerated.

189. Once again the Council finds itself confronted not
with facts that clearly define the issue but with chargesand
counter-charges, obscurity and confusion. To fulfil our role
with the assurance and objectivity expected of us is quite
impossible. And this brings home again the need for some
mechanism that will make it possible for the Council to act
in a truly informed manner when distasteful events of this
kind occur.

182. The Security Council must resist this policy of
aggression with a firm determination and resolve to put an
end to the military provocations of the Israel extremists
and to achieve a political settlement in accordance with the
Council’s resolution of 22 November.

190. It is timely, therefore, for the parties once again to
reconsider the positions they have taken in the past and to
agree to the presence of United Nations observersin the
area where violence is continuing to occur with such
regularity. The presence of such observers would prejudice
the rights of neither side. On the contrary, it could serveas
a deterrent to further incidents, save lives, assure retiable
information as to what actually occurred and, by reducing
tensions, help create the conditions in which peace may at
long last be realized.

183. The Soviet delegation most strongly urges the Security Council to condemn Israel for its criminal acts of
aggression against the Arab States and, in conformity with
the Charter, to take such steps for stopping aggressionand
punishing the aggressoras would discourage the arrogant
soldiers from Tel Aviv from wanting to continue their
military provocations.
184. As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, there should
be no doubt in anyone’s mind that it is determined,
together with other peace-loving States, to strive for the
cessation of Israel’s aggression, the liquidation of all its
consequences, the return to their lawful owners of the
territories seized from the Arab States as a result of the
1967 aggression, and the implementation of the indispensable political settlement in the Middle East on the basis of
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of every State in that area.

191. Within the last few weeks I have paid a brief visit to
the Middle East and have gained a deep impression asto the
hopes and desires of the people throughout the whole area.
All that I saw and heard persuaded me that the people of
the Middle East, no matter whether in Israel or in the Arab
nations that I visited, are weary of conflict. They have
known the awful destructiveness of war and, affected as
they clearly are by history and passion, are none the less
groping for an honourable and peaceful solution at the end
of the road.

185. The Soviet Union is firmly convinced that the
attempts by Israel and the forces supporting it to
consolidate the results of the June aggression against the
Arab States are unquestionably doomed to failure.

192. That solution will not be found through terror or
killing or brutal border incidents or through violent
reprisals, but through the incidence, the instruments and
the processes of accommodation and agreement. These
instruments and processes are readily at hand, for this is
one of the problems which in my judgement $e United
Nations is best equipped to resolve, Not only this C,ouncil
but the people of the area are fortunate in having available
to them the services of Ambassador Jarring who is striving
wisely and patiently, with sensitivity and determination, to
find those areas of agreement which are the key to a
peaceful settlement, the kind of settlement that can alone
offer to the people of the Middle East a chance to fulfil the
genius that is in them, through the resourcesthat are their
birthright.

186. Mr. BALL (United States qf America): I wish to
thank those representatives who have spoken here this
afternoon for the gracious and generous words of welcome
that they have addressedto me.
187. While it is true that I am present here today as a very
new member, the argument we have been listening to is,
unhappily, anything but new. It is merely one more chapter
in a lamentable chronicle. Once again this Council has been
called into session to consider complaints of violations of
the cease-fire between Jordan and Israel, which have led to
further loss of life and destruction of homes and other
property. We have heard the statements of the two sides
describing the events of 4 August and the weeksof violence
that preceded them.

193. Regardless of any precise adjudication of relative
guilt or innocence in this particular tragic situation, the
14

most useful thing for us to do is to exhort the parties once
more to lay aside their arms and to abide by the terms of
the cease-fire resolution both in letter and in spirit.

201. The Council has not held a meeting on Middle
Eastern problems for several months, but we have all been
very conscious of the extent of the distress and suffering in
the area, and of the violence which has continued. Feelings
are running very high, feelings which we understand only
too well. The Council did not discuss the attack on Irbid on
4 June, nor the circumstances which proceeded it. Now we
have these latest grave developments reported to us in the
letters from the Jordanian and Israeli representatives.

194. How many more incidents must occur, how many
more lives must be lost, how many.more families must look
forward to a bleak and tragic future before this hard but
simple lesson is learned? How many no one can say today
but, in a situation as complex as this, the best we can do is
to urge and to hope.

202. My delegation has always made it clear that those
who break the United Nations cease-fire forfeit international sympathy and support. We have repeatedly
stressed that all acts of violence are to be deplored wherever
they occur and in whatever circumstances. We now deplore
this serious and deliberate new attack, just as we deplore
the acts of violence which preceded it. As many members
of the Council have said, violence solves nothing; it merely
breeds more violence. Small-scale violence grows into large
scale violence; the vicious circle escalates. If we are to break
out of this vicious circle my delegation remains convinced
that the only solution is an unrelenting search for a
settlement which can be generally accepted and which will
endure. We believe that the resolution of 22 November
[242 (1967)] and Ambassador Jarring’s mission’still offer
the basis and the best hope for such a settlement. The
continued anguish, hatred and violence make it more
necessary than ever that Ambassador Jarring should be
given full support. Further resorts to violence and, even
more, escalation of violence such as the latest reports
indicate, do the opposite. We must make it plain not only
that we deplore violence, but also that those who resort to
it are harming their own causes and forfeiting sympathy
which could strengthen and help them in the months ahead.
Ambassador Jarring has shown great patience, tact and skill.
I think there was a general feeling during the summer that
the atmosphere showed some improvement. There is reason
to believe that he may be about to embark on further talks
and we must all hope for progress on which he can build.

195. Just a moment ago the representative of the Soviet
Union added his contribution
of obfuscation to the
discussion-this
discussion of a tragic situation that is
already clouded in dust and dissension. By an extraordinary
logic which treats fantasy as fact he accuses my country of
having encouraged the violence we are considering here and,
in an extraordinary flight of imagination, he even suggests
some causal connexion between my brief visit to the area
and the acts in question.
196. I do not believe that f need to take much notice of
this statement, which is so ob’viously false. I am confident
that the other Governments represented here today will
take no notice of it, Knowing the facts they could not do
otherwise.
197. It is late in the afternoon and we are all anxious
to
get on with the serious discussion of the sad problem before
us. I hope we will have no more attempts, by the making of
irresponsible charges, to deflect us from our solemn
business here today.
198. Mr. HILDYARD
(United Kingdom): As you have
pointed out, Mr. President, we have both a new President
and various new colleagues in our work on this Council. I
was very glad to hear you extend a welcome to them,
speaking as President and on behalf of all members of the
Council. I believe that this used to be the old practice and
all representatives then ex,tended whatever friendly and
fIattering sentiments they wished privately, rather than
publicly. Perhaps this will be our practice in the future.
But, as other members have spoken words of welcome, I
would not like to remain silent and would like to say how
very glad we are to welcome you, Sir, both as the
representative of Brazil and as our new President. It can be
a daunting task to assume the Presidency after only a few
weeks in New York, but with your great experience, both
in the highest posts in your own country and of the United
Nations, you are particularly well equipped to guide us. We
shall all benefit from your experience, your wisdom and
your broad objectivity.
199. Secondly, I am very glad to see as a neighbour
Ambassador Ball of the United States. He has had a
distinguished and varied career. We have all admired in his
book his historical sense, his powers of analysis and his
vision. The Council is fortunate indeed to have such a
powerful new representative well able to speak for his great
country, and we arc fortunate to have such a stimulating
new colleague.
200. Thirdly, I have already paid tribute in another forum
to our new Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Kutakov, but I
would like to say how much we welcome him %ere and to
wish him a very successful and happy period in office.

203. It is natural to want immediate solutions to blows
that sometimes seem unbearable. I hope, however, that we
will not allow ourselves to be diverted from a positive and
constructive course-even if this cannot bring immediate
results-by those blows and anguish, however deeply we
may feel them, and however much we may sympathize with
those affected. We all agreed on the lines of a settlement in
the resolution of 22 November, Our efforts must be
directed at breaking ‘this terrible vicious circle, and advancing, slowly perhaps but eventually, to a settlement of the
present lamentable state of affairs which can be accepted
by all and will endure.
204. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Jordan has
signified his wish to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I
now call on him.
205. Mr. EL-FARRA
late.

(Jordan): I realize that the hour is

/OS.
Most of the points raised by Mr. Tekoah are not new;
we have heard them on previous occasions, raised by the
same representative. I therefore need not take much of the
Council’s time to refute every single point raised. I had
occasion to state my answer to every question raised in the
15

“, . .._

past, and I simply would like to confine my reply to some
of these points we have heard this afternoon.

,’

207. No matter how we look at it, no one can be blind to
the reality of the situation; and no matter how much
Mr. Tekoah attempts to twist facts, facts are stubborn
things they are clear for everyone to see. He cited many
incidents-a list of incidents, He spent fifteen minutes or
more speaking about incidents, although his very military
authorities in Tel Aviv made things simpler for him and the
Security Council. They issued a statement, which can be
found in The New York Times of today. Reference was
made to it very clearly; it is a very long article, and I shall
quote only one part. Mr. Terrence Smith, writing from
Jerusalem, said-to support his statement:
“ . I . the Army press office distributed a detailed
eight-page account of 98 sabotage and shooting incidents.
Weheard them this afternoon.
“It says it occurred along the Jordanian border.
“The list includes mining and shooting in&dents in
which the Israeli army says44 Jordanian saboteurs were
slain, while three Israelis werekilled and 30 wounded.”
Then the statement continued:
“It is the sort of list Israel has prepared in advance of
each of her major reprisal raids agains+the Arabs.”
208. According to their own admission or confession, they
said they lost three, they killed forty-four. What wasbehind
this reprisal of yesterday? If it is the intention to twist
facts and to cite numbers and figures, these are the
numbers, taken from their military authorities in Tel Aviv
and Jerusalem.
209. In his statement this afternoon, Mr. Tekoah said-and
I am quoting from his speech-“the cease-firecannot be a
screen for Arab aggression”, I ask the Council this question:
Is the cease&e intended to be a screen for continued
Israeli expulsion of the inhabitants of the occupied areas?
Did you intend by your resolution to make it a screen for
continued changes in the City of Jerusalem, in violation of
your resolution adopted last May by thirteen votes to none
with two abstentions? Was it intended to be a s’creenfor
the continued acts of genocide in the Gaza Strip? Was it
intended to be a screen for the continued arbitrary arrests
in the west bank of Jordan occupied by Israel? And, above
all, was your cease-fire resolution intended to freeze the
situation and kesp the Israelis there occupying Jordanian
territories, Syrian territories, United Arab Republic territories and the Gaza Strip? I do not think that was your
resolution.
210. He then went on to say: “Jordan became the principal
base for continued Arab aggressionagainst Israel”. Is it not
Jordan which is now standing on the other side of the
bridge, receiving the expellees every single day? Is not
Jordan the country which has half a million expellees from
the west bank and Gaza Strip and Sinai? Is it not Jordan
now the small Member which is carrying the burden of
feeding and helping and accommodating half a million
expellees from the occupied areas?

..

211. Those people do go back-we have no control over
them-to get-killed, maybe, in their own homeland. They
do go there, I admit, but we have no control over their
movements. We are not there to defend the Israel aggression. The answerto their aggression is to get out of the west
bank and then complain about possible feduyeen or
resistance. But as long as they are there, there is only one
single answer to occupation: resistance. It is not something
created by the half million expellees who go back to resist:
it is the mission of every single individual suffering from
occupation. So it is not for Mr. Tekoah to speak about
aggression while the Israelis are living and staying in and
occupying almost half of Jordan. He is not coming here
with clean hands when he speaks and preachesabout values,
because he is committing aggression; every single second he
is continuing his aggression. I should hope Mr. Tekoah was
not expecting the people expelled by him and his authorities to send a thank-you note to Mr. Dayan for expelling
them, or to send a letter of appreciation for the crime
committed by Mr. Dayan and other members of the Israeli
authorities. Mr. Tekoah stated-to quote his exact words:
“It is regrettable that the Jordanian Government should use
inhabited centres such as Irbid as locations for their
artillery positions.” Those are the exact words of Mr. Tekoah this afternoon.
212. I should like to say that this is a misrepresentation of
fact; it has no foundation. Mr. Tekoah does not have to
take my word for it; the big Powers around this table sent
their military attach&-and they all have a complete
report-immediately
after the attack on Irbid. They went
their on a fact-finding mission; they examined the city of
Irbid; they went around the city of Irbid; they visited every
single area which was subjected to Israeli attack on 4 June;
and they came up with the answer; and I wish the big
Powers who sent their military attaches would come openly
and speak the truth about it, because the military attaches
reported exactly what happened; they spoke about whether
or not there was any military position there, or artillery in
Irbid. We hope, maybe against hope, that some of the
Powers that sent their military attaches to Irbid would
come here and state in the Council whether or not we had
military positions in the city of Irbid.
213. Then Mr. Tekoah proceeded, after citing many colourful incidents, to refer to my statement to Al-Muharrer.
He said that on 26 July it stated: “Jordan’s representative
to the United Nations, Ambassador El-Farra declared in an
interview with the Lebanese daily Al-1Muhmrer”-and then
he gave a quotation. I would say that this quotation was
taken out of context; and in order to set the record straight
I should like to refer to the complete text of my statement
to Al-Muharrer. All that AZ-Muhawer had wasmine; I said
it. But what Mr. Tekoah said is his own misrepresentation
and his own fabrication. I have Al-Muharrer right here, and
this is the statement:
“‘Al-Muharrer, 26 July 1968, Beirut, Lebanon.

“Jordan’s Representative Interviewed by AZ-Muhawer.
“Amman-AZ-Muharrer

‘a correspondent

Sudki

Al-

Dhaher.
“Jordan’s Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, Dr. Muhammad El-Farra, stated in answer to
16

‘elw
:ir
:srst

or
ne
[m
;t:
m
ut
id
re
5,
1e
as
r%
le
:li
s..
;e
ir
ef
0
1t
e
It
If
Y
:;
6
Y
‘S

r
n
i
d
I*
e
I
1
s
t
:
;

.
I
I

questions @t’to him by Al-Muharrer, that the success or
failure of Jarring’s mission is directly related with the
acceptance or rejection by Israel of the Security Council
resolution
which he is seeking to implement. It is
common knowledge that Israel has refused to accept and
implement
the resolution in question, thus leaving no
other alternative to moving her from her present position
except by resort to force.”

217. Whenever we come before the Council to present a
situation fraught with danger, whenever we come with a
clear-cut case, we find, on the one hand, that Israel is trying
to distort and confuse the issue with countercharges, and,
on the other hand, we find also some members raising the
question of observers, 1 have said, and 1 say again, that
there already is machinery in the area called the Mixed
Armistice Commission. That machinery, according to the
United Nations jurisprudence, is still there; it is still binding
and should be effective. We cannot think in terms of
observers in the cease-fire area while ignoring at the same
time violations within the occupied areas. Observers should
be along the whole Armistice Demarcation Line, That
includes’ the Gaza Strip, the west bank, the Syria-Israel
Armistice Demarcation Line. That is the place for the
observers. It does not help to ignore the United Nations
machinery in the area. We need observers in Jerusalem. Why
do you not care to think about observers in Jerusalem? We
know now, and everyone knows, that the Israelis are
committing violations every single day in Jerusalem in
defiance of the United Nations resolution. Why not have
observers there? We are for observers, but their place is the
place embodied in the Mixed Armistice Agreement.

.I any referring to the peaceful implementation of the
resolution
which we accepted and which you wanted to
implement.
The article on my interview continues:
“AS regards optimism pertaining to a sob&on of the
crisis, he stated”-my
statement.-“ ‘I am convinced that
Israel is bent upon expansion; thus what peace she calls
for is the peace of surrender to secure further gains.’ ”
This can be proved by its behaviour right here. They have
not accepted the resolution, they have not announced their
desire
to implement the resolution without conditionwhich
we did. There has been no change in the Israeli
position.
“ ‘The utterances of Israeli spokesmen and their posing
in the guise of moderates and extremists merely reflect
the devious avenues they employ towards the ultimate
and one goal, that is rejection of the Security Council
resolution
as part of their over-all attempts to subjugate
and humiliate the Arab nation.’ ”
Then
comes the quotation
context:

218. The PRESIDENT: 1 now call upon the representative
of Israel, who has asked to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
219. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): 1 should like, first of all, to
express my appreciation to the representative of Jordan for
his having clarified the statement which 1 quoted earlier in
my speech that warfare by terror should continue “under
the present circumstances”. Indeed, it is the present
circumstances that are of concern to the Security Council.
A similar statement was made by the Jordanian representative in support of warfare by terror, as reported by the
Egyptian Agency on 27 June in the Egyptian paper
Al Ahram.

used by Mr. Tekoah out of

“As regards prevailing acts of resistance, El-Farra
commented:
‘Under
present
circumstances’,“-the
circumstances
of refusing to accept and implement the
United
Nations Security Council resolutirn- “ ‘1 am
entirely
convinced that unified and co-ordinated resistance are the only means available to keep the flames of
our righteous cause aglow until such time as the Arab
nation is capable of mobilizing its resources and carrying
out its mission of liberating the usurped land from the
hands of the aggressors.’ ”

220. The representative of Jordan-a country that invaded
Palestine in 1948 in defiance of the United Nations and
illegally occupied the west bank of the Jordan for nineteen
years without obtaining recognition of that occupation
even from other Arab States-claims from time to time to
speak on behalf of the inhabitants of the west bank. In fact,
he speaks only on behalf of those who are ready to
continue to sacrifice the Arab people on the altar of blind
hatred and hostility.

214.
The emphasis here is on peace. We want peace, We
want
implementation of your unanimous resolution. We
want this to be the way to stability in the area. But if the
Israelis
are going to reject your resolution, continue their
occupation,
continue committing crimes every day, then of
course
resistance is the solution. It is the only remaining
solution.

221. What had been, and what should be now, is perhaps
illustrated better by a declaration made by Sheikh Mohammed Ali Ja’abari, former Minister of Education of Jordan
and now Mayor of Hebron on the west bank. On 7 April
1968, Sheikh Ja’abari, according to XJzeNew York Times,
referring to ths situation prior to last June 1967, said: “We
have been kicked around like a football for twenty years
and it must stop. That means peace with Israel.” This is
what the Arab people want. Why must the Arab Governments and their representatives here in this Council deny it
to them?

215.
Mr. Tekoah referred to the cease-fire. He exhorted
Jordan
to forgo war, to abide by the cease-fire, to take
together
the road towards peace. But the price of peace is
justice
and the remedy that will bring peace is your
resolution.
1 am sure that expulsion, intimidation, threats
and bombing are not the road to peace, ncr were they
supported
or endorsed by the cease-fire resolution.
‘Jig1 6 . These are the points 1 wanted to answer at this late
hour
of your deliberations. 1 may have to clarify other
points,
if need be. Meanwhile, 1 hope that before concluding you will permit me to say a few words asout the
question
of observers.

222. In The New York Times of 2 June we read:
“The six-day war has brought about more co-operation
between Arab and Jew than the eighteen preceding years
of armistice agreements. This co-operation has two
17

channels: the link across the Jordan River and the daily
experience of coexistence on the west bank.”
223. Why must the gory nightmare of the past be glorified
by the Arab representatives, the present distorted by them
and the future sown with calamity?
Nothing could have illustrated more the travesty of
law, the mockery of human rights, than the appearance
before this council in the nameof law’and justice by the
representative of Iraq. His statement apparently presupposesthat the world hasforgotten the twenty-year War of
aggressionhis country, togetherwith other Arab States,has
waged againstIsrael, that the world has already forgotten
what happenedonly a year ago,when the Arab assaultwas
mounted againstIsrael, when the cries for blood, Israeli
blood, soundedfrom Radio Baghdad.His statementapparently presupposesthat the world is unaware of or
uninterestedin the warfare that his Governmentis supperting and pursuingtenaciouslyandmaliciouslyagainstIsrael,
contrary to the cease-tiredecisionsof the Security Council.
Doeshe not representa Governmentthat actively organizes
and stages terror operations from Jordanian territory,
contrary to the Charterandthe Security Councilcease-fire,
assigningspecialunits of the Iraqi regular army to that
deadly task, training and armingthe raiders?HOW is it that
the representativeof Iraq evincessuchconcernfor human
rights and the rights of peoples?Is not his Governmentthe
one that detainsits Jewishcitizensin concentrationcamps,
deprives them of their rights by Hitlerian legislationand
exterminatesKurds in a war of genocide?
224.

225. To the representativeof Iraq we say: Before anyone
can be expected to recognizeyour right to plead in the
nameof law, to speakof actsthat might aggravatetension,
abandonyour aggressive
war againstIsrael,stop warfareby
terror. Before you expressviewson humanrights anywhere,
stop the constant violations of human rights within your
own borders.

acts and blind and hateful crimes intended to provoke
insecurity and sow violence, despite the fact that every
facility is publicly offered for sincere discussion,with
both sidesexpressingtheir views, of the disputed issues.
Thus, to try to liken the resistanceagainstNazism to a
movementof elementsinflamed by Arab leaderssurround.
ed by former Nazi criminalswho desireto continue the
Hitlerite genocideis an insult deeply felt not only by the
citizens of Israel who are bravely defendingtheir right to
life but alsoby all resistance-fighterswho have remained
true to themselves.“i
228. I am certain the Soviet Government would not wish
to continue to usurpthe right of anti-Nazi fighters to speak.
on their own behalf.
229. Much of the conflict in the Middle East is due to
blind adherenceto extreme and unjust slogans.No lessof a
prisoner of dogmatic slogansis the Government of the
Soviet Union. Unfortunately, it still believesthat simply by
announcingit in Moscowthe reactionary andundemocratic
policiesof Arab regimescan be turned into progressiveones
and their aggressioninto just wars. The people of Eastern
Europe do not believe these slogans.The people of the
Soviet Union do not believe them. Why shouldthe world?
If the Soviet Government desiressincerely to contribute to
peace in the Middle East, it must free itself from the
shacklesof theseout-dated, reactionary slogans,assume
an
objective and fair attitude and recognize the right of all
peoplesin the area to freedom, sovereignty, security and
peace.
230. What the peoplesof Israel and the Arab States need
is less acrimony, less demagogy and more constructive
reasoning,on how to reach understanding,security and
peace. There is one essentialstep that must be taken
towards that end: faithful, scrup~~lousadherenceto the
cease-fire.

226. The Soviet representatiie,in a passionate
espousalof
231. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative
Arab aggression,
hastried to createnot only new notionsof
of Jordan, who has expresseda wish to speakin exerciseof
right and justice but even new facts of geography.I have the right of reply.
repeatedly suggestedto the Soviet representativethat he
should beware of his Arab mentors.To them, of course, 232. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Just one single point.
any point in any part of Israel is Arab territory, to be Mr. Tekoah o_ncemore,attempted to distort the statement
reconquered by aggression.However, the bulldozers are made to Al-Muhaner. This can be regarded only as a
being mined on Israeli soil, Israeli villages shelledby
deliberate attempt to distort the real meaningbehind it.
Jordanianartillery and attacked by raidersfrom Jordanare The present circumstancesare very clear and refer to very
in Israeli territory. The least the world expects from
clearpoints in the statement.
Governmentsmembersof the Security Council, and especially permanent membersof the Security Council, is 233. Point number one: the continued defianceby the
respectfor facts.
Israelisof the Security Council resolutionby refusingit and
227. b&xv me also to end once and for all the Soviet its implementation.
representative’sabuse of the memory of those millions
234. Point number two:-and this is mentioned in the
annihilated by Hitler and the mockery of those who
statement-the continued occupation of Arab territories
resistedthe Nazis. At its plenary sessionin Brusselsfrom
and
the continued policy of aggression.
3 to 7 Apr& held with the participation of distinguished
delegations from Belgium, France, the United. Kingdom,
Austria, Cyprus, Denmark,the United States,Luxembourg, 235. Point number three: the continued Israeli policy of
annexation.
Israel, Italy, Norway andthe Netherlands,the International
Union of Resistanceand DeporteeMovementsadoptedthe
236. Point number four: the continued Israeli policy of
following resolution:
“peaceof surrenderto securefurther gains”.
“There can be no comparisonbetween, on the one
hand, the spirit of resistanceand, on the other, terrorist
1 Quotedin Frenchby thespeaker.
18

237. Those are the four points in my statement. Under
these circumstances and based on these considerations of
Israeli policies, the only remaining alternative is the only
legitimate alternative, which is resistance. The statement is
there for everyone to read and analyse. I do not think it is
open to Mr. Tekoah to read something into a thing which is
clear on its face.

contravention of the solemn guarantees given to them by
the international community?
245. No, sir, no people can be expected to accept such a
fate without resisting and the people of Palestine are no
different from other peoples of the world. Therefore I
reject entirely the statements of some of the representatives
around this table who said that the activities of the freedom
fighters of Palestine are violations of the cease.fIre. They
are nothing of the kind.

238. I must emphasize one point in conclusion: that no
matter what the Israelis say here, one thing is very clear. No
Israeli crimes, no Israeli Craime attack, no attack on the
rural people of Irbid, no attack on the civilian rural
population of Salt, no attack on those people will make
them abandon their rights. You have to understand that.
That is the crux of it. None of these things will make the
people of these lands surrender their legitimate rights.

246. I think it is not only unjust and unfair to try to
equate the individual acts for which no government is
responsible with the carefully planned massive retaliatory
raids undertaken by the armed forces of Israel. But let us
not follow the representative of Israel in his flight of fancy
and let us come down to facts.

239. So it is not a question of scoring points. It is a
question of Israel’s presence violating the Charter, United
Nations values and Security Council resolutions. The
answerto all this is their withdrawal from Arab lands, clear
and simple.

247. The Security Council since June 1967, since it
adopted the various cease-fireresolutions, has adopted six
resolutions, all unanimously. First there was the resolution
called the humanitarian resolution, adopted on 14 June
1967 [237(1967)], which asked two things of Israel. It
asked Israel to facilitate the return of those who left
because of the hostilities in the area of war. It also asked
Israel to treat the civilian population in the occupied areas
in accordance with the Geneva Convention. We have been
informed on reliable authority that out of more than
170,000 applications for return to their homes, only
14,000 people were allowed to go backin accordancewith
that resolution.

240. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
Iraq in exerciseof his right of reply.
241. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): I must apologize for taking
the floor at this late hour, but I think that the members of
the Council will understand that the representative of Israel
has left me no alternative but to speak in order to answer
his statement.

248. When the Secretary-General asked the Israel Government to agree that a special representative should go to the
area to see for himself the situation and the conditions
under which the civilian population lives, after procrastinating and delaying for a long time they finally came up with
a reply that the Secretary-General rightly considered a
rejection of this proposal, trying to tie in entirely irrelevant
questions completely outside the scope of the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, knowing
full well that such conditions as they set for the implementation of these resolutions and for the acceptance of the
proposals of the Secretary-General could not be accepted
either by the Arab :ountries involved or by the Secretary
General himself.

242. He spoke about constructive reasoning and then gave
a very eloquent display of that constructhe rtiasoning by
launching a vicious personal attack against me and against
my people. He brought entirely irrelevant issues into our
discussion today, trying to confuse the very grave situation
with which the Security Council is seized at present.
243. Let me say only that it is grotesque to try to equate
the situation of the Jewish community in Iraq-all of whom
are loyal citizens of my country and who live in an
atmosphere of complete equality and tranquillity-to
the
repressive and wholesale expulsion of the inhabitants, the
people, of Palestine, to the continuous terrorization of the
inhabitants of the occupied areas.

249. So this is Israel’s attitude toward the first resolution
adopted by the Security Council since the end of hostilities
in June 1967.

244. What are the people of Palestine expected to do?
Are they expected to sit calmly’in their wretched refugee
camps, seeing their country being transformed beyond
recognition, seeing their homes taken away by alien
immigrants, seeing their villages obliterated out of existence? What are they supposed to do when they hear day
in and day out responsible leaders of Israel declaring that
they will not relinquish the areas occupied last June? What
are they supposed to do when thousands of their brethren
are daily being expelled from Gaza and other areas of the
west bank across the Jordan River? What are they
supposed to do when their Holy Places are being desecrated
in Jerusalem? What are they supposed to do when their
properties are being expropriated and their houses demol”
ished? What are they expected to do when their whole
country has been taken over by an immigrant minority and
they are not allowed to return to their own homes, in

250. What was the second resolution? It is the famous
resolution 242 (1967), adopted unanimously by the Security Council, providing the basis for a peaceful settlement
of the problem in the area. Is it’not strange, is it not
revealing that in his long dissertation about peace he did
not mention resolution 242 (1967) once? He did not once
mention the mission of Ambassador Jarring. What does this
reveal? Does this reveal genuine interest in peace, in
accordance with the wishes of this Council? No. It reveals
one thing and one thing only: Israel has no intention of
carrying out the provisions of that resolution. It has done
everything since the adoption of that resolution to seeto it
that the full implementation of that resolution becomes
impossible, by creating new situations and by subverting
19

-

the activities of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
251, It also means that Israel, in accordance with the
often expressed wishes of its leaders, does not intend to
withdraw from the territories occupied during the conflict
of June 1967. The withdrawal from these territories is the
central provision of resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967. It must be clear that under that resolution no just
and lasting settlement can be made without withdrawal of
Israel’s troops from the areas occupied during that conflict.

theory is: unconditional obedience by the population of
the occupied territories-go down on your knees before the
aggressor and kiss his blood-stained boot. Such a theory will
never be accepted by any self-respecting people, no matter
how the Israel aggressors may try to popularize this theory
and regardless of how or where or at which congresses in
Brussels or elsewhere they may manage to impose their
view.
259. Finally, I should like to draw attention to the fact
that the representative of the Israel aggressors has already
been called to order once in the Security Council, during
the Presidency of the distinguished representative of the
United Kingdom, Lord Caradon. Instead of discussing thi
issue, the substance of which is that Israel is accused of
aggression, of new acts of aggression, he is trying to distract
our attention by slandering other countries and peoples,He
has already been called to order once. He has been seriously
warned and reprimanded; but evidently he has understood
nothing and learned nothing. If he continues the same
practice in the future then, obviously, the Security Council
will again be obliged to take steps to ensure that he does
not interfere in the affairs of other States and peoples but
answers the charges legitimately brought against him both
by the representative of Jordan and by the representative of
Iraq, and by almost all those who have spoken here, No one
has expressed approval of the new Israel aggression, No one
is trying to justify it,

252. The third resolution-resolution 248 (1968) of 24
March 1968-is the one to which I referred in my first
statement. How did Israel abide by that resolution? I have
given three examples of the response of Israel to the
warning which was included in that resolution: the attack
on Jordan in the Dead Sea area, the attack on Irbid, and
finally the attack of yesterday.
2.53. What about resolutions 250 (1968) and 251 (1968)
regarding the parade in Jerusalem? I do not have to say
much, only that Israel completely disregarded these resolutions and did not even bother to answer regarding their
implementation.
254. We come to the final resolution-resolution
252
(1968) on Jerusalem, in which the Security Council
deplored the failure of Israel to comply with the General
Assembly resolutions on Jerusalem. What was the response
of Israel to that resolution? Again, complete disregard.

260. Just one more comment. The representative of Israel
has tried to distract the Council’s attention by asserting
that, once the disobedience of the population in the
occupied territories has stopped, everything will be all right,
and this-he says-is the only way of solving the problem.
No, Mr. representative of Israel, that is not the main point.
And do not try to divert the attention of the Security
Council and the United Nations from the essence of the
matter. The main point is that Israel must impIement the
resolution adopted by Security Council on 22 November
1967 (242 (1967)/ and must withdraw its troopsfromthe
occupied territories. That is the crux of the matter. Once
you withdraw your troops from the occupiedterritories,
everything will be in order and the matter will be settled.
Once you agreeto comply with all the provisionsof the
Security Council resolution of 22 November,the political
settlementin the Middle East will be achieved.That isthe
main issue and that is the key to the solution of the
problem.

255. So, instead of trying to lead the members of the
Council through irrelevancies and flights of fancy, let us
discuss facts-the facts of Israel’s position, of Israel’s
behaviour, vis-a-vis the unanimously adopted resolutions of
this Council. Those are the facts with which the Council
should concern itself, and on the basis of those facts the
Council should determine what action it should take in
regard to this latest aggressive act by the Israeli armed
forces against Jordan,
256. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
the Soviet Union who wishes to exercise his right of reply.
257. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I do not intend to engage in
polemics with the representative of Israel. I shall confine
myself to a statement firmly rejecting the calumny and
insinuations he is spreading here regarding the Soviet and
Eastern European peoples.

261. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakerson my
list for today’s meeting. May I be permitted to extendmy
warm thanksfor the kind and generouswordsof the several
speakerswho welcomedme today asthe representative
of
Brazil to the Security Council? I shallendeavourto liveUP
to their words, to their confidence, andaboveali to their
friendliness.

2.58. AS to the question of who is offending whom, it is
precisely the Israel representative who, with his theory oc
unconditional obedience by the pcpulation in the occupied
territories, is offending the sacred memory of millions of
Soviet partisans, of the Polish, Czechoslovak, Hungarian
and French maquis and of all those who have died for their
countries’ freedom and independence. The Israel aggressor’s

The meetingroseat 7p.m.

20

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
de% Notions
Unies
sent en vente
dons
les libroiries
et 10s ogsncer
dCpositoires
du monde
entier.
lnformex-vow
ovprbr
de votre libroirle
ou adrarrer-vous
bz
Nations
Unier, Section
des venter,
New York ov Genbvc.

KAK IlOJY’iHTb

M3~AHllR

OPrAHH3AL(WH

OSbEAHHEHHblX

HAL(Hil

~hX~lllllll
O~~~clllll:l~l(IlIl
%L~~~IlClIIII~lX
Ihl\llil
JIOili110 K~UllTb 11 IilllI2illl~lS
~It3KU111lflX
i1l'CIITI'TIILlS 110 IlWX
p:U?OlKIS NlIpS
hlO~llTC
t'DpMllill
06 ll:l~~llllllS
II IlllUIPM
lillllilillOY
Hara:lnllC
ILlI lIrrlull~c
110 aqwg
: Oprallnnnr[lul
0henllllclllll~lX
IInl(rll"l.
CCtillllH
UpOJfi;liC
ll:lJ,Ulllli"l,
IIbW)-nOl)Ii
ll.7n 3fCCllCD&

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de lo1 Neciones
Unidar
est6n
en todos partes det mundo. Conrulte
o su librero
Ventor, Nueva York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

UO

UNIDAS

en vento en librerias
y ccuos distribuidoras
o dirijose
a: Naciones
Unidar,
Secci6n

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

11

in other currencies)

de

35635-October

1972-2,oso
