VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

governmental orga!lizations _in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council to answer the Secretary-G~neral's request for their views and observations concef!lmg
the problem of arbitrary executions and summary executions;
7. Requests the Committee on C~ime Preven~ion and
Control to examine the problem of arbitrary executions and
summary executions at its seventh session with a view to
making recommendations.
49th plenary meeting
9 November /98/

36/28.

International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resoluti~ns 34/151 of 17 December 1979

and 35/126 of 11 December 1980, by which it decided to
designate and observe 1985 as International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace,
Recalling also its decision 35/318 of I I December 1980
on the appointment of the members of the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year,
Recognizing the profound importance of the _direct participation of youth in shaping the future of mankmd a_nd the
valuable contribution that youth can make m the implementation of the new international economic order based
on equity and justice,
Considering it necessary to disseminate among youth the
ideals of peace, respect for human _rights and fund~me_ntal
freedoms, human solidarity and dedication to the obJect1ves
of progress and development,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the energies,
enthusiasms and creative abilities of youth to the tasks of
nation-building, the struggle for self-determination and national independence, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and against foreign domination and occupation, for the economic, social and cultural ~dvance~ent
of peoples, the implementation of the new mternatJonal
economic order, the preservation o~ world peace and. the
promotion of international co-operat10n and understandmg,
Emphasizing again that the United Natio_ns should give
more attention to the role of young people m the world of
today and to their demands for the world of tomorrow,
Recalling the topicality of assessing the needs and aspirations of youth, and reaffirming the importance of current
and projected United Nations activiti~s desi_gned to _incre~se
the opportunities for youth and for Its active part1c1pat10n
in national development activities,
Believing that it is urgently desirable to consolidate the
efforts of all States in carrying out specific programmes
concerning youth and to improve the activities of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies in the field of youth,
including youth exchanges in the cultural. sporting and other
fields,
Reaffirming the necessity for better co-ordina~ion of efforts in dealing with specific problems confrontmg young
people and in examining the mann~r _in which t~ose problems are being treated by the specialized agencies and by
various United Nations bodies.
Convinced that the preparation and observance in 1985
of the International Youth Year under the motto "Participation, Development, Peace" will offer a useful a_nd s_ignificant opportunity for drawing attention to th~ s1tuat!on
and specific needs and aspirations of )'.Outh, for _mcreas1~g
co-operation at all levels in dealing with youth issues, tor
undertaking concerted action programmes in favour of yo~th
and for involving young people in the study and resolut10n
of major national. regional and international problems,

169

Confident that the International_ Youth Y~ar will ser_ve to
mobilize efforts at the local. nat10nal, reg10nal and mternational levels in order to promote the best educational,
professional ~nd livin_g _con_diti<?ns for young people, to ensure their active part1c1pat10n m the over-all develop~ent
of society and to encourage the prel?aration of new 1_1at1onal
and local policies and programmes m ac~o~d_ance with each
country's experience, conditions and pnont1es.
Recognizing that the preparation and observance of ~he
international Youth Year will contribute to the reaffirmation
of the goals of the new international e~onomic order and
to the implementation of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 4~
Recalling also in this connection its de_cision 35/_424 of
S December 1980 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on the question of guidelines
for international years and anniversaries,
A ware that for the International Youth Year to be successful and to maximize its impact and practical efficiency,
adequate preparation and the widesl?read s~pport. of Governments, all specialized agencies, mte~att<!nal mtergovernmental and non-governmental orgamzations and the
public will be required,
Noting with great satisfaction _the interest. o'. Member
States, various United Nations bodies and spec1ahzed agencies, as well as youth organizations, in the decision to designate and observe 1985 as International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
Taking note of the report of the ~dv_isory C~mmittee for
the International Youth Year on its first sess10n, held at
Vienna from 30 March to 7 April 198 I ,48
1. Endorses the Specific Programme of Measures and
Activities to be undertaken prior to and during the International Youth Year, as adopted by the Advisory Committee
for the International Youth Year and contained in the report
of the Secretary-General. 49 bearing in mind that co~tinued
review and revision of the Programme should he earned out
in the coming years;
2. Requests the Secretary-General !o_t~ansmit the Specific Programme of Measures and Act1v1t1_es to all St_ates,
United Nations bodies, specialized agencies and regional
commissions as well as to the international intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned with
a view to its early implementation;
3. Invites all State~. all United Nations bodies, specialized agencies, regional commissions and the i_nte~national intergovernmental and non-governmental orgamzat1ons
concerned, as well as youth organizations, to exert all possible efforts for the implementation of the Specific P~ogramme of Measures and Activities, in accordance with
their experience, conditions and priorities;
4. Stresses the importance of active and direct participation of youth organi~ations in _the acti_vities organized at
the local, national, reg10nal and mternational levels for the
preparation and observance of the International Youth Year;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary
measures to ensure the proper co-ordination of the implementation and follow-up of the Specific Program_me of M~asures and Activities, including the provision of mformat1on;
6. Requests the Secretary-General,_ in_ consultati?n with
Governments of Member States, spec1ahzed agencies and
all the international bodies and organizations concerned, to
prepare for submission to the General Assembly at its thirty0

" Resolution 35156. anne,
" A/36/21). annex
'" //,id . sect. IV. decision I I I l

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

170

seventh session, through the Advisory Committee, a progress report on the implementation of the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the second session of the Advisory Committee during the second
half of 1982, prior to the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly, to provide it with all necessary assistance
and to submit to it a progress report on the implementation
of the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities;
8. Invites the Advisory Committee to pay particular
attention to the implementation of the Specific Programme
of Measures and Activities and, to this end, to submit adequate recommendations to the General Assembly;
9'. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
concrete measures, through all the communications media
at his disposal, to give widespread publicity to the activities
of the United Nations system in the field of youth and to
increase the dissemination of information on youth;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary measures in order to enable the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat
to perform its tasks and responsibilities for the adequate
preparation and observance of the International Youth Year;
11. Again appeals to all States, to international governmental and non-governmental organizations and to the
public to make in due time generous voluntary contributions
to supplement funds provided under the regular budget of
the United Nations for the costs of the Specific Programme
of Measures and Activities and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take all appropriate measures for obtaining
such voluntary contributions;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace" and to grant it
high priority.
57th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/29.

Efforts and measures for securing the implementation and the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly the right to education
and to work

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 50 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 51 and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 51
Recalling its resolution 34/151 of l7 December 1979, by
which it decided to designate 1985 as International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
Recognizing the profound importance of the role of youth
for the all-round development of each country,
Convinced of the need for further action aimed at the
codification and implementation, whenever possible, of the
rights of youth with special regard for the right to work,
stipulated in article 6 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights as one of the fundamental
human rights,
Aware of the fact that the unemployment of youth is a
hindrance to the full participation of young people in the
socio-economic life of their country, limits their ability to
participate in the development process and is, furthermore.
a source of increased social ills, and in this regard empha>0 Resolution 217 A (III).
" Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex

sizing the importance of secondary and higher education of
youth as well as of its access to appropriate technical, vocational guidance and training programmes,
Considering it necessary that States and also international
organizations and their bodies should examine in a more
comprehensive, systematic and effective manner ways and
means to secure the implementation of human rights and
their enjoyment by youth, particularly the right to education
and to work, aimed at solving the problem of youth
unemployment,
I. Calls upon all States, in view of the forthcoming
International Youth Year, to adopt appropriate legislative,
administrative and other measures, for the implementation
and the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly
the right to education and to work, aimed at solving the
problem of youth unemployment;
2. Appeals to the respective governmental and nongovernmental organizations to pay, during the preparation
and observance of the International Youth Year, increased
attention to the securing and realization of the basic right
of young people to education and vocational training and
to work;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, the Commission for Social Development and the Commission on
Human Rights, as well as other relevant bodies of the United
Nations and specialized agencies, to give continuous attention to the problems of the unemployment of youth and to
resolving them;
4. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to ensure that, in the context of the preparations for the Year, systematic and continuous attention
is given to the efforts aimed at the promotion of human
rights and their enjoyment by youth, particularly the right
to education and vocational training and to work, with a
view to resolving the problem of youth unemployment.
57th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/30.

World Assembly on Aging

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/52 of 14 December 1978, in
which it decided to convene a World Assembly on Aging
in 1982, and 35/129 of 11 December 1980,
Bearing in mind that the number of older people in the
world, in both the developed and developing countries, will
increase dramatically during the next two decades,
Recognizing that the aging are a valuable human resource
as much in the economic and social fields as in the transmission of the cultural heritage,
Emphasizing the great importance of the World Assembly
on Aging in addressing the broad spectrum of questions
concerning the aging and in helping to formulate policies
to deal with these questions,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Advisory Committee for the World Assembly on Aging on its
first session, held at Vienna from 17 to 21 August 1981, 52
I. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Austria to
act as host to the World Assembly on Aging; 53
2. Decides that the World Assembly on Aging will be
held at Vienna from 26 July to 6 August 1982;
3. Decides further that, subject to the conditions in paragraph 8 below, two days of pre-conference meetings should
be held at Vienna immediately before the World Assembly
" A/361472, annex.
" See A/361357.
