A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/264
17 August 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 53
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.61)]
48/264.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2837 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 33/138 of
19 December 1978, 39/88 of 13 December 1984, 45/45 of 28 November 1990, 46/77
of 12 December 1991, 46/140 of 17 December 1991, 46/220 of 20 December 1991
and 47/233 of 17 August 1993,
Reiterating the importance of the objectives and principles relevant to
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly as set out in
resolution 47/233,
Desiring to enhance its capacity to exercise the functions and powers
assigned to it under the Charter of the United Nations so that it can play a
more effective role within the Organization,
Recognizing the usefulness of improving its working methods to enable it
to perform its functions more effectively, efficiently and in a comprehensive
manner,
1.
Stresses the importance of enhanced cooperation and an effective
relationship between the General Assembly and other principal organs,
particularly the Security Council, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations;
2.
Decides, in accordance with and subject to the relevant provisions
of the Charter, to continue to use the existing machinery and, when necessary,
to consider the creation of new bodies to facilitate the discussion of any
question or any matter within the scope of the Charter and, as appropriate,
the making of recommendations on it to the Members of the United Nations or to
the Security Council or to both;
/...

A/RES/48/264
Page 2

3.
Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Security Council to improve
its working methods, and in that context encourages the Council, in the
submission of reports to the Assembly, to provide in a timely manner a clear
and informative account of its work, including its resolutions and other
decisions, inclusive of measures taken under Chapter VII of the Charter;
4.
Invites the President of the General Assembly, following
consultations, to propose appropriate ways and means to facilitate an in-depth
discussion by the Assembly of matters contained in the reports submitted to it
by the Security Council;
5.
Encourages Member States to exercise restraint in making proposals
requesting new reports of the Secretary-General, bearing in mind the
desirability of reducing the number of such reports;
6.
Emphasizes that reports requested of the Secretary-General should
be made available in all official languages in a timely manner in accordance
with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and the annexes thereto
with a view to enabling delegations to consider the substance of such reports
more thoroughly in advance of meetings;
7.
Commends the valuable work undertaken by the Main Committees to
review their respective agendas, and encourages the Committees to continue
this work, taking into account the present resolution;
8.
Reaffirms the right of Member States to propose, in accordance
with the rules of procedure, items for inclusion in the agenda of the
Assembly;
9.
Adopts the Guidelines on the Rationalization of the Agenda of the
General Assembly set forth in annex I to the present resolution, which shall
be embodied as an annex to the rules of procedure of the Assembly;
10.
Decides to replace paragraph 4 of the annex to its resolution
33/138 with the text contained in annex II to the present resolution
concerning the pattern of election of the six Chairmen of the Main Committees;
11.
Decides also that the arrangement concerning the pattern of
election of the six Chairmen of the Main Committees shall take effect at its
forty-ninth session;
12.
Decides further to review the arrangement concerning the pattern
of election of the six Chairmen of the Main Committees at its fifty-third
session;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly at its
fifty-second session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
present resolution after having ascertained the views and experience of the
Presidents of the Assembly at its forty-ninth, fiftieth and fifty-first
sessions;

/...

A/RES/48/264
Page 3

14.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly".
102nd plenary meeting
29 July 1994
ANNEX I
Guidelines on the Rationalization of the Agenda of the
General Assembly
1.
The plenary meetings of the General Assembly should constitute a forum
for high-level policy statements, as well as for the consideration, inter
alia, of agenda items of special political importance and/or urgency.
2.
Agenda items which are of a nature that relates to more than one Main
Committee or which do not come within the purview of any Main Committee should
be considered by the General Assembly in plenary meeting, taking into account
the recommendations of the General Committee.
3.
Substantive items initially allocated directly to a plenary meeting of
the General Assembly could be reviewed for allocation to a Main Committee in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the Assembly, in particular with
Assembly decision 34/401, which is reproduced in annex VI to the rules of
procedure.
4.
There shall be periodic reviews of the agenda, taking into account the
views of concerned Member States, in order to ascertain whether it is possible
to delete any item on which no resolution or decision has been adopted for a
period of time.
5.
The Main Committees should be encouraged to continue with the review of
their respective agendas, taking into account, inter alia, the following:
(a)
Agenda items concerning issues of closely related substance could
be merged within a single agenda title or be incorporated as sub-items where
this is possible without loss of focus on the items/sub-items concerned;
(b)
Items that cover related matters or issues could be considered in
agreed clusters;
(c)
Biennialization and triennialization of items on the agenda of the
Main Committees could be considered in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
The existing broad division of work among the Main Committees
(d)
should be maintained.

/...

A/RES/48/264
Page 4

ANNEX II
Text to replace paragraph 4 of
the annex to resolution 33/138
4.
The six Chairmen of the Main Committees shall be elected according
to the following pattern:
(a)

One representative from an African State;

(b)

One representative from an Asian State;

(c)

One representative from an Eastern European State;

(d)

One representative from a Latin American or Caribbean State;

(e)

One representative from a Western European or other State;

The sixth chairmanship shall rotate over a period of twenty
(f)
sessions according to the following pattern:
(i)

One representative from an African State;

(ii)

One representative from an Asian State;

(iii)

One representative from a Latin American or Caribbean State;

(iv)

One representative from an African State;

(v)

One representative from an Asian State;

(vi)

One representative from an African State;

(vii)

One representative from a Latin American or Caribbean State;

(viii)

One representative from an Asian State;

(ix)

One representative from an African State;

(x)

One representative from an Asian State;

(xi)

One representative from a Latin American or Caribbean State;

(xii)

One representative from an African State;

(xiii)

One representative from an Asian State;

(xiv)

One representative from an African State;

(xv)

One representative from a Latin American or Caribbean State;

(xvi)

One representative from an Asian State;

(xvii)

One representative from an African State;

/...

A/RES/48/264
Page 5

(xviii)

1

One representative from an Asian State;

(xix)

One representative from a Latin American or Caribbean State;

(xx)

One representative from an African State.
