S/2021/1069

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 December 2021
English
Original: French

Letter dated 14 December 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter dated 28 December 2020 (S/2020/1322),
in which I informed the President of the Security Council of the progress made by the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, and to his reply dated 30 December 2020
(S/2020/1323), in which he took note of my intention to continue the activities of the
United Nations support team to the Mixed Commission, with funding from the regular
budget. In this regard, I would like to inform you of the latest activities and
achievements of the Mixed Commission.
As you may know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002, on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial dispute. Through
my good offices, and with the support of the Secretariat, I have continued to facilitate
the implementation of the judgment.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and the delineation of the maritime boundary; facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority; addressing the situation of affected populations;
and making recommendations on confidence-building measures. Achievements to
date in the implementation of the judgment include the withdrawal of Nigeria and the
transfer of authority to Cameroon in the Lake Chad area (December 2003), along the
land boundary (July 2004) and on the Bakassi Peninsula (a process that be gan in June
2006 and was completed in August 2008); the delineation of the maritime boundary
(May 2007); and the end of the special transitional regime of five years and the
exercise by Cameroon of its full right of sovereignty over the Bakassi zone (Augus t
2013).
The Mixed Commission also approved the recommendations of the Working
Group on the Maritime Boundary, including the provisions for cross-border
cooperation on hydrocarbon deposits straddling the maritime boundary (March 2011).
Over the course of 2021, the Mixed Commission, chaired by my Special
Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and Head of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Annadif Khatir Mahamat Saleh, continued to make
progress towards the implementation of the judgment, including by supporting
dialogue and communication between the two parties. While the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic continued to impede the work of the Mixed Commission, the
team complied with the revised protocols governing intern ational and regional travel
to resume demarcation activities, including mediation meetings with the two parties
to resolve the remaining areas of disagreement; pillar construction, on which
considerable progress was made; and the final mapping process, whi ch continued
through remote collaboration.

21-19291 (E)

211221

*2119291*

211221

S/2021/1069

The pillar construction exercise advanced, with 1,673 pillars constructed to date,
representing a completion rate of approximately 60 per cent. The emplacement of an
additional 327 boundary pillars is expected to commence in January 2022.
In August 2021, my Special Representative met the United Nations country team
in Cameroon to update and reactivate socioeconomic projects to support communities
living on both sides of the border. A meeting with the United Nations country team in
Nigeria is planned for 2022.
The Mixed Commission held its thirty-third session on 19 and 20 November 2021,
in Yaoundé, chaired by my Special Representative. During that session, the agreements
reached on 14 of the 18 remaining areas of disagreement were endorsed and the parties
reiterated their steadfast commitment to expedite the activities under way. The parties
also agreed on technical specifications for the resolution of two areas of disagreement
and endorsed the terms of reference for three missions to be led by the Sub-Commission
on Demarcation. The Mixed Commission recommended the mobilization of funds to
complete demarcation activities and implement socioeconomic projects to support local
communities affected by the demarcation process.
The following activities are required to conclude the work of the Mixed
Commission:
(a) Agreement by the two parties on outstanding demarcation areas, to be
reached by conducting field assessment missions, led by the Sub-Commission on
Demarcation, in the areas of concern;
(b) Facilitation of the construction and emplacement of boundary pillars
financed by the trust fund for demarcation activities;
(c)

Production of final maps and a boundary statement;

(d) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and coordinated security monitoring along the land boundary;
(e) Finalization of confidence-building initiatives for local communities
affected by the demarcation process;
(f) Implementation of the completion strategy by progressively handing over
the activities of the Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other
subregional structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission had been funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. Thereafter, from 2004 to 2021, its activities were
funded through the regular budget. The Governments of Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay have provided in-kind
contributions for the substantive and technical work of the Commission (military and
legal experts). In addition, logistical support has been provided by the Governments of
Cameroon and Nigeria, and voluntary contributions to the trust fund for demarcation
activities have been made by both countries, as well as by Germany. Between 2018 and
2020, the parties contributed $6 million to the demarcation trust fund.
As has been the case in recent years, and given the cost-effectiveness of the
operation and the important tasks remaining at this juncture to help to advance the
peaceful implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice, it is
my intention to ask for resources from the regular budget for the United Nations
support team to cover the year 2022.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

21-19291
