United Nations

S/PV.5973

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5973rd meeting
Thursday, 11 September 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Terzi di Sant’ Agata
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-50335 (E)

*0850335*

S/PV.5973

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I now give the
floor to Mr. Grauls.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): This is the seventh
90-day report to the Security Council in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of resolution 1737 (2006). The
report covers the period 14 June to 11 September 2008,
during which the Committee held one session of
informal consultations. Allow me to begin by updating
the Council on a matter I referred to in my previous
report.
The Council may recall that, following media
reports that a State had publicly announced a
contravention of resolutions 1747 (2007) and 1803
(2008) on its territory with respect to the export ban on
arms and related materiel from Iran, the Committee
addressed letters to the two States concerned seeking
clarification and additional information. The
Committee has received a reply only from the State
that made the announcement, providing explanations of
the actions taken by that State to address the situation
and containing assurances that that State would
continue to fully implement the relevant resolutions.
I shall now turn to issues relating to the
implementation of resolution 1737 (2006). Paragraph
13 (d) of the resolution contains an exemption to the
assets freeze for activities directly related to the items
specified in subparagraphs 3 (b) (i) and (ii) of the
resolution, which have been notified by the relevant
States to the Committee. The Committee received one
such notification from the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

2

Paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006), which
also contains an exemption to the assets freeze for
contracts entered into prior to the listing of persons and
entities in the annexes to resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008), provides for notifications by
the relevant States to the Committee of the intention to
make or receive payments or to authorize the
unfreezing of funds for that purpose. The Committee
received one such notification.
The Committee also received a letter from a
Member State informing the Committee of the delivery
of items relevant to the construction of the nuclear
power plant in Bushehr, Iran.
With regard to reporting by States on their
implementation of the relevant measures in all three
resolutions, the figures are as follows: 89 reports under
resolution 1737 (2006), 76 reports under resolution
1747 (2007) and 56 reports under resolution 1803
(2008).
Let me now turn to a specific measure under
paragraph 10 of resolution 1803 (2008). In that
paragraph, the Council called upon all States to
exercise vigilance over the activities of financial
institutions in their territories with all banks domiciled
in Iran, in particular with Bank Melli and Bank
Saderat, and their branches and subsidiaries abroad, in
order to avoid such activities contributing to the
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities, or to the
development of nuclear weapon delivery systems, as
referred to in resolution 1737 (2006). Yesterday, 10
September, a member of the Committee provided to the
other members a briefing on its efforts to implement
paragraph 10 of resolution 1803 (2008).
Finally, Mr. President, two letters that were
addressed to you and subsequently issued as documents
of the Security Council — the first submitted jointly by
France, the United Kingdom and the United States on
1 August and the second submitted by Iran on
15 August — were both circulated within the
Committee for the information of members. The letter
from the three States, which was copied to me in my
capacity as Chairman, contained a list of banks
domiciled in Iran and their branches and subsidiaries
abroad. The list was intended to assist States in their
implementation of paragraph 10 of resolution 1803
(2008). The letter from Iran was a direct response to
the letter from the three States.

08-50335

S/PV.5973

Lastly, the Committee received a written request
for certain specific information from a Member State,
which the members are currently considering.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Grauls for his briefing. I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States thanks the Chairman for his report on the
actions taken by States in fulfilment of their
obligations under resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007)
and 1803 (2008) to take measures to counter the
proliferation and development of nuclear technology
and ballistic missiles by Iran. I must note that Iran
continues to defy the continued demands of this
Council to suspend its uranium enrichment programme
and activities related to its heavy water reactor and has
failed to cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) investigations.
The United States believes it essential that
Member States fully implement the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
We encourage all States to take actions that are
complementary to those explicitly required by those
resolutions, to achieve the international community’s
ultimate objective of persuading Iran to make a
strategic decision to abandon its pursuit of a nuclear
weapons capability. Full implementation of the
resolutions will maintain pressure on Iran to change
course.
We would like to call special attention to the need
to implement the provisions of the Council’s
resolutions regarding Iran’s financial institutions. The
goal of those provisions is to ensure that Iran’s
financial sector is not used to fund proscribed nuclear
proliferation or missile programmes.
As was mentioned by the Chairman, to help
ensure that, on 1 August the United States, France and
the United Kingdom distributed to the Council a list of
banks domiciled in Iran, which included their branches
and subsidiaries abroad. We hope that the sharing of
that kind of information will assist other countries in
carrying out their obligations under those resolutions.
We note that those resolutions apply to all types of
financial institutions, including banks and insurance
providers.
The United States seeks to aid the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution

08-50335

1737 (2006) in carrying out its mandate to examine
information regarding alleged violations of imposed
measures and to seek information from all States
regarding actions taken by them to implement the
imposed measures. It is in that vein that the United
States provided a briefing to Council members on
10 September about our own efforts to implement the
provisions of the Iran sanctions resolutions related to
financial institutions, in particular paragraph 10 of
resolution 1803 (2008).
By sharing best practices, we seek to assist other
States in deciding how to carry out that vigilance,
particularly because we have encountered a number of
attempts by Iran to avoid sanctions through the use of
deceptive financial practices. Vigilance is a matter for
each Member State. We would encourage other
countries to share their experiences so that we may
help each other implement the provisions of those
resolutions more effectively.
Finally, the United States objective remains a
diplomatic resolution to this issue. Iran must fully and
verifiably suspend its uranium-enrichment-related
reprocessing and heavy-water-related activities and
cooperate fully with the IAEA, as required by the
Security Council.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Belgium, Mr. Grauls, for his briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) during the past three months. In
that period, under the leadership of Mr. Grauls, the
Committee has worked in strict compliance with the
provisions of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and
1803 (2008). It is our view that, in its future work, the
Committee will continue to be guided by the spirit and
letter of those resolutions in trying to achieve its main
purpose — the effective settlement of the Iranian
nuclear problem through exclusively political and
diplomatic means and through talks on the basis of
proposals by the six countries.
On that basis, we wish to comment on what we
heard in the briefing and in the statement of the
representative of the United States, Mr. Khalilzad, with
respect to the national implementation of paragraph 10
of resolution 1803 (2008). In that paragraph, the
Council calls on all States to exercise vigilance over
the activities of financial institutions in their territories
with all banks domiciled in Iran, in particular with

3

S/PV.5973

Bank Melli and Bank Saderat, and their branches and
subsidiaries abroad,

to the supply … of the prohibited … goods and
technology”.

“in order to avoid such activities
contributing to the proliferation sensitive nuclear
activities, or to the development of nuclear
weapons delivery systems.”

That obligation is clear and unconditional and
applies to all States Members without exception. The
Council spelled that out further in its resolutions,
whether by imposing sanctions on Bank Sepah or by
mentioning the particular type of vigilance required
with regard to Bank Melli and Bank Saderat.

We believe that this call is solely a reminder to
States to fulfil the relevant requirements of paragraph 6
of resolution 1737 (2006). Thus, the reference in
resolution 1803 (2008) to specific Iranian banks does
not impose new restrictions regarding financial ties
with the credit organizations of Iran. It was mentioned
solely to send Iran a further political message on the
need to comply with International Atomic Energy
Agency and Council requirements in order to settle the
Iranian nuclear issue.
States have the right to determine for themselves
how they will be vigilant in the context of paragraph
10 of resolution 1803 (2008). If some States require
guidance regarding implementation of that paragraph,
the optimal solution — and the only solution necessary,
as we see it — would be to refer to the 12 October
2007 guidelines of the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering on implementation of the financial
provisions of resolution 1737 (2006). The Task Force’s
guidelines, as we all know, are only recommendations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Belgium for the quarterly report that
he has just shared with us. There are several elements
in it that my delegation would like to highlight.
Failures to fulfil the obligations under the
resolutions in question were pointed out to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), and it had to respond. That shows that we all,
as Member States that are bound by those obligations,
must redouble our vigilance with a view to
implementation. That is the case in particular with
regard to respect for the prohibition on purchasing,
transferring or procuring arms from Iran in any
manner.
That also applies to the obligation of States under
paragraph 6 of resolution 1737 (2006) to
“take the necessary measures to prevent the
provision to Iran of any… financial assistance,
investment, brokering or other services, and the
transfer of financial resources or services, related

4

The States Members are responsible for their own
national legislations to implement those obligations.
One thing is clear — those obligations are binding and
every State must agree conscientiously to implement
them. In the Committee and outside, we have heard
from many States Members, international financial
institutions and private enterprises that would like to
obtain more information on how to implement financial
vigilance. That concern is understandable. The effect
on a reputation and the consequences of violating those
obligations by financing those proliferation activities
that the Council is ordering Iran to suspend would be
disastrous. That is why, together with the missions of
the United States and the United Kingdom, we took the
initiative of circulating a list of Iranian businesses that
require particular vigilance.
I should also like to thank the mission of the
United States for its expert briefings in the Committee
on Iranian breaches of those financial requirements.
My country, and I believe the Committee as a whole, is
at the service of any delegation that would like
information and clarification on how best to meet its
obligations.
Six months after the adoption of resolution 1803
(2008), Iran is clearly in violation of the rules set out
by the Security Council — rules that are simple and
easy for everyone to understand. Iran continues to
develop a nuclear programme that it set up
clandestinely, in violation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and that
the Security Council has asked it to suspend. Iran
continues not to cooperate with International Atomic
Energy Agency in clarifying the scope and nature of its
activities. In particular, it has refused to reply to the
Agency on the very clear signs of the militarization of
the programme. Finally, Iran refuses to negotiate in
good faith with the European Union 3+3, which have
made some generous proposals, and last July in
Geneva, in the presence of the Political Director of the
United States, offered Iran a path back to dialogue.

08-50335

S/PV.5973

That is a serious situation, weakening the entire
NPT. If Iran continues to elude the scope of
international law and at the same time to reject any
type of dialogue, it will suffer increasing isolation, as
the Council has pledged.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I, too, should
like to thank Ambassador Grauls for his comprehensive
briefing and efficient leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
Consistent with the position of the European
Union, Italy remains committed to solving the Iranian
nuclear issue through a dual-track approach based on
political dialogue and full implementation of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
In that regard, I wish to recall that, on 7 August, the
European Council adopted the Common Position
2008/652/CFSP, aimed at implementing resolution
1803 (2008). That Common Position contains, inter
alia, concrete measures to exercise vigilance, as
required by resolution 1803 (2008), on relevant
financial activities under the guidance of the Financial
Action Task Force expressly mentioned in resolution
1803 (2008).
More broadly, I wish to underline that combating
the financing of proliferation activities is a firm
priority for Italy and an integral part of the global
effort against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). Thus, the Italian authorities, and
the Bank of Italy in particular, have issued several
warnings and are reaching out to the banking system
on the need to combat the proliferation of WMDs and
the risk involved in maintaining business relations,
even unknowingly, with entities connected to
proliferation.
An outreach effort is under way to raise the
awareness of the private sector of measures adopted
pursuant to Council resolutions, and to follow that up
concretely, a seminar, organized by the Ministry of
Finance together with the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute, will be held on
that issue in Rome on 25 September.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I should
like to join my colleagues in thanking Ambassador
Grauls for his report and for his work chairing the very
important Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). My delegation will continue to support
him fully in securing the full implementation of

08-50335

resolution 1737 (2006), resolution 1747 (2007) and
resolution 1803 (2008).
In order to assist in that task, the United
Kingdom, together with our colleagues France and the
United States of America, circulated the list of Iranian
banks referred to in the report. We believe that sharing
information and best practice is a useful and
constructive way to improve overall implementation,
and by providing additional information about Iran’s
financial institutions, we believe we can help Member
States make better informed decisions on how to carry
out their obligations under resolution 1803 (2008),
including the call for Member States to exercise
vigilance over certain institutions.
We encourage all members of the Council to be
transparent and to inform the 1737 Committee of the
actions that they have taken to implement the relevant
resolutions. That is particularly important given the
efforts Iran is making to evade the Chapter VII
sanctions.
Last month, the European Union adopted a new
Common Position that will assist the effective
implementation of those resolutions, especially with
regard to financial vigilance, and includes rigorous
reporting requirements for Iranian banks.
As the report of Ambassador Grauls makes clear,
there is no blanket ban on nuclear-related cooperation
with Iran, and it is welcome that his briefing referred to
a Member State following the required procedures
before going ahead with work related Iran’s civil
nuclear power programme. We are not trying to prevent
Iran having such a programme. In fact, we have offered
Iran extensive support to develop its civil nuclear
programme in the package provided by Britain, France,
Germany, China, Russia and the United States, the
so-called European Union (EU) 3+3.
However, we do have very profound concerns
about Iran’s intentions for its nuclear programme.
Taken as a whole, Iran’s nuclear activities make no
sense to us unless Iran’s goal is to develop a nuclear
weapons capability.
Three steps are required of Iran. First, Iran must
suspend all of its enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities. Iran continues to flout that legally binding
Security Council requirement for a suspension.
Secondly, Iran must fully implement the Additional
Protocol and the other measures demanded by the

5

S/PV.5973

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Without
that, the IAEA continues to be unable to provide
assurances on the absence of undeclared nuclear
material and activities in Iran, and it will not be able to
determine whether the nature of Iran’s programme is
exclusively peaceful. Thirdly, Iran must resolve
outstanding issues of concern to the IAEA, including
what the agency calls “the alleged studies”, by
delivering fully on all outstanding issues.
It is self-evident that Iran has not met its
obligations under those three resolutions. The offer of
the EU 3+3 remains on the table, but it is of great
disappointment that Iran has not engaged seriously,
despite the refreshed offer from the EU 3+3 and the
direct participation of a representative of the United
States in the meeting with Iranian officials.
Our objective remains a diplomatic solution to
this matter and for the international community to be
able to build up, over time, international confidence in
Iran’s intentions, but that requires a much more
constructive approach from Iran. To date, its
cooperation with the Security Council and with the
IAEA has fallen woefully short. Our offer remains on
the table, but given the absence of cooperation by Iran,
we have no alternative but to start a discussion with
our partners on further measures, as signaled in
resolution 1803 (2008).
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to thank the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing on the work of
the Committee and to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Grauls for presiding over that work.
Since December 2006, the Security Council has
adopted resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and
1803 (2008) on the Iranian nuclear issue. Those
resolutions reflected the collective concern of the
international community with regard to that issue and
were aimed at maintaining the international

6

non-proliferation mechanism in order to strengthen the
authority and role of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and to advance diplomatic efforts to peacefully
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.
All States have the obligation to implement those
resolutions in a comprehensive and conscientious
manner. China attaches importance to and has strictly
fulfilled its obligations under those resolutions and has,
in a timely manner, submitted three reports on their
implementation. At the same time, we would like to
emphasize once again that the sanctions are not an end
in themselves and cannot fundamentally resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue. The best option is to resolve the
issue peacefully through diplomatic negotiations.
There is now a rare opportunity to resume the
negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue. We hope that
the parties concerned will seize that opportunity,
demonstrate flexibility and work hard to help the
situation develop in a peaceful direction, seeking a
comprehensive, lasting and appropriate resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue.
China has consistently supported maintaining the
international non-proliferation mechanism and opposed
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We do not want
to see any new turbulence in the Middle East region,
and we advocate the peaceful resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue through diplomatic negotiations. We will
continue to participate actively in the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We will support and cooperate with its
Chairman in relevant efforts and seek to ensure that it
plays a constructive role in properly resolving the
Iranian nuclear issue.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

08-50335
