S/PV.7609

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7609

th meeting
Monday, 25 January 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nin Novoa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-01678 (E)
*1601678*

S/PV.7609

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I welcome Her Excellency Ms. Maria Ángela Holguín
Cuéllar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/67, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by all the members of the Security Council.
I thank the members of the Council for sponsoring the
draft resolution, which is now a presidential text.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2261 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming you to the Chamber, Mr. President,
as well as Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar.

2/10

25/01/2016

The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2261 (2016) today. The special
political mission that the resolution mandates is an
important step forward towards peace in Colombia. It
is an outcome that both the Government of Colombia
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
have called for. I pay tribute to the leadership shown,
particularly by President Santos Calderón, in bringing
this issue to the Council. I am pleased that the United
Kingdom could lead the drafting of the resolution, and I
am delighted that we received such strong support from
all Council members.
The United Kingdom is a great supporter of the
Colombian Government’s efforts to secure peace — a
peace that has, sadly, eluded Colombia for over five
decades. In that time the Colombian people have shown
great resilience. We welcome the progress made since
the negotiations began, in 2012. The agreements already
reached on rural development, political participation,
illegal drugs and, most recently, victims’ rights and
transitional justice, are testament to the commitment
of both parties. The joint communiqué issued last
week, which sets out the monitoring mechanisms for
the ceasefire and the cessation of hostilities, is another
positive step towards the final peace agreement.
It is to the credit of the parties that they have
worked together to bring this issue to the Council.
It is not common for a country to refer itself to the
Council, but that is exactly the sort of role the United
Nations should be playing, namely, supporting conflict
prevention and conflict resolution at the national level
alongside others, including members of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States.
I hope that today will mark the start of the final
stage of Colombia’s peace talks and that this resolution
itself will help build confidence and momentum towards
the final peace agreement. The United Kingdom will
play its part by working with Colombia, other Council
members and the Secretariat. Together we can ensure
that the implementation of this resolution will be swift
and effective so that it supports Colombia to realize a
stable, prosperous future for all its citizens. To do so, I
hope we can draw on the world unity shown today. It is
that unity that we will need to sustain if we are to make
progress in support of Colombia’s peace agreement and
on so many of the other issues that we face this year.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish

16-01678

25/01/2016

Colombia

to extend a special greeting to Foreign Minister Maria
Ángela Holguín Cuéllar on this very important day for
her country and the future of the people of Colombia
and all its children.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela co-sponsored
and voted in favour of resolution 2261 (2016), for we are
convinced that it constitutes clear support for the peace
process in the sister nation of Colombia — a country
to which Venezuela is inevitably joined by geography,
culture, history and the integrationist legacy of Simón
Bolívar, our liberator and common father of our
countries, as well as the powerful determination of
our peoples to live in harmony and peace. Venezuela
and Colombia have always been together as a region
and greater nation. The impetus for the revolution for
independence in Latin America, led by the liberator
Simón Bolívar, led to Colombians and Venezuelans
helping each other and, in heroic deeds, to cross the
Andes in order to bring freedom to New Granada in
Boyacá, to Venezuela in Carabobo and to Ecuador
in Pichincha — and finally, all us together as Latin
Americans and as children of Gran Colombia, the
greatest political creation of Simón Bolívar, to sealing
our independence in the glorious battle of Ayacucho.
It is that shared history that has kept Venezuela and
Colombia together as brothers, and both of our nations
are proud of that fact today and forever.
We are very pleased that the resolution just
adopted recognizes and makes mention of Venezuela’s
contribution and commitment to dialogue and peace in
our neighbouring country. In that context, we would like
to take this opportunity to highlight the contribution
of, and pay well-deserved tribute to, the tireless efforts
and the determined political commitment to peace
of Commander President Hugo Chávez Frías, who
worked relentlessly, nobly and with sincere interest,
friendship and Bolivarian willingness for peace in
Colombia — one of his dearest wishes. For our country,
today’s resolution represents the continuation of his
integrationist legacy.
For decades, we looked on with deep sorrow as
our Colombian brothers fought each other in a conflict
that passed through various phases and which had deep
social roots and a complex political and ideological
history. That protracted war, which lasted for more than
five decades, brought with it a lamentable toll in terms
of human lives, displaced people and destruction. In
the light of that reality, our deeply Bolivarian country

S/PV.7609

could not be indifferent to the pain and tragedy in our
sister republic as a result of the conflict.
That is why we welcomed thousands of refugees and
people displaced by war, victims of the various factions
of the armed conflict in Colombia. In that way, the
people and the Government of Venezuela have helped
and continuously contributed to the peace process and
opened its doors and its arms to those who were forced
to flee violence and threats to their personal safety.
More than 5 million Colombian brothers and sisters,
legal and illegal migrants alike, as well as refugees, are
now living in Venezuela. We have taken them in like
the brothers and sisters that they are. Venezuela has
given them all the guarantees and rights that citizens of
Venezuela enjoy, on an equal basis.
Our country has always been willing to participate
in efforts to bring about peace in Colombia, at the
request of the Colombian Government and the relevant
players in the conflict and with no intention whatsoever
to intervene. The unwavering will of our Government
to cooperate in a peaceful settlement was expressed in
the dedication and commitment of our former President
Hugo Chávez Frías and our current President, Nicolás
Maduro Moros, and took the form of supporting the
sister Republic of Chile in the peace negotiations held
between the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), a process to which we were invited
to participate with Cuba and Norway as guarantors.
The parties, which have been holding talks in Havana
in the framework of the General Agreement to End
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
signed on 26 August 2012, agreed to a joint communiqué
agreement on 19 January 2016, which requests the
United Nations to set up a special political mission of
this multilateral Organization to act as an international
component and coordinator of the tripartite mechanism
to monitor and verify a definitive bilateral ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities, as well as the laying down
of arms.
Our country commends that initiative and is
grateful for the willingness of the United Nations and
all the members of the Security Council, as reflected
in the adoption of today’s resolution, in order to
contribute through a specific function to the overall
efforts towards peace in Colombia. We are awaiting
the next steps, both of the parties in Colombia and of
the Organization, to define the operational aspects,
functions and composition of the political mission,

16-016783/10

S/PV.7609

Colombia

25/01/2016

which must take full account of the terms of established
in joint communiqué No. 65, issued by the Government
of Colombia and the FARC-EP, which led to the request
for the special political mission I just mentioned.

parties will fulfil what has been agreed and that we
will soon see in Colombia a cessation of violence and a
lasting peace — with reconciliation, social justice and
inclusion for its people.

We are extremely pleased that, in line with what
was agreed in the joint communiqué, the resolution
recognizes, and makes direct reference to, the
contribution of the member States of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) to the
special political mission approved by the Council today.
We welcome that willingness and we hope that CELAC,
through its full commitment to peace in Colombia,
will be reflected in the character and functions of the
political mission. We therefore encourage considering
the possibility of the head of the mission reporting to
the rotating CELAC presidency, as our Latin American
and Caribbean organization is a committed guarantor
of peace in the region.

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Foreign Minister Nin Novoa, for convening this
important meeting. I also thank Foreign Minister
Holguín Cuéllar for joining us to mark this very
special occasion. It is a pleasure to have her here as
a representative of her Government, as a former
Ambassador to the United Nations and as someone who
has been so personally engaged in this peace process.

The countries of CELAC have a prominent role
role to play in the composition of the political mission.
The members of our political mechanism followed with
interest and hope the development of the peace process.
In statements issued at their summit meetings, they
have expressed their support for the dialogue process
between the Government of Colombia and the FARCEP, welcomed the progress made and urged the parties
to continue the process aimed at putting an end to the
internal armed conflict, which has had affected the
political, social and economic development of a sister
nation.
Finally, our country wishes to reiterate its full
commitment to the negotiation process leading to
peace in the sister republic of Colombia. We again
welcome the voluntary joint initiative of the Colombian
Government and the FARC to turn to the Organization
to ask its support in the final phase of the dialogue. We
also reiterate our respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Colombia,
as well as its inalienable right to manage its internal
affairs without interference or imposition. We note its
support for CELAC’s cooperation and the inclusion
of its members in the political mission, as well as its
full conviction that the resolution we adopted today
represents a valuable contribution and a positive step
towards peace.
This adoption is an important step, but not the last
one: it is one more step towards the end of the conflict.
From here, therefore, we express the hope that the

4/10

In an interview published over the weekend in the
newspaper El Tiempo, President Obama said,
“It is harder to end wars than to start them. It
requires commitment, it involves taking risks.
President Santos and his team have demonstrated
unyielding determination to achieve peace.”
I know that Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar and
Colombia’s formidable Ambassador her, Ms. Maria
Emma Mejía Vélez, share that determination. I know
President Obama looks forward to welcoming President
Santos Calderón, the Foreign Minister and their whole
team to Washington, D.C., next week.
Last month, a small ceremony was held in the
central Colombian town of Villavicencio. Presented
in small brown coffins, the remains of 29 people who
had been killed in the conflict were returned to their
relatives. One victim had been abducted and forced to
join the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) when he was 11 years old. His father, a 60-yearold farmer, had spent a decade looking for his son. He
told a reporter, “it is hard to finally find him under
these conditions”. That ceremony reflects the toll that
this conflict has taken on the Colombian people over
the last 50 years.
The National Centre for Historical Memory has
documented the killing of 220,000 citizens, while the
Government has registered nearly 6 million displaced
persons. Colombians have lost loved ones to bombs and
bullets, kidnappings and disappearances. They have
seen their streets and villages turned into war zones,
and they have spent too many years worrying that today
might be the day that war strikes home.
It is the prospect of finally ending that violence
that brings us here today. After nearly four years of
negotiations, the Colombian peace process has yielded

16-01678

25/01/2016

Colombia

agreements on a set of extraordinarily complex issues,
including an accord on victims of the conflict, which
made the ceremony in Villavicencio possible.
Colombia is now on the precipice of a historic
achievement. Forging a lasting peace agreement will
not resolve all of Colombia’s challenges, nor will it
instantly help heal the deep wounds inflicted over the
last five decades. It cannot undo what happened in
Villavicencio and so many communities like it. But if
the fighting truly ends, then a new and long-overdue
chapter can finally begin.
With today’s resolution 2261 (2016), the Security
Council shows that the United Nations stands with the
Colombian people as they forge that new future. The
resolution represents the answer of the United Nations to
the joint call made by the Government of Colombia and
the FARC for United Nations engagement in helping to
end the conflict. The requested United Nations observer
mission will serve as the international component of a
tripartite mechanism that will monitor and verify the
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and be responsible
for monitoring the laying down of weapons. The mission
will be strengthened by the participation of observers
from other countries in the region and will complement
the important work of United Nations agencies already
in Colombia, such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
With its vote today, the United States underscores
its continued partnership with Colombia. Just as we
have supported the Government since it developed the
Plan Colombia strategy, nearly 16 years ago, so have
we backed its efforts to negotiate a just and lasting
peace agreement — one that should be consistent with
Colombia’s domestic and international legal obligations
and make accountability and the rule of law the bedrock
of sustainable peace. As Colombia works towards that
goal, the United States will remain at its side, ready to
assist in the hard work ahead, in the lead-up to the final
peace agreement and then in the challenging process of
implementation that will follow, where what is put in
writing must be translated into practice.
Victims and vulnerable individuals will need
access to justice, protection and dispute-resolution
services. Communities that suffered in the conflict
will need basic security and additional public services.
Former combatants will need to be reintegrated into
society. Land mines will have to be removed so that
communities can return to their lands and more rural

S/PV.7609

economic development can occur. The United States
will support critical Government initiatives such as
those aimed at expanding the rule of law and economic
opportunity in former conflict zones, bolstering civilian
law enforcement, supporting the victims of conflict and
expanding protections for human rights.
In conclusion, back in September, President Santos
Calderón travelled to Havana, where he reached an
agreement with the FARC to complete a peace deal by
March. He said at the time,
“We are adversaries, on different sides, but today
we advance in the same direction, the direction of
peace”.
Today, Colombia has taken another step in that direction
of peace. The road ahead will surely have its bumps,
and much will rest on implementation. But because
of the Colombian Government’s commitment — its
“unyielding determination”, as President Obama put
it — to fight for peace, the destination is in sight. With
today’s vote, the United Nations recognizes Colombia’s
achievement and offers its collective support as the
country completes its journey.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased, Sir, to see you presiding
over the Security Council today. We also welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of Foreign Minister
María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar.
We note the major significance of the agreements
signed in Havana on 23 September 2015 by Colombia’s
President, Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, and the
leader of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC) rebel group, Timoleón Jiménez,
on the timetable for a final peace agreement, as well
as the joint communiqué of 19 January agreed on by
both sides, which requests international support for the
peace process, including the establishment of a United
Nations mission, which is what we have done in today’s
unanimous resolution 2261 (2016).
We believe that the countries of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States will respond
positively to the parties’ request that they provide the
mission with unarmed observers. We commend these
important agreements and the diligent and determined
efforts of the representatives of the Government of
Colombia and of the FARC, as well as the active
contributions made to the negotiating process by the
guarantor countries — Cuba and Norway — and the

16-016785/10

S/PV.7609

Colombia

observer countries, Venezuela and Chile. We take
special note of Cuba’s role in the process of working out
mutually acceptable solutions to the complex problems
facing the participants.
In Moscow we have followed the progress of the
negotiations attentively and with interest, and have
consistently supported bringing to a speedy conclusion
the peace process aimed at ending Colombia’s halfcentury of internal armed conflict. We are sure that
the agreements that have been reached, along with the
resolution adopted today, will be important milestones
on the country’s road to peace and will enable it to
achieve a final settlement and implement it effectively.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Security Council’s unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2261 (2016), on the establishment
of a United Nations mission in Colombia. I would also
like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Uruguay as he
presides over today’s meeting, as well as Ms. Holguín
Cuéllar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Colombia’s peace process has recently made major
progress. The Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia are expected to sign a
peace agreement that marks the end of a civil war that
has lasted approximately half a century. That will not
only help to achieve peace and stability in Colombia
soon, it will contribute greatly to the promotion of
stability and development in the region. It will also serve
as an important example for finding solutions to other
hotspot issues. China welcomes this development and
commends the efforts of the Colombian Government
and the relevant parties to conduct a dialogue for peace.
We also greatly appreciate the important role that
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar played in the process.
China hopes that the Security Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2261 (2016) will help to
encourage the signing and full implementation of
a final peace agreement by all the parties involved
as soon as possible. We support the United Nations,
on the basis of respect for Colombia’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, in accordance
with the needs of the Colombian Government, in its
work to prepare to speedily deploy a mission aimed at
providing constructive assistance to the peace process.
China is ready to engage with Council members and
the international community to work tirelessly to
achieve peace, stability, development and prosperity in
Colombia and the entire region as soon as possible.

6/10

25/01/2016

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Gabriel García Márquez should have lived
two years longer. If he had, he would have been here
to witness this truly historic moment for Colombia and
Colombians. Today Gabo would be an extraordinarily
happy man, because he personally stood for peace
for us all. As he said, in the midst of confusion and
disenchantment, we continued to believe, in an obstinate
and perhaps illusory way, that peace was possible.
Today Colombians have shown that to be true and have
put five decades of conflict behind them. The time has
come to congratulate the Government of Colombia and
all Colombians.
Today we, the members of the Security Council,
have the honour, along with the entire international
community, to be able to bear witness to the
reconciliation of all Colombians, represented here by
my dear friend Foreign Minister María Ángela Holguín
Cuéllar. It is also a historic day for the Council, because
we have adopted resolution 2261 (2016) with 15 votes
in favour and 15 sponsors, something that has happened
only three times in the past three years. The resolution
assigns to the United Nations a major role in helping
to write what is probably one of the most promising
pages of recent history. As always, Spain is here for
Colombia. We offer it our experience in the area of
peace processes, as Members of the United Nations
and as members of the European Union, from which
we will channel assistance to Colombia and its people.
Colombia should know that Spain will always be by its
side.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2261 (2016) and
the establishment of a United Nations mission tasked
with monitoring the implementation of the ceasefire
that is awaited in the next few months in Colombia as
part of the peace process under way since 2012.
It has been very unusual, in the recent history of the
Council, for a country to turn to it asking for assistance
in the implementation of a negotiated peace process.
The request that was sent to us to that end a few days
ago by the President of Colombia, in keeping with
the joint request of the parties to the conflict, clearly
demonstrates the extent to which the United Nations
constitutes a central, legitimate and trustworthy player
in the maintenance of international peace and security
throughout the world.

16-01678

25/01/2016

Colombia

The resolution that we have just adopted shows that
our Organization and more specifically the Council
were able to respond positively to the appeal made to
them. France welcomes this and would like to thank the
United Kingdom. We cherish the hope that the mission
whose establishment has been decided today will
constitute a positive element that will promote the early
conclusion of peace negotiations, a peace for which the
people of Colombia have waited too long.
France lends its full support to the process,
which was launched in 2012 under the auspices
of the Colombian President. Bilaterally speaking,
the French Development Agency in 2015 lent more
than $300 million to the Colombian Government to
promote the implementation of the agreement on rural
development. An additional $200 million should be
forthcoming this year. Our country has also lent its
experience to Colombia in the field of transitional
justice as well as land governance.
France also actively contributed to the creation last
January of the European Union Trust Fund in support
of the Colombian peace process. The resolution that we
have just adopted serves as the beginning of the process
that will lead the United Nations to play a decisive role
in ensuring the conditions necessary for lasting peace
in Colombia. France will remain resolutely mobilized
to ensure that this process is a success — for Columbia
first and foremost but also for the United Nations.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I wish warmly
to thank Foreign Minister Nin Novoa, and I welcome
Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar to the Council today.
New Zealand was very pleased to co-sponsor
resolution 2261 (2016) and welcomes its unanimous
adoption. The Council’s flexible and quick response
to the request for a political mission is a welcome
development. As others have noted, it is a welcome and
somewhat unusual development that a country should
come to the Council of its own accord for help, and
even better that it is doing so in the context of a peace
process. We hope that this mission, as the international
component and coordinator of the tripartite monitoring
and verification mechanism, will generate further
confidence in the Colombian peace process.
New Zealand congratulates President Santos
Calderón for the courage and determination that he and
his country have demonstrated in pushing for a durable
solution to a protracted conflict. We, too, commend
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia for

S/PV.7609

taking the road to peace and for sticking with it through
the long negotiations. We also congratulate and thank
Cuba and Norway, as well as Chile and Venezuela,
for their vital roles in shepherding the peace process,
and we welcome the role that the region as a whole has
played in the peace process. It represents a positive
example of a regionally led solution to a long-standing
conflict.
New Zealand is committed to supporting
Colombia’s efforts to find lasting peace. We are
pleased that our partnership with Colombia and the
burgeoning relationship with the Pacific Alliance will
be further strengthened with the opening of a New
Zealand embassy in Bogotá in the near future. We wish
Colombia well in advancing the peace process in the
coming months. No one expects the road ahead to be
easy, but as has been demonstrated today, the Council
and the international community stand ready to help.
Mr. Akahori (Japan) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I am grateful to you for having convened
this important meeting. We also highly value the
leadership of the United Kingdom, which prepared
resolution 2261 (2016) in a very effective manner. I
welcome the Foreign Minister of Colombia, María
Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, and I congratulate her on the
adoption of the resolution.
We fully support the peace process in Colombia,
and Japan had the pleasure of being a co-sponsor of the
resolution. I hope that the peace process in Colombia
will make further progress and that a final agreement
will soon be reached as a result of the adoption of the
resolution.
Japan has been cooperating in rehabilitating the
victims of the conflict and in anti-mining efforts,
among other activities, and it intends to continue its
support. Japan is also prepared to consider not only
financial support but also support in terms of human
capital for the special political mission.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine is very
pleased to see that the Colombian Government and
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia have
achieved major breakthroughs in the peace process
negotiations. We welcome the agreements reached by
the sides on transitional justice, the laying down of
arms and a timetable for signing a final agreement.
The peace talks in Havana brought historic progress
toward a final peace agreement to put an end to the

16-016787/10

S/PV.7609

Colombia

more than 50-year-old armed conflict in Colombia,
the longest in Latin America. We applaud the fact that
peace is now closer than ever for the Colombian people.
They deserve a just and durable peace.
We also underline the important roles played by
Norway and Cuba as guarantors of the peace process,
as well as Chile and Venezuela as accompanying
countries.
In the spirit of strong support for the peace process
in the Republic of Colombia, Ukraine welcomes
resolution 2261 (2016), adopted today, and was glad to
co-sponsor this historic document. We also express our
appreciation to the British delegation for its leadership
in preparing the draft and in conducting the negotiations
that led to its successful adoption.
This decision will contribute to the strengthening of
the role of the United Nations in peacebuilding in postconflict situations and will provide the support required
to advance peace, human rights and development for all
citizens in Colombia.
We believe that the Colombian initiative to engage
the United Nations as the international component of
the tripartite mechanism will be a success story and
help to bring stability to the region. This experience
should be followed and replicated where applicable.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I should like to greet
Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar of Colombia and
join earlier speakers in congratulating the delegation
of Colombia on this historic and momentous occasion,
which undoubtedly marks the beginning of the end
of the long-running conflict in that country. In this
regard, I wish to also express our position to the United
Kingdom delegation for its constructive and proactive
role in leading the negotiations on resolution 2261
(2016), just adopted by the Council.

25/01/2016

from the States members of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, Malaysia urges both
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo to
spare no effort towards the expeditious conclusion of
the final peace agreement. We further believe that the
establishment of the mission will contribute positively
to increasing the level of comfort and confidence
between the two parties, with a view to consolidating
the gains already achieved.
We firmly believe that taking this step towards a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Colombia will
pave the way towards ensuring lasting peace, security
and prosperity for all sections of society in the country.
Malaysia looks forward to receiving proposals from
the Secretary-General on the establishment and
operationalization of the mission, and reaffirms its
readiness to work closely with all Council members,
concerned partners and stakeholders in that regard.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We welcome and support
the peace process in Colombia between the Government
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). We praise
the decision and commitment of the parties to put their
differences aside and to engage in fruitful negotiations
aimed at putting an end to the conflict that has affected
the country for many decades. We commend the
Governments of Cuba and Norway for facilitating the
negotiations, and the Government of Colombia and the
FARC-EP for signing, respecting and implementing the
final peace agreement in order to consolidate peace for
the well-being of the Colombian people.
Finally, we hope that in the future the United
Nations political mission will carry out its task with
professionalism and impartiality.

The resolution just adopted authorizes the
establishment of a special political mission of the United
Nations, comprising unarmed international observers
responsible for the monitoring and verification of
the laying down of arms and a part of the tripartite
mechanism that will monitor and verify the definitive
bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities between
the parties, consistent with the joint communiqué of
19 January 2016 (see S/2016/53).

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, and to thank
you and your delegation for your efforts this month,
culminating in the adoption of the historic resolution
2261 (2016), which will consolidate peace in Colombia
on a solid foundation and with the strong support of
the international community. In that respect, I welcome
Ms. María Ángela Holguín Cuellar and to thank her
both for attending this historic meeting and for the
important steps being taken by Colombia.

Pending the commencement of the mission,
which will be led by a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and with personnel contributions

On behalf of the Egyptian Government, I
congratulate the Government and the people of
Colombia on taking this historic step to put an end

8/10

16-01678

25/01/2016

Colombia

to years of tension between the Government and the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, which
has claimed thousands of victims. We hope that a final
agreement will be reached in March, and wish Colombia
every success in that regard.
Like all other members of the Security Council,
Egypt sponsored and favour voted in of resolution
2261 (2016). We are convinced of the importance of
the political mission to be established pursuant to the
resolution, which would be in charge of observing the
implementation of the Final Agreement.
In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks
and appreciation to all those who mediated and thanks
to whom we have reached this historic moment, in
particular Cuba, Norway, Chile, Venezuela and all
other stakeholders. We also like thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for all its efforts to facilitate this
important resolution.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to see you, Sir,
personally presiding over this historic meeting.
While watching a Colombian film, I heard it
said that a people that does not know its history is
condemned to see that history repeat itself indefinitely.
The Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia have clearly
read their history books because now, through the Final
Agreement, which we have all awaited and hoped for,
Colombia is now writing a new page of its history.
Seen from an African perspective, the historic
action that Colombia has just taken is a ray of hope,
in particular as many conflicts continue to rage in
my continent. Senegal would therefore like to add its
voice in congratulating the guarantor countries of this
very promising process — the Republic of Cuba and
the Kingdom of Norway — and those that decided to
assist the process, namely, the Republic of Chile and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. We also wish
to congratulate our friend, the Ambassador of Great
Britain, on his outstanding work in facilitating the
adoption of resolution 2261 (2016), which Senegal,
along with all the other members of the Council,
sponsored and voted in favour of.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

S/PV.7609

On behalf of my country, I wish to express my
great satisfaction at the adoption of resolution 2261
(2016), and congratulate the friendly country of
Colombia on taking this essential step to achieve
lasting peace. The resolution establishes the role that
the international community, through the United
Nations, will play in monitoring the implementation of
one of the most complex aspects of the post-conflict
process: the conditions ceasefire and bilateral and
definitive cessation of hostilities and abandonment of
arms by both parties to the conflict, the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo.
The resolution enjoyed the unanimous support of
the entire Security Council, and surely of the entire
international community. That is so in large part
because of the firm conviction and determination
demonstrated by both parties to attain lasting peace.
This attitude is clearly reflected in the text adopted,
which recognizes the unambiguous national ownership
of the implementation of the Final Agreement and
establishes a political mission with unarmed observers,
which says a lot about the political and institutional
maturity of Colombia.
I also wish to acknowledge the important role played
as guarantors of the process by a number of countries,
including Cuba and Norway; Chile and Venezuela,
which supported the process; and the United Kingdom
as facilitator of the resolution.
There is one last effort remaining before the
definitive peace agreement is signed on 23 March,
after which it will be subject to the political will of the
Colombian people.
I am proud to be presiding over this meeting for
two reasons. The first is the clear empathy that we feel
for the Colombian people; the second is that this event
makes the entire American continent free of armed
conflict. We, the inhabitants of the Americas, and the
world should be proud of this. Uruguay will continue
to support this process so long as the parties deem
necessary.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Ms. Holguín Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I congratulate Uruguay on the excellent

16-016789/10

S/PV.7609

Colombia

manner in which it has conducted the work of the
Security Council this month. Uruguay began its
mandate as a non-permanent member by presiding
over the Council and overseeing complex issues.
Now Uruguay is presiding over a meeting that is of
tremendous importance for Colombia.
On behalf of my Government, I wish to thank you,
Sir, and each of the members of the Security Council
for the unanimous adoption of resolution 2261 (2016),
which establishes a special political mission in my
country, with the specific mandate to participate, for
a period of 12 months, in the international component
of a tripartite mechanism to monitor and verify the
ceasefire and bilateral and definitive cessation of
hostilities and abandonment of arms. This decision of
the Council is a demonstration of its commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It is an opportunity for
the United Nations and the international community to
enjoy success as they are being asked for their support
in the implementation of an agreement in a conflict
that is being resolved by national stakeholders through
negotiation and dialogue.
We are facing a situation in which we have sought
and reached our own solutions. We have come to the
Security Council to ask for its support in implementing
the agreement for the abandonment of weapons and in
monitoring and verifying the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities. I would like to convey to the members of the
Council that their willingness to work with Colombia
on this matter will be essential to the success of the
process. We know that by remaining focused on our
mandate we will achieve conclusive and definitive
results for peace in Colombia.
Ever since he took office, President Juan Manuel
Santos has been convinced that, after half a century of
violence, it was possible to end the conflict in Colombia.
He therefore outlined a peace policy that would make it
possible to build a prosperous, modern and safe society
that values and benefits from the dividends of peace.
The negotiations enjoyed the valuable support of the
Governments of Cuba and Norway as guarantors, and
of Chile and Venezuela as accompanying countries.
Colombia will always be deeply grateful to them,
and exceedingly appreciative of their dedication and
commitment.
We have also had the very valuable and considerable
ongoing support of the countries of our hemisphere.

10/10

25/01/2016

European countries have been greatly supportive
of our peace efforts and eager to assist in the postconflict phase. We have received a constant outpouring
of support from countries in Asia in our quest for
peace. Africa has also joined in this demonstration of
solidarity with Colombia. The Secretary-General has
supported our peace negotiations from the beginning,
sending positive messages to our country and rallying
the closest members of his team around the issue.
His Special Envoy for this stage of the negotiations
was tasked with explaining how the system works in
anticipation of a request for the creation of the special
political mission for the monitoring and verification of
the ceasefire agreement. We sincerely thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, a truly great friend of Colombia.
With regard to the work and preparation required
to bring resolution 2261 (2016) before us today, I wish
to thank the Government of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft and the diplomats
of his Mission for their willingness and their role as
penholders of the resolution. Its adoption was made
possible by the cooperation and contribution of all
the members of the Security Council. We are deeply
grateful to the members for helping us to draft a clear
and detailed resolution with a specific mandate. Such a
resolution will help to build peace in Colombia.
This specific mandate of the Security Council
will benefit all Colombians and help to build trust in
a country determined to overcome the aftermath of a
decades-long conflict that caused too much suffering
for generations. We see our future with hope and faith
in our capacity for the reconciliation that is essential to
restoring our society. The international community will
see a Colombia that will fully embrace its enormous
potential, its human capacity and its natural resources
not only to build a more just and prosperous society, but
to make an even greater contribution to development in
our America and the rest of the world.
Today, thanks to the Council, we are providing that
which the Buendía family in One Hundred Years of
Solitude — the greatest literary work of Gabriel Garcia
Márquez, the most renowned Colombian of all — never
had, that is, a second chance for Colombians here on
Earth. We will rewrite our entire history as one of life,
hope and peace.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

16-01678
