General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

16

of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 14 and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar objectives,
Appreciating the assistance given by the lnternational
Atomic Energy Agency to the International Nuclear
Fue! Cycle Evaluation completed in February 1980,

Noting the excellent safety record of nuclear power
generation, but aware of the need to pay continuing
attention to the questions of nuclear safety and waste
management,
Bearing in mind the special needs of developing countries for technical assistance by the I nternational A tomic
Energy Agency in order to benefit effectively from the
application of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes
as well as from the contribution of nuclear energy to
their economic development, and the need to assure a
satisfactory and effective source of financing to implement adequate and effective technical assistance programmes,
Conscious of the importance of developing ways and
means in which supplies of nuclear material, equipment
and technology and fue! cycle services could be assured
on a more predictable and long-term basis, in accordance with mutually acceptable considerations of nonproliferation, and of the importance of the role and responsibilities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency in this regard,

Notes with satisfaction that:
(a) There is continuing progress in the studies by the
lnternational Atomic Energy Agency aimed at establishing a system of international storage of plutonium and the international management of spent fue!:
(b) The Committee on Assurances of Supply, open
to ali Sta tes members of the I nternational A tomic
Energy Agency, established by the Board of Governors
of the Agency in June 1980, held its first session in
September and will reconvene at the begining of March
1981:
7. Urges ali States that have not already done so to
ratify the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material, which was opened for signature on
3 March 1980;
8. Notes that the recommendation contained in
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 33/3 of
2 N ovember 1978 was duly considered al the twentythird and twenty-fourth regular sessions of the General
Conference of the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency
and expresses the hope that the matter will be brought to
an early conclusion;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly relatin!! to the Agency' s activities.
6.

53rd plenary meeting
6 November 1980

l. Takes note of the report of the I nternational
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Notes with satisfaction that:
(a) The International Atomic Energy Agency is continuously making efforts to strengthen its activities in
the field of technical assistance to the developing countries;
{b) Assistance provided by the lnternational Atomic
Energy Agency is playing a significant role in the introduction of nuclear power as well as in the application of nuclear science and technology, particularly in
the fields of agriculture, medicine and industry in the
developing countries;
(e) Ali possible effective means to assure the financing of technical assistance are being studied;
3. Commends the lnternational Atomic Energy
Agency for its continuing efforts to ensure the safe and
secure use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
throughout the world, notes with satisfaction the steady
improvement of the Agency's safeguards system and
welcomes the conclusion that in 1979 nuclear material
under Agency safeguards remained in peaceful nuclear
activities or was otherwise adequately accounted for:
4. Notes with appreciation the steps taken by the International A tomic Energy Agency to expand and
strengthen its programmes in nuclear safety and enhance its ability to deal with emergencies as well as the
useful discussions at the International Conference on
Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues. held at
Stockholm from 20 to 24 October 1980:
5. Urges ali States to support the endeavours of the
lnternational Atomic Energy Agency, pursuant to its
statute, in furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear power,
improving the effectiveness of safeguards and
promoting nuclear safety;
"Resolution 2373 (XXII). annex.

35/36.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Co-operation between the United Nations and the Islamic Conference",
Recalling its resolution 3369 (XXX) of I O October
1975, by which it granted observer status to the Islamic
Conference,''
Noting that the Organization of the Islamic Conference has reaffirmed its support for the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the purposes and principies of which
constitute the basis for a fruitful co-operation between
ali peoples,
Noting further that contacts at the highest leve] have
been established between the United Nations and the
Organization of the lslamic Conference,
Taking into account the fact that the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations is represented at the
lslamic Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs by a
Special Representative at the leve! of Under-SecretaryGeneral,
Taking note of the effective participation of the Organization of the lslamic Conference in the work of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind the numerous resolutions of the Organization of the Islamic Conference seeking to find
solutions to the serious problems relating, ínter afia, to
international peace and security, disarmament. self"By a letter dated 29 October 1980 addressed to the SecretaryGeneral. the Permanent Representative of Pakistan lo the United
Nations. in his capac1ty as Chairman of the lslamic Group in New
York. requested that. 10 accordance with article I of the Charter of the
lslamic Conference. the designation ··organization of the lslamic
Confcrence·· should henceforth be used at the United Nations.

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

determination, decolonization, fundamental human
rights and the establishment of a new international
economic order, which are matters of common concern
for the two organizations,

Taking into account the fruitful co-operation which already exists between the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the specialized agencies and other
bodies of the United Nations system, such as the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
1. Decides to promote further the co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference in the political, economic, social,
cultural and humanitarian fields and urges the two organizations to co-operate in their common search for
solutions to global problems, such as questions relating
to international peace and security, disarmament, selfdetermination, decolonization, fundamental human
rights and the establishment of a new international
economic order;
2. Notes with satisfaction the determination of the
Organization ofthe Islamic Conference to work towards
finding solutions to the serious problems relating to
international peace and security in accordance with its
Charter and the Charter of the United Nations:
3. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to maintain contacts with the Organization of the Islamic Conference and requests him
to further strengthen these contacts;
4. Welcomes the active participation of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in the work of the
United Nations in the fields of common interest to both
organizations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to examine ways
and meaos of further strengthening co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the
lslamic Conference and to submit a report to that effect
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference".

63rd plenary meeting
14 November 1980

35/37.

The siti,ation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security",
Recalling its resolution ES-6 /2 of 14 January 1980
adopted at its sixth emergency special session,
Reaffirming the purposes and prim:ipks of the Charter of the U nited N ations and the obligation of ali Sta tes
to refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of any State,

17

Reafjirming further the inalienable right of ali peoples to determine their own form of government and to
choose their own economic, political and social system
free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or
constraint of any kind whatsoever:
Grave/y concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principies, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Deeply concerned at the increasing outflow of refugees from Afghanistan,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political
solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan.
Recognizing the importance of the continuing efforts
and initiatives of the Organization of the lslamic Conference for a political solution of the situation in respect
of Afghanistan,
1. Reiterares that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful solution of the problem;

2. Reafjirms the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any
kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan:
4. A /so ca lis upon ali parties con cerned to work for
the urgent achievement of a political solution and the
creation of the necessary conditions which would enable
the Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes
in safety and honour
5. Appeals to ali States and national and international organizations to extend humanitarian relief
assistance, with a view to alleviating the hardship of the
Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the U nited
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees:
6. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of thc
Secretarv-General in the search for a solution to the
problem' and hopes that he will continue to extend assistance, including the appointment of a special representative, with a view to promoting a political solution
in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution, and the exploration of securing appropriate
guarantees for non-use of force, or threat of use of force.
against the political independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of ali neighbouring States,
on thc basis of mutual guarantees and strict 11011interference in each other's interna! affairs and with full
regard for the principies of the Charter of the U nited
Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed
of progress towards the implementation of the present
resolution and to submit to Member States a report on
the situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security".

70th plenary meeting
20 Novemher 1980
