82

General AaaemM;-81:ith Seeaion

(iii) Reducing any other subsequent demands to a
minimum, in particular refraining froI!1 requ~ting the repetition or reissumg.of material readily
available in other United Nations documents;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To exercise a strict control of documentation
by refraining from publishing documents not called for
by an organ of the United Nations or not necessary
for the conduct of meetings or the proper exercise of
the functions of the Secretariat;
( b) To exercise discretion as to the disposition of
material received from delegations which does not fa]l
within tpe requirements of paragraph 1 (a) (ii) above;
( c) To restri et to an essential minim.um. the free
distribution of internally-processed pubhcattons and
the distribution of documents which are still in draft
form;
(d) To submit to all organs of the United Nations,
before the adoption of draft resolutions requiring documentation, an estimate of the cost and, if possible, an
estimate of the off-setting sales revenue ;
( e) To strengthen the internal control of documentation by enforcing strict editorial policies to eliminate unnecessary and repetitious matter;
(f) To make available to delegations the relevant
services of the Secretariat for consultations in the matter of the organization of their documents files, with
a view to avoiding as far as possible requests for redistribution.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
594 (VI). Operational programmes under the
reaponsibility of th-, United Nations financed
by voluntary contributions
The General Assembly,
Considering that the system of voluntary contributions established to finance the various operational programmes executed under the direct authority of the
United Nations cannot diminish the administrative responsibilities involved in such expenditures,
Considering, in consequence, that the administrative
costs of such programmes should be subject to the same
scrutiny as tl}at applied to similar expenses under the
regular budget of the United Nations,
Considering also that, under the system now in force
and the related administrative machinery, no means
exists of affording to the financing governments an opportunity to review such activities,
Considering further the fact that the majority of the
governments contributing to such voluntary operational

pr:ogrammes are represented in the General Assembly
of the United Nations,
Considering, finally, that past experience, .as w.ell as·

the magnitude of the programmes a~d the diversity of
the activities involved have shown it to be necessary
and convenient to apply. ful.ler admin~strativ~ controls
in the interest of co-ordmabon and with a view to secqring specific guidanc<: from the. governments of
Member States in the implementation of such programmes,
1. Resolves that the administrative part of the technical .assistance programme financ:d by vo~untary contributions and executed by the Umted Nations shall be
subject to the same scrutiny on the part of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as that applied to expenses proposed under
the regular budget ;
. 2._ Requests the Advisor~ Committee on .Admi~isti"ative and Budgetary Que~tlons, as .part of its revie'Y
of the accounts of the special operational programmes
authorized by the General Assembly and financed from
extra-budgetary funds, to pay special attention to the
administrative practices and expenses of these prop-ammes and to submit comments thereon as part of
its reports to the General Assembly.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
595 (VI). Public information activities of the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation of the work of Sub-C?mmittee 8 of the Fifth Committee on public information,
Taking cognizance of the report 22 of the Sub-Committee,
1. Approves the basic principles and notes with
satisfaction paragraph 13 of the report of the SubCommittee;
2. Recommends that the Secretary-General shall be
guided in framing budget estimates for 1953 by the
basic principles and paragraph 13 of the report;
3. Decides that the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and of the Secretary-General, if any, on the Sub-Committee's report shall be considered at the seventh regular session of the General Assembly.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
,. See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 41, document A/C.5/L.172.
