A/63/PV.36

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

36

th plenary meeting
Monday, 3 November 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Cujba
(Republic of Moldova), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 40 and 44
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(A/63/3)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/371)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/255)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.14)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/83)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.15)
The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 40, I would like to remind the members of the
General Assembly that, pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, the Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee, decided at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2008, to
consider agenda item 40 in its entirety in plenary, on
the understanding that the administrative, programme

and budgetary aspects should be dealt with by the Fifth
Committee.
At the same meeting, the Assembly took note of
the clarification that, in implementing resolution
58/316 to consider item 40 in its entirety in plenary, the
relevant parts of chapter I of the report that are under
agenda items already allocated to the Main Committees
will be considered by the Committees concerned for
final action by the General Assembly.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Léo
Mérorès, President of the Economic and Social
Council, to introduce the report of the Economic and
Social Council.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti), President of the Economic
and Social Council (spoke in French): I have the
honour to introduce the 2008 report of the Economic
and Social Council (A/63/3). The Council’s substantive
session in July took place at an important juncture. It
was a transition year for the Economic and Social
Council, which has now operationalized many of the
new functions given to it by the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, in particular the biennial Development
Cooperation Forum (DCF) and the annual ministerial
review of the implementation of the international
development goals.
Today, allow me to briefly highlight the key
outcomes of the Council’s work so far and then to
focus on the future, including the steps forward. We
began the year with the annual special high-level
meeting of the Economic and Social Council with the
Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-58333 (E)

*0858333*

A/63/PV.36

Organization and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development. The meeting made an
important contribution to the preparations of the
follow-up to the International Conference on Financing
for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus, which — as we all know — will
be held in Doha, Qatar, from 29 November to
2 December 2008.
Turning now to the high-level segment, the 2008
Development Cooperation Forum, including its series
of preparatory meetings, was, in the view of many, a
success. Given the broad mandate, an important
objective of the preparations for the first Forum was to
establish the Economic and Social Council as a
principal forum for political dialogue and policy review
on the effectiveness and coherence of international
development cooperation. Another objective was to
contribute to the outcome of key intergovernmental
processes, such as the upcoming Doha Review and the
recently concluded Accra High-level Forum. Those
objectives have been achieved, and the Accra Agenda
for Action reflects several of the policy messages of the
Development Cooperation Forum.
A number of factors account for the preliminary
success of the Development Cooperation Forum,
including the perceived quality of the high-level
symposiums held under the auspices of the Forum, the
professionalism and political balance of the analytical
work, including the Secretary-General’s report, the
ability to attract key development cooperation actors
and the strong public support from stakeholder groups,
such as parliamentarians, civil society and local
governments. Indeed, the Forum is seen as having
established a comparative advantage in organizing
multi-stakeholder consultations on aid issues.
While progress has been made in building
political support for and ownership of the Forum by the
whole range of stakeholders, the Forum also faces
several challenges. One is to strengthen the distinct
identity of the Forum as a leading global forum for
dialogue among senior policymakers dealing with
development cooperation at the country level.
A related challenge is to further raise awareness
of the Development Cooperation Forum among
practitioners at the country level, especially since
adding experiences from the local level to the debate at
the global level is a particular comparative advantage
of the Forum.

2

It is important that the preparations for the 2010
Forum further strengthen its contribution to
international development cooperation. An important
recommendation of the 2008 Forum was that it should
play a key role as an international mutual
accountability mechanism that would draw together
analysis of progress in national and global-level mutual
accountability processes. For the 2010 Forum to be
able to advance the global dialogue on this important
issue, it is important that member States and other
stakeholders actively participate in the upcoming
preparatory process.
The 2008 annual ministerial review focused on
sustainable
development,
which
encompasses
economic
growth,
social
development
and
environmental protection. It helped spur the efforts of
countries to implement the global consensus on
sustainable development at the national level and
provided practical guidance to assist in those efforts.
The annual review also served to advance the ongoing
work on climate change, which was also bolstered by
the climate change and development event organized in
the run-up to the substantive session. This meeting
discussed ways on how developing countries can cope
with climate change and how to reduce the world’s
carbon footprint.
The national voluntary presentations during the
annual review continue to be seen by member States as
a very important mechanism for strengthening
accountability for fulfilment of development goals.
This year brought presentations from developed
countries, namely Belgium, Finland, Luxembourg and
the United Kingdom, which discussed lessons from
their development policies and programmes. Chile,
Kazakhstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and
the United Republic of Tanzania shared both their
success stories and the specific obstacles to
implementation at the country level. The success of the
annual review as a collaborative review mechanism is
reflected in the large number of volunteers for 2009
and 2010.
The impact and visibility of the high-level
segment were enhanced by an extensive series of sideevents, such as the annual ministerial review
innovation fair and ministerial breakfasts and panel
discussions organized by member States, entities of the
United Nations system and non-governmental
stakeholders, including civil society and the private
sector. Together, those meetings served to promote and

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

catalyse tangible, multi-stakeholder partnerships for
implementing the international development agenda.

that member States placed in the Council’s role of
supporting a country’s long-term development.

The 2008 high-level segment concluded with the
adoption of the Ministerial Declaration. It underscored
the need for urgent, collective and collaborative action
by all members of the international community to
address global financial turmoil, rising food and fuel
prices, environmental degradation and climate change.

The Council’s informal discussion on possible
modalities of interaction between the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
using the framework of the work of its Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau, generated a general
consensus on the need to further explore how to bring
development work into the Peacebuilding Commission
and how to bring the peace and security dimensions of
peacebuilding into the work of the Council. In my
view, the time has come perhaps to clarify the
relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Council and to define the modalities for their
interaction.

Many other outcomes of the Council’s
substantive session are of key relevance to the work of
the General Assembly. They will assist, I am sure, the
Second and Third Committees in their work.
First, the Economic and Social Council is
entrusted with the follow-up to the implementation of
the General Assembly resolution on the Triennial
Comprehensive Policy Review of Operational
Activities for Development of the United Nations
system. As called for by the Council, the United
Nations system is now proceeding with the
implementation of the Assembly’s resolution on the
policy review, and the resolution adopted by the
Council this summer gave new impetus to these efforts.
Secondly, member States recognized and
encouraged the ongoing strengthening of humanitarian
coordination, particularly in partnerships, funding and
leadership capacity on the ground and of
mainstreaming gender equality in humanitarian
assistance. Member States have underlined the
importance of national capacity-building, disasterpreparedness and risk reduction, and have strengthened
legal disaster relief frameworks. Member States also
reacted to the reality on the ground by condemning the
increased attacks against humanitarian personnel,
urging the persecution of perpetrators.
The Council has now started to convene
emergency sessions, such as the one on the global food
crisis this year. The time may have come to adopt a
regular practice of turning to the Council whenever
major emergencies occur. The Council organized a
meeting on the food crises, which was very well
attended.
Thirdly, the Council’s role in peacebuilding and
post-conflict development was also recognized and
received unwavering support from member States. The
extension of the mandate of the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti is a manifestation of the confidence

08-58333

The Council intends to expand the range of
stakeholders that the United Nations can partner with
in promoting the implementation of the internationally
agreed
developments
goals,
particularly
the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Its
philanthropy
event
discussed
how
corporate
philanthropy can contribute to advancing the MDGs,
especially for sustainable development. The Council
intends to further expand its outreach to the
philanthropic community and could continue
discussions how to facilitate the growth and flow of
philanthropic resources on a global basis and the
possible establishment of a United Nations
Philanthropy Day as a way to mobilize interest and
support for philanthropy worldwide.
My experience as President of the Economic and
Social Council has shown me that the convening power
and the spirit of engagement that have been the
hallmark of the United Nations conferences are well
captured in the Council. The Council has opened new
vistas of cooperation among various stakeholders.
I find this to be an encouraging sign. The Council has
great potential for becoming the forum for promoting
collaborative action in the pursuit of current crises. I
urge the Assembly to utilize this potential to the fullest.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda to introduce
draft resolutions A/63/L.14 and A/63/L.15.
Mr. Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China. The Group wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for the report contained in document
A/63/83 and we also welcome the report just

3

A/63/PV.36

introduced by the President of the Economic and Social
Council and contained in document A/63/3. During this
year’s substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council
on
the
theme
“Implementing
the
internationally agreed goals and commitments in
regard to sustainable development”, ministers
pointedly recognized that the international community
was meeting at a critical juncture in our efforts to
realize these goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), and that we faced
multiple challenges in our efforts to achieve them.
Back then in July, less than four months ago,
some were still sceptical about recognizing the
looming turmoil in financial markets as a crisis,
preferring instead to use the anodyne terms
“instability” and “uncertainty”. In the short space of
time since then, the world has come to recognize the
financial situation for what it is: a crisis. The crisis in
international financial markets has now permeated the
global economy, significantly slowing global economic
growth. This, added to the food crisis and rising fuel
prices, as well as the impacts of environmental
degradation and climate change, means that urgent
individual and collective actions, both short- and longterm, are needed to curtail the impact on development
and to ensure that development gains are not reversed
and future efforts are not undermined.
Our ministers expressed determination to take
concerted action to promote progress towards the
realization of the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
in the face of those overwhelming risks to
development. We certainly hope that the strong
political will that is required will be demonstrated in a
timely fashion.
In the face of such challenges, development
remains a central goal in and of itself, and sustainable
development,
in
its
economic,
social
and
environmental dimensions, constitutes a key element of
the overarching framework and purpose of the United
Nations. During the Council’s discussions on various
economic and social issues, the Group of 77 and China
identified several areas where progress was lacking and
which we deemed vital for development and for the
achievement of the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals.
There is general agreement that global challenges
such as climate change and the environmental crisis,

4

the global food crisis, the financial crisis, the energy
crisis and the crisis in international policy and
institutional
infrastructure
—
which
bear
disproportionately on developing countries and the
poor — have to be addressed in an integrated and
holistic manner. They cannot be sequenced and have to
be addressed with urgency. The international
community has the framework of the MDGs and the
other internationally agreed development goals around
which to rally efforts. But actual implementation
actions remain woefully lacking. There is now an
opportunity for extraordinary responses from the
international community. But the window of
opportunity is closing very fast and will be lost, if we
are not swift to respond concretely and instead carry on
with the status quo.
As we continue to examine and assess the role of
the United Nations system in ensuring a coordinated
implementation of the outcomes of major United
Nations conferences and summits at all levels, the
Group of 77 and China continues to stress the need to
ensure a strong and direct link between coordination
and development effectiveness. The outcome of
increased coordination should be tangible and
measurable development results where they matter
most. We should therefore place priority on monitoring
results at the country level.
We remain convinced that the United Nations is
the best intergovernmental forum for advancing the
development agenda and for facilitating the full
realization of all internationally agreed development
goals, including the MDGs. On the very important
factor of policy coherence, the United Nations, through
the Economic and Social Council, has a key role to
play in ensuring that the policies of developed
countries and international institutional partners are
coherent and consistent with development goals and
objectives of developing countries, particularly policies
on trade, finance, intellectual property and the transfer
of technology. Such inconsistencies should be the
subject and object of deliberations of the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly, so that
they may be identified and corrected.
The Group of 77 and China reiterates that
securing real progress on MDG 8, on the global
partnership for development must become a priority.
The importance of benchmarks, and targets under
MDG 8 cannot be overemphasized, as global
partnership is necessary to achieve all internationally

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

agreed development goals and the MDGs. The General
Assembly should make this message abundantly clear.
Additionally, there remain many challenges to the
coordination of United Nations humanitarian assistance
activities, both in natural disaster situations and in
complex emergencies. These include addressing such
situations in a timely, safe and effective manner. A
single natural disaster can set back development
progress in a developing country by several decades,
accentuating poverty and economic vulnerabilities. For
these reasons, it is critical that affected States, donor
countries, the United Nations system and other
humanitarian organizations coordinate to provide the
much-needed humanitarian assistance and development
support while recognizing the primary role of the
affected State and fully respecting General Assembly
resolution 46/182.
In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China hopes
that the international community and development
partners will take urgent measures to address the
significant and debilitating implementation gaps
identified in several areas, in particular in technology
transfer, food security, agriculture and rural
development, trade policies including agricultural
subsidies, debt and official development assistance.
I wish now to take this opportunity to introduce
the two draft resolutions that are before the Assembly.
The first is the draft resolution contained in document
A/63/L.15, entitled “Commemoration of the fifteenth
anniversary of the International Conference on
Population and Development”.
Next year, 2009, will mark the fifteenth
anniversary of that landmark international conference
on population and development, which was held in
Cairo. Fifteen years later, the international community
is well poised to note achievements, assess progress and
identify shortfalls in the achievement of International
Conference on Population and Development goals. In
this regard, I am pleased to introduce, on behalf of the
Member States that are members of the Group of 77 and
China, the draft resolution contained in document
A/63/L.15, entitled “Commemoration of the fifteenth
anniversary of the International Conference on
Population and Development”. The draft resolution
proposes that the General Assembly devote one day
during its sixty-fourth session to a commemoration of
the fifteenth anniversary of the International Conference
on Population and Development. The Group thanks all

08-58333

delegations for their support of this draft resolution and
looks forward to a fitting commemoration of the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development plus 15.
Permit me now to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document A/63/L.14 entitled “Smoke-free
United Nations premises”. By its decision 2008/231,
the Economic and Social Council recommended that
the General Assembly, at its sixty-third session,
consider the recommendation set out in Council
resolution 2006/42 of 27 July 2006 on the
implementation of a complete ban on smoking on all
United Nations indoor premises, at Headquarters as
well as at regional and country offices throughout the
United Nations system, and the implementation of a
complete ban on sales of tobacco products on all
United Nations premises.
In this regard, I am pleased to introduce, on
behalf of the Member States that are members of the
Group of 77 and China, draft resolution A/63/L.14,
entitled “Smoke-free United Nations premises”. The
Group thanks the many delegations that have
participated in the consultations on this resolution,
especially the delegation of Uruguay for conducting
those consultations on behalf of the Group. We are
heartened by the overwhelming support among all
States for this resolution, and we look forward to its
adoption by consensus.
Before action is taken on the draft, there is one
small correction to be made. In operative paragraph 3,
the words “the measures for” should be inserted after
“report on”. Paragraph 3 should now read:
“Requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session a report on the measures for the
implementation of the present resolution.”
Finally, the Group of 77 and China looks forward
to adoption by consensus of both draft resolutions, and
we thank all delegations for their support.
Mr. Delacroix (France) (spoke in French): I am
honoured to speak on behalf of the European Union on
agenda item 40, on the report of the Economic and
Social Council. The countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Montenegro; Iceland,
member of the European Free Trade Association and

5

A/63/PV.36

the European Economic Area; and Ukraine and
Armenia align themselves with this statement.
The European Union thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the activities of the Economic
and Social Council (A/63/3). We would also like to
congratulate the President of the Council, Ambassador
Mérorès, for the great expertise and benevolent
authority with which he steered the Council’s work in
the last few months. The European Union takes this
opportunity to renew its support for the Economic and
Social Council. The recent introduction of the annual
ministerial review and the holding this year of the first
Development Cooperation Forum have had a very
positive impact in terms of strengthening the Council,
in line with the desire expressed by the heads of State
and Government at the World Summit in September
2005.
The first Forum took place during the Council’s
high-level segment and was able to play an important
role as a setting for constructive dialogue within the
United Nations on the key issues of cooperation and
development, including South-South cooperation and
aid effectiveness. It facilitated the review of trends in
international
development
cooperation,
the
identification of gaps and the making of
recommendations to formulate and implement national
development strategies. The European Union is
convinced that the Forum can make a key contribution
in its capacity as a preferred entity for examining aid
architecture, encouraging dialogue and strengthening
coordination among all relevant actors, including
emerging donors, particularly to achieve the
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals.
In order to boost the Forum’s efficiency and
allow interactive discussion on cooperation and
development issues, the European Union believes that
two or three specific themes should be identified,
which would enable the Forum to draw up a factual
assessment, highlight the elements of coordination to
be improved and identify best practices on the ground.
The role of the Development Cooperation Forum
was recognized in the Accra Agenda for Action on aid
effectiveness, and we hope it will contribute to
international dialogue and mutual accountability on the
issues related to aid, in the spirit of the global
partnership to which the European Union is
particularly committed.

6

The role of the Annual Ministerial Review held
during the Council’s high-level segment is also very
important. The European Union supports its goal of
reviewing progress made in the implementation of the
outcomes of conferences and summits and their followup processes. It welcomes the smooth running of the
second session of that voluntary exercise, on the theme
“Implementing the internationally agreed goals and
commitments in regard to sustainable development”,
which contributed to the formulation of lessons learned
and best practices on that issue.
The European Union will be just as mobilized for
the 2009 Annual Ministerial Review, which will focus
on the theme of “Implementing the internationally
agreed goals and commitments in regard to global
public health”. The European Union stresses in this
regard that its States members rank among the largest
contributors to the health-related activities of the
United Nations system, in particular the World Health
Organization, the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), and the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. It also welcomes the
contribution of developing countries in presenting
lessons learned from their progress in implementing
internationally agreed development goals. In that
regard, it recalls the need to maintain an appropriate
balance between the numbers of developing and
developed countries that volunteer for national
voluntary presentations. That balance must take into
account their respective representation in the Economic
and Social Council and the United Nations.
The European Union considers further reform of
the Economic and Social Council’s working methods to
be paramount in view of enabling the Council to
refocus on its core functions and to assume its full role
of guiding and coordinating international action in the
economic, social and environmental arenas. In
particular, the European Union believes that an even
better organized and focused substantive session would
clearly be a guarantee of coherence and effectiveness.
Finally, the European Union would like to
reiterate the importance that it accords to achieving
increased coordination and complementarity among
United Nations activities, in particular as regards the
necessary links between the work undertaken by the
Economic and Social Council and that of funds and
programmes, between the Council’s work and that of
the General Assembly.

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

Ms. González (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): In
the context of the consideration of the report of the
Economic and Social Council and draft resolution
A/63/L.14, on a smoke-free United Nations premises,
Uruguay’s delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement of the Group of 77 and China. My delegation
wishes to reiterate once more its support for the draft
resolution on smoke-free premises, a continuation of
the work initiated by the Economic and Social Council
in July with the adoption of decision 2008/231, which
recommended that the General Assembly implement
the Council’s resolution 2006/42 of 27 July 2006.
My country attaches particular importance to that
issue. For that reason, we have made a firm
commitment to anti-tobacco policies, at the
international level, by ratifying the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control, and also at the national level, by
implementing correspondent policies that seek to
improve the well-being of its population. In 2006 my
country became the first in Latin America to be totally
free of tobacco smoking in closed public areas.
In that regard, we feel it is appropriate to recall
that the consumption of tobacco is unquestionably a
risk factor for health and a cause of death, in addition
to being associated with all sorts of diseases ranging
from cancer to cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases,
as noted by the report submitted to the Economic and
Social Council by the United Nations Ad Hoc
Interagency Task Force on Tobacco Control.
Tobacco affects not only smokers. Second-hand
smoke is damaging to health. Our delegation believes it
is the responsibility of all in the Organization to protect
against exposure to tobacco smoke in public places,
especially in indoor work spaces and closed public
premises. The majority of States Members of the
Organization have adopted and encouraged smoke-free
policies, and the United Nations and Governments
should set an example in public health. Reducing the
smoking areas in the workplace protects staff members
and delegates from involuntary exposure to smoke and
aids smokers in reducing their daily consumption. In
view of these facts, we believe that the Organization
should act and it is thus essential that the General
Assembly take prompt action on this matter so that we
can have a smoke-free United Nations.
Mr. Alimov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to thank the President of the

08-58333

Economic and Social Council for his very informative
presentation of the Council’s report (A/63/3). I would
also like to convey our gratitude to the Secretariat for
ensuring the Council’s ability to work effectively
during the course of this year.
The Russian delegation has consistently
championed the strengthening of the role of the
Council within the framework of the United Nations
development system and the global economic
architecture as a whole. We view the Council as one of
the leading platforms within the framework of the
universal Organization to seek compromise solutions to
the most pressing socio-economic problems of today,
including re-emerging threats and challenges to
consistent sustainable development. The Council’s
updated, more flexible and more focused format and its
demonstrated ability to rapidly respond to new threats
and challenges have provided the Council with the
opportunity to become one of the most utilized
mechanisms
for
multilateral
cooperation
for
development, including in the context of the task of
overcoming the global financial crisis.
The successful conduct of the second annual
ministerial review of the progress in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and of the
first full-scale Development Cooperation Forum allow
us to speak of the Council as having fully achieved its
intended operational level in implementing its mandate
as the main body in the United Nations system
ensuring coordination of multilateral efforts aimed at
achieving the MDGs. Of special importance here was
the Development Cooperation Forum. In our view, the
Forum, on the whole, discharged its main function to
serve as a universal platform for equal partnership
dialogue on issues of development with the
participation of as broad a range of partners as
possible, including civil society and the private sector.
A priority task is the search for the best work format
for the Forum to enable it to genuinely promote greater
agreement on and the effectiveness of development
processes. The interactive discussion within the
framework of the Forum must be targeted at
elaborating
concrete
recommendations
and
compromise decisions, which may serve as the
foundations of future intergovernmental agreements.
One of the ways to strengthen the role of the
Council is the more effective use of the potential of the
Council’s annual sessions to implement its
coordination functions. We believe that the

7

A/63/PV.36

coordination segment should become the main
platform for a practical, focused and grounded
consideration of the issues of the work of regional and
functional commissions of the Council, including the
format for the dialogue with their Executive Directors,
as well as the topic of the comprehensive
implementation of the decisions of major United
Nations summits and conferences in the field of
economics.
We welcome the outcomes of the operational
segment of the session, whose work is of major
importance from the point of view of implementing
agreements achieved within the framework of triennial
reviews of substantive activities, which give the United
Nations practical policy guidance in the field of
cooperation for development and which turn United
Nations programmes of work and funds at the country
level.
The humanitarian segment confirmed the growing
importance of a timely and appropriate response to
natural disasters of increasing frequency and severity.
The Council fully retains its role as the main platform
of work within the framework of the United Nations
for consideration of humanitarian issues. We are,
however, forced to note that the fact that the Council
had to vote on a humanitarian resolution this session —
the first time in its history — creates a very dangerous
precedent and points to an undesirable trend towards
the politicization of humanitarian issues at the United
Nations. The Council should continue to play a role in
considerations aimed at finding responses to such
global challenges threatening progress in achieving the
MDGs, such as the food crisis. We back the efforts of
the United Nations system to overcome it. We believe
that the Rome Declaration and the Comprehensive
Framework for Action worked out by the High-level
Task Force can serve as a sound basis for consolidating
the efforts of the international community in this area.
The high-level segment of the upcoming the
Council session, will, as is well known, be devoted to
assessing progress in the implementation of objectives
and obligations agreed at an international level in the
field of health. The President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-third session of has declared the topic of
global health as one of his priorities. Russia supports
increased attention devoted to health issues on the
Organization’s agenda. However, we urge that their
consideration in various United Nations forums over
the coming year should take place in a consistent,

8

coherent manner following a single line of logic, and
with consideration by the Council as a central element.
We expect that the organizations and specialized
agencies of the United Nations, coordinated by the
Council, will, in a timely fashion, start preparations for
Council sessions, including at a regional level. Russia
is ready for constructive cooperation in this field with
all interested partners.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to express my thanks for the
report introduced by the distinguished representative of
Haiti, Mr. Mérorès, and to pay tribute to his skilful
guidance of the Economic and Social Council as its
President.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Antigua and Barbuda on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Two years have elapsed since the adoption of
resolution 61/16 on strengthening the Economic and
Social Council, which established, among other things,
two elements that my delegation regards as fundamental
to improving the work of the Council: on one hand,
substantive annual reviews at the ministerial level and,
on the other, the Development Cooperation Forum.
We welcome the holding in July of the first
meeting of the Development Cooperation Forum, at
which time the President of the Council said that the
launching of the Forum was a significant milestone in
the implementation of the global partnership for
development as, for the first time, international
development cooperation issues as such will be
discussed under the aegis of the United Nations by the
Economic and Social Council in order to strengthen the
impact of cooperation for development.
In this regard, I would like to underscore a
number of points that we regard as key for this work to
proceed effectively. The Forum should further
strengthen the voice of all those concerned, including
civil society, parliamentarians, the private sector and
local government, through support for high-level
dialogue on the main issues of cooperation for
development. Due consideration must be given to the
broad range of topics affecting the efficiency of
cooperation for development, such as climate change,
food security and policy coherence. The Forum should
continue to provide independent high-quality analysis
on the topic of cooperation to ensure a broad and
inclusive international debate on that agenda. The

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

Forum should play a key role as an international
mechanism for accountability, bringing together
analysis of progress achieved on the national and global
levels as related to the topic of mutual accountability,
thus contributing to donor-beneficiary coordination.
Another key event at the July meeting was the
thematic debate entitled “Promoting an integrated
approach to rural development in developing countries
for poverty eradication and sustainable development,
taking into account current challenges”, at which my
country raised a number of points that it would like to
reiterate in this forum.
Like climate change, protection of biodiversity is
a long-term global issue that is not being handled
effectively and is closely associated with sustainable
development. In that regard, we need to heighten
awareness of the problem and increase the number of
international programmes promoting technical and
financial assistance for the protection of biodiversity.
The rules and incentives established by markets
in the developed countries to mitigate the effects of
climate change can at times hamper some exports from
developing countries. For that reason, technical and
financial assistance is needed, so that the developing
countries can upgrade their manufacturing plants, so as
to comply with those new and more stringent
requirements.
The current regimes of intellectual property rights
need to be reviewed to take into account the interests
of developing countries. We are particularly concerned
about the protection of traditional knowledge.
In the private sector of developing countries,
limited access to credit and technology can hinder
investment in cleaner and more efficient production
depending on resources and the establishment of new
companies that contribute to sustainable development.
In that regard, we must support not only the large
corporations, but also individual initiatives and small
business, which is essential to developing countries.
As a result, we underscore the importance of
initiatives, such as that of the Commission on Legal
Empowerment of the Poor, co-chaired by the former
Secretary of State of the United States of America,
Ms. Madeleine Albright, and Mr. Hernando de Soto,
who delivered the report of the Commission on 3 June
2008 and to which we believe all necessary support
should be offered.

08-58333

Just 10 days ago, thanks to the endorsement of
our region, my country had the honour to be elected as
a member of the Council for the period 2009 to 2010.
We are excited to return to the Economic and Social
Council, since the work of that body relates closely to
the outlook and priorities of Peru’s foreign policy.
Together with the impetus given to economic
growth by investment and the generation of
employment — goals towards which we are working
hard — fighting against poverty and exclusion is
currently probably the most daunting challenge of
Peru’s national and foreign policies. We are convinced
that the dignity of the human being and his well-being
lie at the core of our concerns.
In that regard, I would like to put forward two
brief thoughts of a general nature about the work of the
Council.
First, we need to refocus the work of the Council.
As His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI pointed out when
he last addressed the General Assembly: “The founding
principles of the Organization … express the just
aspirations of the human spirit and constitute the ideals
which should underpin international relations”
(A/62/PV.95, p. 3). In that regard, the work of the
Council should focus on the human being and make the
individual the core of its actions and the purpose of all
goals.
Secondly, to put it plainly, we believe that we
need more action and less rhetoric. It is not so much a
question of creating new commitments as fulfilling
those already made. That needs the establishment of
flexible and effective follow-up mechanisms in all the
Council’s areas of activity.
Mr. Sen (India): I am grateful for the opportunity
to express our views on the report of the Economic and
Social Council for 2008 (A/63/3). India attaches great
importance to the work of the Economic and Social
Council, and believes that its strengthened structure
will assist in better discharging its role as the principal
body for coordination, policy review, policy dialogue
and recommendations on issues of economic and social
development. We underline the importance of the new
mandate, given to the Council in 2006, to undertake a
regular and periodic review and assessment of
international economic and development policies and
their impact on development. We support the
Development Cooperation Forum as a key body in

9

A/63/PV.36

overseeing trends
cooperation.

in

international

development

Insofar as the report of the Economic and Social
Council for 2008 is concerned, we would like to
comment on the report of the Statistical Commission
on its thirty-ninth session (E/2008/24), which was
considered by the Economic and Social Council during
its 2008 substantive session. While the Statistical
Commission was asked merely to look at the indicators
for the targets of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), we would like to reiterate our position and
place on record that we do not agree with the change in
targets effected last year by the United Nations
Secretariat, particularly the transfer of a target from
Goal 8 to Goal 1. Such actions, without the approval of
Member States, are arbitrary and misrepresent the
decision taken at the 2005 World Summit Outcome.
Further, those actions weaken the monitoring of
MDG 8 and are against the spirit of the global
partnership for development. We would therefore urge
the Statistical Commission to focus particularly on that
aspect during its fortieth session.
Mr. Murakami (Japan): Today, it is my pleasure
to share Japan’s position under agenda item 40, on the
report of the Economic and Social Council (A/63/3),
and agenda item 44, on integrated and coordinated
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits in
the economic, social and related fields (A/63/83).
First of all, I would like to express my
delegation’s sincere gratitude to the Secretariat for
providing those reports. I would also like to join
previous speakers in praising Ambassador Mérorès,
President of the Economic and Social Council, for his
skilful and successful leadership of the Council this
year.
On 22 October, with the endorsement of the
regional group, Japan was re-elected a member of the
Economic and Social Council for the term from 2009
to 2011. My delegation would like to express its
sincere gratitude to all the Member States that
supported our re-election. We are committed to
continue playing an active and constructive role in the
deliberations of the Council.
Japan attaches great importance to the activities of
the Economic and Social Council. During the high-level
segment of the substantive session this year, the then
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan,

10

Mr. Yasuhide Nakayama, declared that Japan supported
the efforts to strengthen the Council, including the
establishment of the Development Cooperation Forum.
Japan not only financially supported the preparation
process of this year’s Economic and Social Council, but
also sent panellists to its meetings to share their views.
Japan has announced its intention to make a
national voluntary presentation at next year’s annual
ministerial review in Geneva. Under the theme
“Implementing the internationally agreed goals and
commitments in regard to global public health”, Japan
will present its unique experience in enhancing public
health domestically, as well as its recent role as a
strong advocate for the promotion of global health.
The high-level meeting on Africa’s development
needs and the high-level event on the Millennium
Development Goals in September provided an ideal
opportunity for world leaders to send a strong message
that we should act together to make strong efforts for
the development of Africa and the achievement of the
MDGs. For its part, Japan placed the MDGs at the top
of the agenda at the two important summits it hosted
earlier this year, namely, the fourth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD IV) and
the Group of Eight (G-8) Summit.
The fourth Tokyo International Conference on
African Development, which took place in Yokohama
in May this year, was co-organized by Japan, the
United Nations, the United Nations Development
Programme
(UNDP)
and the World
Bank.
Representatives of 51 African countries, including 41
leaders, along with other donor countries and a wide
range of international organizations, gathered to rally
behind the theme “Toward a vibrant Africa”, or, in
French, “Vers une Afrique qui Gagne”. They
reaffirmed the importance of developing country
ownership and international community partnership in
advancing development. They also emphasized the
need to accelerate broad-based economic growth, to
ensure human security including achieving Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and the consolidation of
peace and good governance and to address
environmental issues and climate change.
At the Group of Eight (G-8) Hokkaido Toyako
Summit in July, leaders declared that, in tackling the
MDG agenda, they would work to improve human
security through the protection and empowerment of
individuals and communities. In its discussions, the G-8

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

focused on the areas of health, water and sanitation, and
education. In the field of global health, the G-8
emphasized
the
importance
of
pursuing
a
comprehensive approach in order to strengthen health
systems, improve maternal, newborn and child health
and combat infectious diseases. At the successful MDG
Partnership event on water and sanitation on
24 September, Japan announced its determination to put
even greater effort into enhancing good water cycle
management. With regard to education, Japan
emphasizes the importance of improving both the
quality and quantity of basic education as well as of
developing a well balanced and holistic education
system, including secondary, higher and technical and
vocational education and training. All of these policies
came with specific commitments, which Japan
announced earlier this year and reiterated at the highlevel event on the MDGs. Japan is determined to work
steadfastly in order to fulfil these commitments.
In the fight against climate change, the G-8
leaders sought to share with all parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change the
vision of the goal of achieving a reduction of at least
50 per cent in global emissions by 2050. They also
emphasized the importance of midterm goals and
national plans, and shared the view that sectoral
approaches are useful tools for achieving national
emission reduction objectives.
Japan stands ready to continue to provide
leadership towards the eradication of poverty and the
achievement of sustained economic growth through the
enhancement of human security. My delegation hopes
that fruitful discussions at the United Nations will lead
to concrete actions towards the achievement of these
goals.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, allow
me to express some words of appreciation to the
President of the Economic and Social Council for his
report and to the Secretary-General for his report
entitled “Role of the Economic and Social Council in
the integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits, in the light of relevant
General Assembly resolutions, including resolution
61/16”.
We believe that the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 61/16 since its adoption
is accurately reflected in the report. The report contains

08-58333

a number of important recommendations for further
action to promote an integrated and coordinated
approach to the implementation of the outcomes of the
major United Nations conferences and summits in
economic, social and related fields. It concerns, first of
all, the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), namely, poverty eradication, sustained
economic growth and sustainable development. We
should realize that our eventual success in attaining
those goals will be achieved through cross-sectoral
interaction, as well as through the mobilization of
resources and maximization of support from various
constituencies in the development process.
The delegation of Kazakhstan would like, in
particular, to emphasize the role of the General
Assembly in ensuring overall monitoring and oversight
of the implementation of decisions taken in global
multilateral forums. We note with satisfaction that, in
accordance with the relevant recommendations of
resolution 61/16, the Economic and Social Council was
strengthened during the reporting period in its role as
the central mechanism for system-wide coordination of
the
process
of
integrated
and
coordinated
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits.
As a member of the Economic and Social
Council, Kazakhstan would like to note that the
Council
successfully
finalized
its
multi-year
programme of work based on a focused and balanced
list of cross-sectoral thematic issues common to the
outcomes of global multilateral events. The multi-year
work programme is helping the Council to achieve
greater coherence and effectiveness in the exercise of
its managerial and coordination responsibilities.
The new Economic and Social Council functions,
such as the annual ministerial review and the
Development Cooperation Forum, constitute the
central pillars of a revitalized Council and have been
significant strides in positioning the Council as the
principal forum for global dialogue and reviewing
policy regarding the effectiveness and coherence of
international development cooperation. The results of
the various conferences and follow-up processes are
brought together in an integrated manner at the annual
ministerial review. This year, during the second annual
ministerial review, Kazakhstan conducted its national
voluntary presentation on its progress in the
implementation of the MDGs. During the preparatory
process, which gave the Kazakhstan Government the

11

A/63/PV.36

opportunity to once again look critically at the progress
made towards attaining the MDGs, national MDG
benchmarks were set, higher than those agreed upon at
the global level. In this regard, my delegation would
like to express deep gratitude to experts from the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs and to the
Council secretariat for providing technical assistance in
the course of those preparations for the presentation.
The first ever Development Cooperation Forum
brought together representatives from Governments,
the private sector, intergovernmental organizations and
academia to discuss technical aspects of development
cooperation issues. It was truly a historic session,
which implemented the new functions of the Council in
their entirety. Further evidence of the Council’s
leadership role in the development area is the launch,
during the previous session of the Council, of the
global debate on the consequences of economic
insecurity caused by the overlapping food, fuel and
financial crises, in search of an appropriate response.
This is a truly global forum in which the world can
unite in order to, among other things, reinvent the
global financial architecture.
We welcome the ongoing involvement of
functional and regional commissions in the review of
their working methods, priorities and programmes,
taking into account the multi-year work programme of
the annual ministerial review, in order to better pursue
the implementation of the outcomes of various global
events. Recognizing the instrumental role of regional
commissions in maintaining the focus on the
implementation of the outcomes of the various
conferences within their respective purviews, my
delegation calls on member States to support the
proposal to open sub-regional offices of regional
commissions, particularly the joint office of the
Economic Commission for Europe and the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in
North Central Asia, which will bring the Council closer
to beneficiary countries.
One of the central events of this year in the
United Nations was the high-level event in the General
Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals to
assess the achievements made at the midpoint towards
2015.
In view of the slowdown in the process of
implementing the MDGs within the defined time frame,
governments and business and civil society partners

12

made new commitments in the amount of $16 billion to
help meet the MDGs. Implementation of additional
development programmes will require additional efforts
by development partners.
Therefore, we encourage the Economic and
Social Council, its functional and regional
commissions and other relevant subsidiary bodies to
gear their deliberations and workplans towards making
significant contributions to that process. This concerns
primarily the Economic and Social Council high-level
segment with the Bretton Woods institutions in 2009,
periodic sessions of the Commission on Sustainable
Development and the review meetings of the
Commission on the Status of Women and the
Commission for Social Development. We also hope
that the outcome of the Doha Round of negotiations at
the end of this month will contribute to accelerating
progress towards the development goals.
My delegation would like to reiterate
Kazakhstan’s adherence to its commitments to the
Millennium Declaration and the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits. We also
express our conviction that the Economic and Social
Council, as one of the main organs of the United
Nations, should continue to play a critical role in
ensuring steady progress towards forging a global
partnership for development.
Ms. Legarda (Philippines): I am honoured to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Philippines and
to state for the record that the Philippines aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. The Philippines also wishes to commend the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
agenda item 44, entitled “Role of the Economic and
Social Council in the integrated and coordinated
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits, in
the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions,
including resolution 61/16” (A/63/83).
As an immediate past Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council, the Philippines has been
in the privileged position of actively participating in
the revitalization of that important organ of the United
Nations. In the same manner, it continues to contribute
to the work of the various functional Commissions of
which it is a member.

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

On substantive matters, the Economic and Social
Council annual ministerial review’s focus this year on
sustainable development showed much overlap with
the Philippines’ positions on cross-cutting issues such
as the food crisis, climate change and the gender gap,
which were reported on during the Commission on
Sustainable Development’s meeting last May — all
aspects of which add to the challenges already faced by
developing countries in meeting the Millennium
Development Goals.

importers of rice and the Philippines remains critically
engaged in efforts concerning the food crisis. During
the meeting of the Commission on the Status of
Women, the Philippines highlighted the fact that the
World Economic Forum ranked the Philippines as the
only Asian country in the top ten on the global gender
gap index — an achievement that reflects progress in
narrowing the gender gap. However, that is not
reflective of the vulnerability faced by women in the
face of the current global financial crisis.

The Philippines has taken the position that
greater focus should be concentrated on adaptation
than on mitigation. Adapting to climate change
requires reducing underlying vulnerabilities, building
response capacities and managing climate risks. Two
weeks ago, parliamentarians from countries vulnerable
to climate change gathered in a consultative meeting in
Manila, Philippines, and came up with The Manila Call
for Action of Parliamentarians on Disaster Risk
Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation. This
representative was privileged to be a co-convener with
the United Nations Inter-Agency Secretariat of the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction. The
Philippines, together with those countries will also
look into compliance by our respective Governments
with the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015, the
guide for effective disaster reduction at the national
level, which 168 countries adopted in 2005.

On procedural matters, it has become apparent
that all of the major global crises that have made the
headlines over the past year — the food and fuel crises,
climate change and environmental degradation and
most recently, the financial crisis — are within the
purview of the Economic and Social Council. Those
crises pose grave threats to the achievement of all
internationally agreed development goals and in
particular the Millennium Development Goals.

It is now high time to review legislative progress
pursuant to the Hyogo Framework for Action, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Bali Action Plan. Accordingly, the
Philippine reiterates the parliamentarians’ entreaty to
the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
to commence the process of transforming the Hyogo
Framework for Action into an internationally binding
legal instrument. The Philippines is convinced that that
would strengthen our commitments and ensure the
realization of the goals and objectives of the Hyogo
Framework for Action.
The Economic and Social Council special
meeting on the global food crisis was one of the very
first discussions on the problem and one that led to the
high-level meeting in Rome and the eventual
finalization of the Comprehensive Framework for
Action.
Whereas 30 years ago we were one of the biggest
exporters of rice, we are now one of the world’s largest

08-58333

The number and severity of the global crises
challenge the United Nations system and challenge all
United Nations Member States as well, in terms of
trying to find quick, coherent, comprehensive and
coordinated responses to the multidimensional and
often interrelated effects of those problems.
The Philippines supports taking a closer look at
the utility of reporting triennially on efforts to reduce
the amount of work that may not have any useful
outcome.
Finally, on a personal note and speaking as a
member of the Philippine Senate — the Upper House
of the Congress of the Philippines — let me underscore
the report’s recommendation on the conduct of the
Economic
and
Social
Council
Development
Cooperation Forum (DCF) that,
“The inclusion of civil society organizations,
parliamentarians as well as local government and
private sector representatives provides for a
unique opportunity to garner a wide range of
inputs for a deepened dialogue on the future of
international
development
cooperation.”
(A/63/83, para. 68)
There is much merit in that recommendation. I believe
that the development pillar of the United Nations must
be pushed forward on the basis of a multi-stakeholder
approach, as it is only in that manner that we can
actually ensure that policy recommendations,

13

A/63/PV.36

negotiated resolutions and programme implementation
can have any real meaning to the ordinary person.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
This year has been a difficult one for the international
community. The weakness of existing coordinating
mechanisms for economic development at an
international level has led to the emergence of a
multifaceted global crisis in energy, food and finance.
Countering that crisis, as shown by the results of the
interactive discussion of 30 October, will be impossible
without radical reform of the existing system of
international financial institutions, in whose activities
the principles of the free market often take precedence
over ensuring the sustainable development of
individual States and the conditions for sustainable
development of the global economy as a whole.
In that respect, we should welcome the efforts of
the Economic and Social Council to conduct a review
of the progress made in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and the convening in
2008 of a series of special sessions and meetings with
the participation of the heads of the Bretton Woods
institutions and the World Trade Organization. Those
events allowed us to better understand the nature of
those crises, identify their origins and forecast their
short and midterm impacts on various States. We
believe that the practice of convening such events
should continue.
Belarus has consistently advocated enhancing the
role of the Economic and Social Council as a
specialized body to resolve global economic problems.
Similar to the Security Council, which is a body whose
mission is to respond to threats and challenges to
international peace and security, the Economic and
Social Council must become the centre for
coordination of the international community’s efforts
to respond to global challenges in its area of
competence. In that respect, we believe that the
Economic and Social Council should, as rapidly as
possible, convene a high-level meeting to consider
ways to overcome the financial crisis. We welcome that
the Development Cooperation Forum and the annual
ministerial review have been mainstreamed into the
activities of the Economic and Social Council.
However, further steps in that direction will be needed.
The questions of assistance to middle-income
countries should be included in the framework of the
fight against the consequences of the financial crisis.

14

We call upon the international community to step up
international cooperation in providing that group of
States with technical assistance, in order to provide
them with the broadest possible capacity to
independently elaborate and implement sound and
effective strategies for their development.
Mrs. Wahab (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to
thank the Secretary-General for the reports contained
in documents A/63/3 and A/63/83. We also join
previous speakers in thanking the President of the
Economic and Social Council for his leadership.
Indonesia also aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Antigua and Barbuda on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Indonesia welcomes the General Assembly’s
continued focus on integrated and coordinated
implementation of, and follow-up to, the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits. As
emphasized in paragraph 151 of the World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1), the General Assembly
should strengthen its relationship with other principal
organs to ensure better coordination. In paragraph 155
of the same document, the Economic and Social
Council was called upon to ensure follow-up of the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits, including the internationally agreed
development goals.
The Economic and Social Council’s launch of the
annual
ministerial
review
and
Development
Cooperation Forum in 2007 contributed to those
interrelated objectives. The annual ministerial review
and Development Cooperation Forum are important to
enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations system
and its impact on development. More importantly, both
forums bridge the divide between the normative and
operational work of the United Nations. That thus
helps close the implementation gap.
The measure of success for both entities rests on
two achievements. First is their impact in enhancing
the integration of the international development agenda
in the programmes of work of United Nations system
entities. Second is their effectiveness in providing
coherent support to the implementation of national
strategies.
In that connection, Indonesia is pleased that a
multi-year programme of work has been adopted for
the annual ministerial review. Organizing a different

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

thematic area each year provides a clear structure for
the deliberations. Furthermore, it facilitates better
assessment of the role of the annual ministerial review.
It also mobilizes the engagement of the functional
commissions.
Likewise, the first biennial meeting of the
Development Cooperation Forum in New York this
year also provided clear policy direction regarding the
Doha Review Conference and the 3rd High-Level
Forum on Aid Effectiveness, held at Accra.
Those measures, in Indonesia’s view, provide a
constructive contribution to the Council’s role as the
principal body overseeing the overall implementation
of the internationally agreed development goals.
In the implementation of the multi-year
programme of work of the annual ministerial review,
Indonesia commends the programmatic contributions
of the functional commissions in regard to the themes.
Their input towards this year’s annual ministerial
review theme, “Implementing the internationally
agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable
development”, showed their commitment to this
process. It is commendable that their efforts are being
attuned to current challenges. The particular focus in
most of the commissions in regard to climate change is
encouraging.
It is important that the regional commissions
continue to contribute the efforts of their member
States to meeting the internationally agreed
development goals. The regional commissions need to
align their programmes of work with regional priority
areas. Therefore, strengthening their capacities by
working together with the Secretariat’s Department of
Economic and Social Affairs becomes imperative.
While acknowledging the positive developments
of the Economic and Social Council, we cannot fall
into complacency. It is important to continually
promote policy coherence at all levels. The link
between the global policy debate and national activities
should be strengthened.
At the international level, the contribution of the
functional commissions is still ad hoc. There needs to
be a clear and systematic way of contributing to the
annual ministerial review while not overlooking the
priorities of their respective programmes of work.
Likewise, the United Nations system’s current effort to
enhance coordination through closer interaction

08-58333

between the Economic and Social Council, the
Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs,
the newly constituted Chief Executives Board structure
and the executive boards of the funds and programmes
could help ensure effective support for the
implementation of conference commitments.
At the national level, the effort of the United
Nations through the “One United Nations” approach is
a positive step towards integrated follow-up of the
United Nations conferences and summits. We should
build on the lessons learned. In terms of reporting, the
recommendation to triennialize the report on the
integrated follow-up merits further consideration.
However, it may be more valuable to follow the timing
of the current Economic and Social Council
restructuring. It is worth considering biennial reports to
conform with the work of the Development
Cooperation Forum and to ensure timely assessments.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda items 40 and 44.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/63/L.14 and A/63/L.15.
We turn first to draft resolution A/63/L.14,
entitled “Smoke-free United Nations premises”. I draw
the attention of the members to the fact that the
asterisk in the line of sponsors should appear after
Antigua and Barbuda. That correction, where
necessary, will be reflected in the addendum to the
document.
Before proceeding to take action on draft
resolution A/63/L.14, I should like to announce that
since the introduction of the draft resolution the
following countries have become sponsors: Argentina,
Finland, France, Ireland, Israel, Lebanon, the
Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.14?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/8).

A/63/L.14

was

adopted

The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/63/L.15, entitled “Commemoration of the
fifteenth anniversary of the International Conference
on Population and Development”.

15

A/63/PV.36

Before proceeding to take action on draft
resolution A/63/L.15, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Austria,
Bulgaria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Luxembourg, Mozambique, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.15?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/9).

A/63/L.15

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 40 and 44.
Agenda item 114
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations

(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.12)
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Eurasian Economic Community
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.13)
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union

(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union

Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.7)
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.9)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Economic System
Draft resolution (A/63/L.10)
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/155)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

16

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/156)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.11)
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Mr. Tóth (Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization):
I have the honour to report today on the status of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and
on the progress achieved by the Treaty’s Preparatory
Commission. The CTBT is an essential pillar of the
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. It
was built on strong foundations and it continues to
grow in strength every year.
The history of the United Nations and the General
Assembly cannot be written without mentioning the
efforts that have been made, and continue to be made,
to secure international peace and security. These efforts
have gone hand in hand with significant attempts to
control and one day eliminate from our lives the
imposing reality of nuclear weapons.
The comprehensive ban on nuclear weapon
testing that was negotiated by the Conference on
Disarmament in the 1990s and the subsequent efforts to
prepare for that ban reach back to the very first
resolution of this Assembly. In January 1946, the
Assembly’s first session adopted resolution 1(I):
“Establishment of a Commission to deal with the
problems raised by the discovery of atomic energy”.
The Commission was given the task of making specific
proposals on the exchange of scientific information for
peaceful ends, the control of atomic energy to ensure
its use for peaceful purposes, the elimination of atomic
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, and
the provision of effective safeguards to protect States
against the hazards of violations and evasions.
In the course of the 62 sessions of the Assembly
and the 62 years that have followed, many noble and

08-58333

effective proposals have been made and implemented.
The CTBT, with its ban on nuclear testing, its
comprehensive and global verification regime and its
open dissemination of the scientific and technical
information gathered is one endeavour that has met
that early Commission’s terms of reference in full.
In its most basic form, the CTBT is a ban on all
nuclear testing, for all people, for all time. The Treaty
foresees the establishment of a global and democratic
verification regime to monitor compliance with the
Treaty’s provisions. In 1996, the year the Treaty was
opened for signature, a Preparatory Commission was
established to build the verification regime in
anticipation of the Treaty’s entry into force, while at
the same time promoting the Treaty and its principles
so that the system could one day be put to work
properly.
But, in fact, the verification system has already
been put to a test. Two years ago, I stood before the
Assembly in the shadow of reports that the then eightyear moratorium on nuclear weapon testing — the
longest silence in the history of nuclear weapon
explosions — had been broken. The announcement by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that it had
conducted a nuclear test on 9 October 2006 cut to the
core of the CTBT’s purpose and mandate.
I reported to the Assembly then on the challenge
that event posed for the nascent verification regime and
how it met this challenge successfully when it detected
the event and attributed it to the Democratic People’s
Republic. That event was some 20 times smaller in
yield than the nuclear explosion that took place over
Hiroshima.
At a time when the verification regime was in
provisional operation and the International Monitoring
System was only half complete, it was an unwelcome
challenge. But the silver lining was that the Treaty’s
verification regime proved itself and has since spurred
its members to greater action.
At the request of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations system is undertaking significant
efforts to present to the international community a
coordinated and effective approach to addressing the
challenge of climate change. The Preparatory
Commission, with its cutting edge technical and
scientific capabilities, may have a substantial
contribution to make to this effort.

17

A/63/PV.36

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization (CTBTO) is uniquely placed for this task,
with an international monitoring system spanning the
globe and observing the atmosphere, oceans,
landmasses and all that rests between. The purpose of
this wide-scale environmental monitoring is to ensure
compliance with the Treaty’s provisions. But, by its
very nature, it can be adapted for other purposes.
In the past two years alone, the system has grown
exponentially, and 70 per cent of the 337 facilities to
be built across the territories of 89 countries are
complete. The global communications infrastructure —
the communications lifeline supporting the system and
comprising 250 terminals networking the globe — has
been completely revamped just in the past 12 months.
The existing system, with the multiplicity of
technologies it supports, could prove a highly effective
and efficient means of generating valuable climaterelated information directly.
The network could also potentially support
sensors co-located with our monitoring facilities and
targeted specifically at the global climate change
problem. Approximately $1 billion have been invested
in the system by its members over more than a decade.
The system is truly unprecedented in its global reach,
with facilities located in some of the harshest yet most
relevant environments. This is a significant asset of the
international community, one that has definite potential
to help us address global climate change issues
successfully.
There are other potential civil and scientific
applications to which the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty’s verification regime can be put to use. As
we have developed and improved the system, interest
in it has grown. That interest has led to other avenues
for which the data we are generating can be put to use,
such as tsunami warning alerts. People naturally want
the best and we can provide the fastest, most reliable
and highest quality data.
Following extensive cooperation with UNESCO,
agreements for the provision of data for tsunami
warning purposes have recently been signed with
institutions in Australia, Japan and the Philippines.
More are to follow with Indonesia and other countries.
Important life-saving applications of the Treaty’s
verification regime are already being put to use. Plenty
more could follow.

18

A great distance has been travelled by the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization since I last
stood before you. In the changing global context of the
twenty-first century, this Treaty is now more necessary
than ever. A verification regime, unprecedented in
scope and ambition, is coming to life. As we assemble
here today, it is waiting. It is a massive human and
financial investment, a great endeavour of scientists
and Governments alike, waiting to enter into full
operation because that is what it was built to do and
that is what it stands ready to do.
However, all of this is for naught if we cannot
bring this Treaty into force. The Preparatory
Commission is now a 180-member-strong organization.
We are five ratifications away from crossing the
150-ratifications barrier. It would seem that all roads
lead to the universalization of the CTBT and its
principles. And yet, because of the Treaty’s own builtin mechanisms, there are still nine countries whose
ratification is necessary for this Treaty to enter into
force. Consequently, we are kept at the gate.
I say that this Treaty is now more necessary than
ever. This is not simply rhetoric. Gaps have developed
in the disarmament and non-proliferation regime. In
the barriers erected to protect us from nuclear weapons,
we are not living up to the resolve with which our
predecessors first convened, united in their common
aim of delivering us from the threat posed by the
discovery of atomic energy. We have lost the sense of
urgency.
When we consider the myriad challenges before
us today, the argument for establishing this Treaty
immediately in the international rule book proves more
compelling than ever.
Concerns about energy security are moving
alternative energy solutions to the forefront. So too is
the potential threat posed by climate change, as its
effects become more apparent in our daily lives. The
potential resurgence of nuclear energy rests at the crux
of these two defining issues on the international
agenda. Nuclear energy may well be about to witness a
renaissance.
Such a resurgence will almost certainly lead to an
increase in the number of countries, facilities,
institutions and individuals managing sensitive
components of the nuclear fuel cycle. Such a surge
across the board will make it more difficult than ever

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

to differentiate between prohibited and permitted
nuclear activities. We are moving in a direction where
the choice between nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes or nuclear energy for weapons will be based
more on political grounds than on technical ones.
As nuclear energy is promoted to address energy
security and climate change challenges, this promotion
must go hand in hand with a strengthening of the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime — a regime
that has been weakened in recent years. The
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is the last and
most visible legal and technical barrier to the
development of nuclear weapons. It can keep the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime from
unravelling, as we progress through the twenty-first
century and attempt to navigate the compound
challenges facing our world and as we learn the lessons
of the current global economic crisis. These challenges
must not be left unattended; they must not be left to
unregulated competition and market forces for an
adequate response; they require even more regulation
than other volatile areas of our daily lives; they will
not forgive complacency; and they must be faced
promptly, decisively and collectively.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and
the efforts we are currently undertaking are steeped in
the tradition of this body. That such tradition is
important because it is the tradition of cooperation and
collective responsibility. Nations assembled here
62 years ago and began that tradition in the General
Assembly: to have disparate and diverse communities
working together as one international community
towards a common goal and with a common ownership
of that enterprise and the fruits of that enterprise.
Those efforts extend now to every outpost of human
endeavour, including the exploitation of nuclear
materials.
Undoubtedly, the most terrifying problem raised
by the discovery of atomic energy was the realization
of the capacity to destroy ourselves — to end human
life on this planet. We are locked in a constant struggle
to control that capacity, to see it diminish so that the
positive applications of scientific thought and
knowledge may flourish.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and
the global and democratic verification regime that it
provides make us stronger. They give us the power to
win that struggle. During the past 10 years the Treaty

08-58333

was repeatedly challenged by nuclear weapon tests and
action putting at risk its eventual entry into force, and
the number of ratifications grew from a mere 13 to
nearly 150. During the same period a $1 billion
verification regime was put in place. It happened not
because of political myopia or abundance of resources.
It happened because all those nearly 150 countries
voted with their feet. It happened because all those
countries put their money where their mouth is. It
happened because they saw the clear and present
difficulties but were determined to prevail.
The great act of this body, as it moves forward,
must be to see the day when proposals to deal with the
problems raised by the discovery of atomic energy are
no longer needed, because the problems have been
solved and all that lies before us is opportunity and the
freedom to pursue it in the absence of fear.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Mr. Rogelio Pfirter,
to present the report of that organization.
Mr. Pfirter (Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons): I have the pleasure of addressing
this Assembly under the agenda item entitled:
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. Indeed, such cooperation is vital for peace
and security through the promotion of disarmament and
non-proliferation. In this common quest, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) plays its part by implementing its mandate of
eliminating all declared chemical weapons and
ensuring their non-proliferation through the tools of
verification. The disarmament and non-proliferation
regime established by the Convention has received
consistent support both from the States parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) as well as from
the United Nations. This has strengthened the hardwon norms banning the development, production,
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons.
The annual report of the activities and
programmes of the OPCW on the implementation of
the CWC in 2006 (see A/63/155) and the draft report
for 2007 have already been circulated to the General
Assembly. As part of the continuing cooperation
between the OPCW and the United Nations, I also had
the opportunity of informing the First Committee on
15 October about the current state of implementation

19

A/63/PV.36

of the Chemical Weapons Convention. Last year,
United Nations Member States signalled their
overwhelming support for the Convention at the highlevel meeting convened in these premises to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
Convention’s operation. It was gratifying to witness
such strong commitment to the Convention and the
work of the OPCW. The adoption each year of a
consensus resolution by the United Nations General
Assembly, reaffirming the importance of the
Convention, represents another concrete manifestation
of such continuing support.
This year, our States parties met for the second
5-year Review Conference and reaffirmed unanimously
their conviction regarding the validity of the
Convention’s objectives in the context of the goals of
peace and security. The Conference stressed in
particular that the Convention sets new standards for
global disarmament and non-proliferation through
verification in a non-discriminatory and multilateral
manner. While affirming the importance of completing
chemical disarmament within the given deadlines, the
Conference equally underscored the need to strengthen
the non-proliferation aspects of the Convention. It
emphasized, in this context, the importance of effective
national implementation of the obligations of the
Convention as a means to both deter and punish misuse
of toxic chemicals for any unlawful purposes.
The second Review Conference also recognized
the important role OPCW can play in support of
internationally agreed action against international
terrorism. In this framework, it recalled the decision
adopted by the Executive Council in December 2001
stressing the effective implementation of all provisions
of the Convention. I wish to underline that this is
entirely consistent with the objectives of United
Nations Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and
that the OPCW is fully cooperating with the United
Nations to promote effective implementation of that
resolution.
The success of the second Review Conference
bears eloquent testimony to the foresight and wisdom
of States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Thanks to this spirit, the Convention remains a
comprehensive and effective disarmament and
non-proliferation tool that has demonstrably made a
significant difference in advancing a system of security
based on respect for rules that apply to all uniformly,
with verification as the watchword.

20

Allow me to summarize the progress that has
been made in the implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. I will also touch upon our future
challenges.
As of 30 September 2008, the OPCW had
verified the destruction of more than 28,600 metric
tons of Category 1 chemical weapons. This represents
41.25 per cent of the total stockpiles declared by six
States parties. In the two years since I last addressed
the General Assembly, the amount of chemical
weapons that has been destroyed has doubled. Also in
this time, two of the six declared possessor States have
completely fulfilled their destruction obligations under
the Convention. They are Albania and a State party.
They deserve the appreciation of the international
community for reaching these milestones. And so does
India, which is close to reaching this landmark. But, of
course, the time remaining to accomplish the total
destruction of declared chemical weapons by all
possessor States is also growing short and a significant
amount still remains to be destroyed.
The major burden of these obligations rests with
the Russian Federation and the United States. The
Russian Federation has to date completed the
destruction of more than 11,600 metric tons or 29 per cent
of its Category 1 chemical weapons. The commissioning
of new destruction facilities, as well as the construction
of additional ones, is proceeding apace. The authorities
in the Russian Federation have been very clear in their
pledge to fulfil their obligations under the Convention,
within its time frame and in the manner mandated by
CWC, and, as stated in a recent report submitted by the
Chairman of the OPCW’s Executive Council, they are
taking concrete steps to that end.
The United States of America has completed the
destruction of nearly 15,400 metric tons or 55.4 per
cent of its declared stockpiles. New destruction
facilities are under construction, which will add to the
existing capacity of the United States to destroy
chemical weapons, thereby further supporting the
resolve of this State party to meet its obligations under
the Convention. The United States has also provided
critically needed assistance to other countries in their
destruction efforts.
The United States and the Russian Federation
have both shown resolve and transparency by hosting
visits by delegations of the Executive Council to their
chemical weapon destruction facilities. These visits

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

have enabled representatives of the Council to gain
first-hand knowledge, both about the scale of the
operations at destruction facilities and the overall
magnitude of the undertakings of these two countries.
I reiterate my deep appreciation to both these
possessor States for this firm commitment to uphold
and fulfil their obligations under the CWC.
China and Japan, for their parts, have submitted
reports on the progress made towards the destruction of
all chemical weapons abandoned by Japan on the
territory of China. I wish to commend the exemplary
cooperation between these two countries in dealing
with this historical legacy and, in this regard, to
reaffirm the readiness of the Technical Secretariat to
provide all possible assistance. Indeed, we can all look
forward to the early commencement of the process of
destruction of these weapons.
The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is also making
progress towards the elimination of its chemical
weapons. The required processes, involving technical
reviews and approval of relevant plans by the OPCW
Executive Council concerning the destruction facility
and activities, are expected to be completed soon. This
will set the stage for the destruction of Libya’s
chemical weapons, so as to complete the process by
2011.
In terms of its security objectives, the CWC is
both a disarmament and a non-proliferation instrument.
Today we have in operation an effective and efficient
industry inspection regime that is key to this
non-proliferation effort and to the promotion of
confidence among States parties in the chemical
industry’s legitimate and peaceful activities. Since the
CWC entered into force in 1997, the OPCW has
conducted almost 3,500 inspections at 195 chemical
weapons-related facilities and over 1,100 industrial
sites on the territory of all States parties. Over 98 per
cent of the world’s chemical industry is located on the
territory of States parties to the Convention. I once
again wish to acknowledge the support the chemical
industry has shown for the Convention. This
cooperation sustains the confidence in the exclusively
peaceful purposes of its activities. However, it must be
remembered that there are nearly 4,500 industrial
facilities worldwide that are liable to inspections.
As the OPCW moves closer to the goal of the
complete elimination of declared chemical weapons
stockpiles, it is essential to evolve an industry

08-58333

verification regime that is responsive to the long-term
validity of the Convention’s non-proliferation
objectives. That requires continued refinement and
intensification of industry verification to ensure that all
categories of relevant facilities, especially the category
known as the “other chemical production facilities”,
are adequately covered under the verification regime.
While those matters are under active
consideration by the OPCW’s policymaking organs, the
Organization’s Scientific Advisory Board is engaged in
matters that are no less important. There is an
increasing overlap between the chemical and biological
sciences and a fusion between them and information
technology — trends that require close study to
determine their relevance to the purposes of the
Convention. Those potential developments call for a
measure of readiness to adapt the verification regime
of the OPCW to new challenges, so that it will
continue to effectively serve the goals of the
Convention.
Following the adoption of the Plan of Action
regarding the Implementation of Article VII
obligations, the promotion of effective national
implementation of the Convention has remained a
priority and represents a highly active programme area
for the OPCW. The number of States parties that have
enacted legislation covering all key areas had increased
from 51 in October 2003 to 82 by 30 October 2008,
and 126 States parties had informed the secretariat of
the legislative and administrative measures that they
had adopted. Of those States parties, 112 had submitted
the texts of their adopted measures. The number of
States parties that have designated or established a
National Authority, which is a step required under the
Convention, had increased to 177, or 96 per cent of all
States parties.
It is through the establishment of the necessary
administrative and legislative measures that States
parties equip themselves to detect, pursue and
prosecute any breach of the Convention by their
nationals on their territory. The relevance of such
measures to anti-terrorist efforts is obvious. With the
domestic implementation of the CWC showing higher
rates of compliance than comparable legal instruments,
the OPCW has had its own successful experience and
will continue to share it with others. That has been the
case in the context of the regional and subregional
outreach activities organized by the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Security

21

A/63/PV.36

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). I note with satisfaction that the OPCW’s
contributions related to that Committee’s work and
experience have been found to be of particular
relevance and utility to the United Nations.
Here, I wish to express my gratitude to members
of the OPCW individually and to the European Union,
acting in the framework of its Joint Actions
programme, for having made available generous
financial contributions that have sustained an extensive
and productive programme of activities in support of
the work of the Organization. Of course, this is true not
only for programmes in the area of national
implementation, but also for activities related to
assistance, protection and international cooperation for
peaceful purposes. The latter are particularly important
for many member States whose economies are
developing or in transition.
The delivery of emergency assistance in the event
of an attack or threat of attack of chemical weapons
has assumed considerable importance in view of the
increase in the number of such threats from non-State
actors. States parties are therefore keen to build their
national capacities to deal with scenarios that may
involve either the use of chemical weapons or the use
of toxic chemicals as such weapons.
The OPCW regularly holds training courses in all
regions of the world. They include programmes for
emergency responders as well as field exercises for the
delivery of assistance in cooperation and coordination
with other organizations, including the United Nations.
The next such exercise is scheduled to take place in
Tunisia in 2010.
In the field of the peaceful applications of
chemistry, OPCW programmes have seen both
qualitative and quantitative enhancement, thus
benefiting a growing number of qualified individuals,
who return from those programmes better equipped to
serve their organizations and countries. In that area,
Africa receives special attention in terms of the
allocation of programmes for and the sponsorship of
candidates. For that purpose, the OPCW programme to
strengthen cooperation with Africa on the Chemical
Weapons Convention is making steady progress, with
the cooperation of countries in the region.
An overwhelming majority of the members of the
international community are now States parties to the
CWC, thus lending to its prohibitions and norms the

22

force of general international law. Adherence by
184 States in 11 years’ time is a notable record. Yet, the
Convention’s objectives and purposes will not be fully
realized until the remaining 11 countries Members of
the United Nations have joined the Convention. I
warmly welcome Iraq’s decision to deposit its
instrument of accession with the Secretary-General.
Lebanon is also expected to do so shortly. That would
leave only nine countries outside the jurisdiction of the
OPCW. We expect some in that group of nine to accede
to the Convention in the near future, as they continue
to make tangible progress in their domestic
preparations.
I would especially urge the remaining countries
in the sensitive region of the Middle East to delink
their consideration of joining the Convention from
other political and regional issues. I welcome the
ongoing interaction that we enjoy with Egypt and with
Israel, which is a signatory State. Despite their
reservations with regard to joining the CWC, they have
not avoided constructive engagement. I hope to enter
into similar discussions with Syria. I will continue to
appeal to them to consider the benefits that their
accession to the Convention would bring to the Middle
East region in terms of building mutual confidence and
promoting a positive assessment of prospects for peace
and security in that part of the world.
It also remains my hope that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which until now has
avoided any contact with the OPCW, will make some
gesture towards discussing the issue of the abolition of
chemical weapons. That would be a positive move in
the context of promoting peace on the Korean
peninsula and would be consistent with the
requirements of Security Council resolution 1718
(2006), which, in addition to dealing with the nuclear
issues, refers to the necessity of abandoning other
categories of weapons of mass destruction in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
In conclusion, I would like to thank United
Nations Member States for their continued interest in
and support for the work of the OPCW. I am sure that
they share my optimism about the future of an
organization whose members have demonstrated great
resolve and commitment in upholding the noble
objectives of the CWC. Time and again, through their
constructive actions and their spirit of consensus, they
have raised multilateralism to an exemplary level. For
its part, the Technical Secretariat remains fully

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

committed to the tasks that it has been mandated to
perform.
The commonality of objectives between the
United Nations and the OPCW, based on the ideals of
the United Nations Charter aimed at a prosperous and
peaceful world, reminds us of the importance of mutual
cooperation and collaboration, which, I am confident,
will strengthen further in the years to come.
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of India, who will introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.7.
Mr. Natchiappan (India): India, as President of
the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
(AALCO) for this year, is privileged to introduce, on
behalf of its sponsors, draft resolution A/63/L.7 on
cooperation between the United Nations and the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Organization.
The draft resolution, inter alia, notes the progress
achieved in enhancing cooperation among the United
Nations, its agencies, other international organizations
and AALCO. It expresses appreciation for the work of
AALCO with respect to issues such as combating
corruption, international terrorism and the trafficking
in women and children, as well as human rights issues.
It also recommends that the consideration of this item
be scheduled to coincide with the Sixth Committee’s
deliberations on the work of the International Law
Commission with a view to promoting close interaction
between AALCO and the Sixth Committee.
It may be recalled that the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Committee, as it was then known, was
established to provide expertise in international law to
Asian and African States, as well as specific assistance
and advice upon request on any topic of international
law. Such advice could be rendered in developing a
suitable legal framework or legislation for
implementation of international treaties or for
providing a model agreement to establish joint
cooperative arrangements, or as an opinion on a given
subject to one or more member States.
Over the last 50 years, AALCO has acquired a
unique stature in promoting legal cooperation among
Asian and African States in the field of international
law. Its annual conferences are major events in
international law, and the New Delhi session in April
this year was well attended by ministers and senior
officers of member States, besides several observer

08-58333

delegations and representatives of international
organizations. The exchange of views on contemporary
issues of international law, including subjects being
studied by the International Law Commission and
those arising in connection with the implementation of
the world trade regime, proved highly beneficial to
participants.
Reports of AALCO and declarations adopted at
its annual sessions have become an important source
for the development of international law and are an
expression of the views and interests of the Asian and
African States. AALCO has been dedicating its efforts
to identifying the common interests of Africa and Asia
on a variety of contemporary issues before the United
Nations and other world bodies, thus helping the
evolution of a fair, just, equitable, universal legal
order. These views were duly communicated by the
Secretary-General of AALCO to the United Nations, at
which it has the distinction of being an observer, and to
the International Law Commission, whose sessions its
Secretary-General regularly attends.
We would like to encourage AALCO to expand
its activities by progressing on its several forwardlooking plans for the benefit of its member States. In
this regard, mention could be made of special training
programmes for the promotion of teaching and
expertise in legal advising in international law, the
establishment of special chairs in teaching of
international law in universities of member State, the
offer of fellowships to Asian and African students to
pursue higher studies in international law, and the
encouragement for publication of books and
periodicals devoted to the cause of international law
that are of special interest to Asia and Africa.
Some of these activities can, however, be pursued
only if more funds are available. The clearance of
arrears in contributions and raising funds through
voluntary contributions would help.
I am pleased to inform the Assembly that the
Secretariat of AALCO has shifted to its new
headquarters building, provided by the Government of
India. The new building is fully equipped to meet the
needs of an intergovernmental organization. We hope
its modern conference facilities will motivate AALCO
to organize more programmes for the benefit of its
members. The shifting of the offices of AALCO and
the residence of the Secretary-General to their own

23

A/63/PV.36

new buildings would also partially ease the financial
situation.
However, it is a matter of great satisfaction that,
despite its financial limitations, the work of the
Organization is efficiently organized by a small but
dedicated band of international experts working under
the guidance of the international diplomatic staff,
including its most competent Secretary-General. Its
excellent library and facilities deserve to be further
improved. In due course, AALCO could operate as an
international law documentation centre for the benefit
of Asian and African States.
We congratulate the new Secretary-General of
AALCO, Mr. Rahmat Mohamad, and hope he will
infuse more vitality in the work of AALCO. We also
thank the former Secretary-General, Mr. Wafik Kamil,
for his immense contribution to the work of AALCO.
We are optimistic that in the years to come
AALCO will achieve greater success in clarifying and
consolidating the common interests of Asian and
African States. It will also surely enhance its activities
in training and the dissemination of international law
expertise among them. We have no doubt that the
cooperation between AALCO and the United Nations
will continue to grow stronger. We wish AALCO and
its members every success in their future endeavours.
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Albania, who will introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.9.
Mr. Dilja (Albania): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization (BSEC) member States,
under sub-item (d) of agenda item 114, the draft
resolution contained in document A/63/L.9, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”.
Let me stress at the very beginning the
importance that all member States of this organization
give to that cooperation with the United Nations. Let
me also express the appreciation for the valuable
support that all countries that have co-sponsored that
resolution have given to it.
The draft resolution on BSEC-United Nations
cooperation stresses the priorities of the work of
BSEC. It will give further impetus to that cooperation,
while reiterating the conviction that multilateral
economic cooperation contributes to enhancing peace,

24

stability and security. The wider Black Sea is being
increasingly transformed into a dynamic area of
development, with a growing weight in both the
geopolitical and geo-economic aspects.
The wider Black Sea area can edge closer to its
neighbours and the world only through concerted
efforts and coordinated initiatives by different regional
and international organizations. To that effect the
selection of the areas of common interest would
produce the necessary premises for engineering
significant projects for the region. It could also
represent one of the most effective ways to ensure the
solidification of BSEC as a regional voice, with its full
weight and dignity.
Building on experience and the advanced
institutional frame, BSEC offers a pragmatic project
and a results-oriented approach in the spheres of
common interest, thus contributing to improved
regional cooperation and beyond, as well as the
creation of synergies and an increase in the efficiency
of resource use. As an acknowledgment of those
qualifications, different actors in the region and beyond
have given further attention to BSEC.
The enhanced regional cooperation through
BSEC and its interaction with other regional and
international organizations, of which the United
Nations is among the first, is one of the best ways to
effectively address the threats and challenges that lie
ahead and is a real contribution to confidence-building
in the region and beyond, as a prerequisite to a more
peaceful and secure world.
This year, preparation of the draft resolution has
taken into consideration the ongoing reform of BSEC
aimed at increasing its effectiveness. Also, it serves the
purpose of promoting cooperation among members of
BSEC and its strategic partners worldwide.
We are convinced that this year’s draft resolution
will further strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization and will contribute to the promotion of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as
well as the statutory goals and objectives of BSEC.
Before I conclude, I would like, on behalf of the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization, to
extend our thanks to all the delegations that contributed
to this draft resolution. It is also the hope of the

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

sponsors that the draft resolution will be adopted
without a vote, as in previous years.
The Acting President: I call next on the
representative of Uruguay, who will introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.10.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is honoured to introduce, on behalf of the
sponsors, the draft resolution contained in document
A/63/L.10, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System”.
The Latin American Economic System (LAES) is
an intergovernmental regional agency made up of 26
countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. It was
created in 1975 and is headquartered in Caracas,
Venezuela. The purpose of LAES is to promote a
system of consultation and coordination for the
adoption of common positions and strategies on
economic matters throughout the countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean vis-à-vis groups of nations,
forums and international agencies, as well as to boost
cooperation and integration among countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean.
On 27 September 1991, the United Nations and
LAES signed a cooperation agreement in which they
agreed to strengthen and expand cooperation on topics
of common interest. In order to give further impetus to
the already fruitful relationship between those two
bodies, I now introduce the draft resolution that we
trust will receive unanimous support from the
Assembly.
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Sweden, who will introduce draft
resolutions A/63/L.11 and A/63/L.12.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): Sweden, representing the
Chair of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO), has the honour to introduce a draft resolution
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”, which is
contained in document A/63/L.11.
A political momentum is building up around the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
There is increased attention by the world community to
the role of the CTBT in nuclear disarmament and the
prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation, which

08-58333

continue to be among the most important challenges
facing humankind today. We all know the importance
of the CTBT for the overall non-proliferation regime,
raising the threshold for the acquisition of nuclear
weapons, preventing a qualitative arms race and
building confidence through an effective verification
system. Positive developments regarding ratification of
the Treaty would furthermore give important impetus
to the review of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in 2010.
The CTBT has been signed by 180 States and
ratified by 145 of them. Only nine so-called Annex 2
States remain to ratify the Treaty in order for it to enter
into force. The Treaty’s verification regime is now well
advanced in its build-up. More than 80 per cent of the
International Monitoring System stations have been
certified or constructed. An international scientific
studies project is under way to monitor the progress of
the verification regime. The verification regime thus
seems to be ready for the Treaty to enter into force
soon.
The coming period will be a defining one for the
Treaty’s future. Sweden was among the very first
nations to sign and ratify the CTBT and has made a
consistent contribution to furthering it. Therefore we
feel a special responsibility and have steadfastly
supported the efforts of our partners and the CTBTO
Preparatory Commission in promoting the Treaty. In
that regard, we welcome recent ratifications of the
Treaty by States and call on other States to follow that
lead. We also appreciate the work of the Preparatory
Commission for the CTBTO and its Executive
Secretary and the efforts of the Provisional Technical
Secretariat. We call on all delegations to support the
draft resolution.
Let me now turn to the second draft resolution
that I have the honour to introduce today. This time I
do so because of Sweden’s current chairmanship of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. The
resolution is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe” and is contained in
document A/63/L.12.
The draft resolution demonstrates the wide range
of areas where the United Nations and the Council of
Europe cooperate and where the Council’s activities
contribute to furthering the goals of the United
Nations. The first draft of the resolution was prepared
by the Council of Europe, in Strasbourg. We have

25

A/63/PV.36

conducted informal consultations with United Nations
Member States, and I wish to thank all delegations for
their constructive and cooperative approach to the
consultations.
With the changes that were agreed during the
consultation process, I hope that the text before us here
today will be adopted by consensus. In addition to the
33 countries that appear as sponsors in document
A/63/L.12, the following countries have also joined as
sponsors: Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Georgia, Greece,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Malta, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Belarus, who will introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.13.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): It
is my great honour, on behalf of the member States of
the Eurasian Economic Community — the Republic of
Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic, the Russian Federation and the Republic of
Tajikistan — to present draft resolution A/63/L.13 on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Eurasian Economic Community.
The Eurasian Economic Community (EURASEC)
was created in 2000. Since 2003 it has enjoyed
observer status in the General Assembly, and it closely
cooperates with agencies of the United Nations system.
With the objective of strengthening the institutional
framework of that cooperation, in September 2006 a
memorandum of understanding was signed between
EURASEC and the United Nations Development
Programme. In January 2007, a cooperation agreement
between the EURASEC Inter-Parliamentary Assembly
and the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe was concluded.
Last year the General Assembly adopted its first
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Eurasian Economic Community (resolution
62/79), which was based on strengthening cooperation
between the organizations and reinforcing the practical
links.
The draft resolution submitted for the Assembly’s
consideration is prepared on the basis of the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
first resolution on cooperation between the Eurasian

26

Economic Community and the United Nations in such
fields as the management of water resources, energy
and technology transfer (see A/63/228, paras. 67-70).
The draft also invites continued cooperation between
the two organizations.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to convey
my gratitude to the sponsors of the resolution and all
delegations that took part in the consultations and
contributed towards the agreement on the text of the
resolution.
Mr. Del Picchia (France) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU). The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Montenegro and
the European Free Trade Association country Iceland,
member of the European Economic Area, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align
themselves with this statement.
The development of the regional integration
process is one of the essential factors that have
contributed to economic development and the
maintenance of peace and security throughout the
world. It is only natural that such development should
go hand in hand with improved cooperation with the
United Nations.
The EU is among the most ambitious and
successful examples of regional integration. By
strengthening the solidarity among its members and
implementing its policies throughout the Union, the EU
has successfully bridged divides and promoted
prosperity within its borders. The role played and the
competencies exercised by the EU are fully in keeping
with the spirit of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, which encourages
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations in accordance, of course, with the
purposes and principles of the Charter, in particular the
pre-eminence of the Security Council in the area of
peacekeeping.
The European Union has supported the objective
of mutual strengthening between the United Nations
and regional organizations. As stressed in the European
Security Strategy, adopted in 2003 — which we intend
to update before the end of the year — one of the EU’s
priorities is to strengthen the United Nations and equip

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

it with the means it needs to shoulder
responsibilities and undertake effective action.

its

On the basis of the 2003 and 2007 EU-United
Nations joint declarations, the cooperation between the
EU and the Organization in the areas of crisis
management and security has developed significantly
in recent years, particularly through the launching of
EU operations, within the framework of the European
Security and Defence Policy, to support United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We have made that a priority
of the French presidency of the European Union. EU
ministers raised the issue at a seminar held in New
York on 26 September, attended by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Javier Solana, EU
High Representative for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy; and Ms. Benita Ferrero-Waldner,
European Commissioner for External Relations.
Furthermore, from 20 to 22 October in Paris, we held
the first meeting of the International Forum for the
Challenges of Peace Operations, on cooperation
between the EU and the United Nations as an example
of partnership under Chapter VIII of the Charter. Many
representatives of major regional organizations,
including the African Union, participated. In addition
to the realm of security, the EU has lent constant
support to the United Nations in the areas of
humanitarian and development assistance and the
defence and promotion of human rights.
The European Union attaches great importance to
the development of other examples of regional
integration throughout the world. It has long been
developing institutional ties with various regional
organizations and promotes the strengthening of those
organizations particularly through its development
policy. In particular, it welcomes the role played by
many regional and subregional bodies in promoting
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The European Union welcomes the strengthening
of the ties between regional organizations and
institutions and the United Nations, as one can see
from reading the report of the Secretary-General
(A/63/228), and continues to attach great importance to
the framework provided by Security Council resolution
1631 (2005), on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
In particular, the European Union supports close
cooperation between the United Nations and the

08-58333

African Union in the area of crisis management on the
African continent. In that regard, it welcomes the
Secretary-General’s establishment of an EU-United
Nations panel to assess modalities of support for
regional peace operations carried out under United
Nations mandates.
The
European
Union
encourages
close
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The cooperation among the United Nations,
the OSCE and the EU during the Georgian conflict and
their co-chairmanship of the international discussions
in Geneva demonstrate the potential of such
cooperation in crisis management and conflict
settlement. The three organizations are also jointly
engaged in Kosovo.
The European Union also welcomes the
development of cooperation between the United
Nations system and the Council of Europe, in
particular in the areas of intercultural dialogue, child
protection, combating violence against women,
protecting refugees and promoting human rights
education. The Council of Europe is the best example
of the very positive role that a regional organization
can play in protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
In addition, the European Union attaches great
importance to the rapprochement between the United
Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF), which represents one third of the
States with seats in the General Assembly and is
increasingly asserting itself as a political force on the
international scene. The EU notes with satisfaction the
increased cooperation between the two organizations in
the area of peacekeeping, as illustrated by the
participation of the Secretary-General, together with
some 40 heads of State or Government of Frenchspeaking countries, in the Quebec summit held from
17 to 19 October this year and by the holding in April
of a joint United Nations-OIF seminar on cooperation
in the areas of early warning and conflict prevention.
Thus, together with the Secretary-General, the
OIF is working to build French-speaking capacities
within the framework of peacekeeping operations. The
OIF does not seek to duplicate United Nations
activities, but rather to carry out supplementary ones in
consultation with the Secretary-General, relying on the

27

A/63/PV.36

intrinsic added value of multilateral Francophone
capacities.
It is not only regional organizations that can help
the United Nations to attain Charter objectives. In that
connection,
the
European
Union
particularly
commends the role of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU) and welcomes the growing cooperation between
it and the United Nations. Given the essential role
played by national parliaments in defining national
policies, we believe it essential that parliamentarians of
various countries be increasingly better informed about
ongoing developments at the United Nations.
Furthermore, the United Nations, like the agencies
within it, must work in ever closer cooperation with
parliaments to improve the assessment of States’
international commitments in drafting legislation and
national budgets.
The European Union therefore supports the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report, in particular that the outcome document of the
annual parliamentary hearing of the IPU at the United
Nations be distributed as an official United Nations
document. The next hearing will take place on 20 and
21 November.
Finally, the European Union, of course, strongly
supports broadening the cooperation between the
United Nations and the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty Organization and works tirelessly to
promote universal ratification of the Treaty. The same
applies to cooperation with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which
might be further increased, in particular in relation to
the OPCW’s efforts — like those of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) — to combat chemical terrorism.
The European Union believes that good
coordination between regional and other organizations,
on the one hand, and the United Nations, on the other,
can strengthen United Nations action, whether in the
area of economic development, security or the
promotion of human rights.
For all those reasons, the European Union looks
forward to actively participating in the coming days in
formulating draft resolutions under General Assembly
agenda item 114.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the 14 States members of

28

the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), on agenda
item 114 (e), entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Caribbean Community”. It is my first
duty to express appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the report that he has presented (A/63/228) to
facilitate our consideration of the item.
I am proud to assert that CARICOM is a family
that is close-knit by ties of geography, culture and
history. But that closeness never obscures in our minds
our membership also in a wider community — a global
community that is desperately in need of a global order
that draws its inspiration from nowhere else but the
Charter of the United Nations. However fragile,
however fractured that order may be at present, our
world would be a dark and dreary place without the
light offered by the United Nations Charter along our
path to a peaceful, just and habitable planet. Hence the
importance of cooperation with the United Nations and
of giving effect to the principles contained in its
Charter.
What is more, we in CARICOM have a number
of shared interests and goals, and we face basically the
same kinds of challenges. Like any other family, we
endeavour to seek ways to strengthen our unity of
action to meet our common needs and goals. Basically,
we are prepared, as far as it is possible, to seek
solutions to the challenges facing us all.
But there are naturally some problems that will
not be solved by our own collective self-help efforts,
however hard we may try. Some require cooperation
that is much deeper, much wider and more varied than
we can ever forge within our own subregion. That is
another area where the United Nations becomes so
important to us. In this Organization, we feel ourselves
to be a family within a family. The consideration of the
question of cooperation with the United Nations
provides an opportunity for us to focus afresh on the
bonds and the many commonalities that exist between
us and the Organization, what our cooperation has
achieved and what it still needs to achieve. Much of
that we will detail in a draft resolution that we intend
to present for the consideration of this Assembly.
For those reasons, therefore, when I ascended to
this podium, it was not simply because the date and the
time for this item had come. More fundamentally, it
was to show once again the deep commitment of
CARICOM to the objectives and goals of the United
Nations and to outline our vision of the place of

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

CARICOM-United Nations cooperation in the wider
polity.
CARICOM is a community which, for the most
part, is comprised of small island and low-lying coastal
developing States, all facing peculiar sustainable
development challenges arising therefrom. For us, the
effects of climate change are an overwhelming and
enduring concern. As members of the wider family, we
therefore feel entitled to look to the United Nations for
recognition of the vulnerabilities to which our special
status exposes us and for the establishment of a
corresponding regime of solidarity and cooperation.
We are pleased that, following the adoption of the
Millennium Declaration and the Final Document of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, our case
was robustly sustained by the Organization in the
adoption of resolution 61/197, which, inter alia,
expressed unequivocal support for the efforts of the
CARICOM States to have the Caribbean Sea
designated as a special area in the context of
sustainable development.
More specifically, in the area of climate change,
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
and, in particular, the Regional Office for Latin
America and the Caribbean in Panama, have facilitated
a number of environmental initiatives, most recently
the promotion of the multilateral environmental
agreement project between UNEP, the European
Community and African, Caribbean and Pacific States,
which seeks to build the capacity of CARICOM
member States to meet their obligations under a
selected set of multilateral environmental agreements,
including the Convention on Biological Diversity and
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. UNEP is also working with the Caribbean
Community Climate Change Centre and the
CARICOM secretariat in ensuring that the region is
updated on preparations for the Copenhagen climate
change conference.
In the area of food security, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
has been active in the region in promoting the nexus
between food security, climate change, sustainable
development and agriculture in the Caribbean. FAO
continues to maintain an amicable, mutually beneficial
and sustainable relationship with the Caribbean
Community in general. That relationship covers a wide
range of activities in the agricultural sector, including

08-58333

promoting food security through the Regional
Programme for Food Security. FAO has also been
responsive to the current rise in food prices and the
resulting negative consequences it poses to the region.
It has provided in excess of $1.25 million in direct
grant assistance distributed among CARICOM member
States, with Haiti being treated separately. Those funds
have been used to help small-scale farm production
input resources, including seeds, fertilizer, chemicals
and tools, by assisting member States in implementing
a project on soaring food prices and in developing
sustainable strategies in the economic production of
food.
The Caribbean Community has benefited
tremendously over the years from development
assistance made available by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) over a succession of
programming cycles and, within the past decade, under
successive regional cooperation frameworks. The
Community has thereby received much valued
technical training, advisory and operational assistance
provided to CARICOM member States, the CARICOM
secretariat and other CARICOM institutions with
region-wide mandates and responsibilities.
The esteem in which UNDP is held in its relations
with the Community is a function not merely of the
quantum or variety of resources we have received over
the years, but also of the strategic, substantive and
truly development-oriented nature of the assistance
granted and the responsiveness of the Programme to
CARICOM needs and priorities.
CARICOM States are also the beneficiaries, in a
number of areas critical to our development, of a
network of relations of functional cooperation with
several other funds, programmes and specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, including
UNICEF, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization and the United Nations Population Fund.
We greatly value those relationships, and look forward
to their continuation and intensification.
CARICOM’s cooperation with the United
Nations happily maintains a dynamic character,
including bilateral and multilateral consultations, focus
groups, memorandums of understanding and other
working agreements, information-sharing, joint
programme development and continuous interaction,
which allow us to address issues as soon as they arise
and help prevent stasis. The highest level of those

29

A/63/PV.36

consultations is the general meeting between the
United Nations system and the Caribbean Community
and its associated institutions.
The meeting is usually organized by the
Department of Political Affairs, with which CARICOM
representatives naturally maintain a close and
productive working relationship. Preparations are
currently in train for the fifth general meeting, which is
due to take place in New York in January 2009.
CARICOM States are looking forward to that meeting,
at which we expect the heads of regional agencies to be
represented. On that occasion, in addition to giving
voice to our own concerns regarding the state of
cooperation with the Organization, including our
dissatisfaction at the closure of the Caribbean Regional
Office of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in Barbados, we will also be looking
forward to joining the Secretariat in constructing with
us a shared vision of a regime of cooperation that is
fully consistent with the realities and challenges of the
rapidly evolving international context.
The various development efforts to which I have
referred naturally require, for their successful
implementation and maintenance, an overarching
umbrella of security. So vital is the field of security
that it was officially included as the fourth pillar of the
Caribbean integration process, joining the three
pre-existing priority pillars of human and social
development, trade and economic integration and
foreign policy coordination. Even as the Community
strengthens its security arrangements and makes every
effort to fulfil its international security commitments, it
looks to the United Nations and its relevant specialized
agencies, including UNODC, to support its efforts. We
are pleased that UNODC has recommenced work in the
Caribbean in concert with the relevant regional
counterparts. However, we reiterate the region’s call
for the reopening of the UNODC Office in the
Caribbean.
More generally, we have found in the United
Nations — both at the level of the Secretariat and that
of the Assembly at large — a framework within which
we can maximize the benefits of cooperation in those
areas where we consider the potential threats to be
greatest. I refer to our active contributions to the global
effort for the effective implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, and also towards the

30

conclusion of an arms trade treaty, among other
initiatives.
The special challenges faced by our sister State of
Haiti have also provided occasion for mutual
cooperation between CARICOM and the United
Nations. We wish to place on record here our gratitude
and appreciation through the work being done through
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). CARICOM recognizes the sacrifices
made and the support that continues to be extended to
MINUSTAH by countries throughout Latin America
and the Caribbean, as well as other parts of the globe.
We welcome the adoption on 14 October of resolution
1840 (2008), by which the Security Council extended
the mandate of MINUSTAH by one year, thereby
assuring the maintenance of critical international
support for Haiti at this time when it continues to be
tested. In our view, it is vital that MINUSTAH’s
mandate remain adequate to the evolving realities and
needs of the situation in Haiti.
Finally, in our cooperation with the United
Nations, CARICOM States see, beyond the satisfaction
of our interests as a regional collectivity, the need for a
wider service to the international community and the
need to help ensure that the high and lofty principles of
the Charter do not remain just that — high and lofty
principles — but that we also do our part to secure
their attainment and their consistent fulfilment. It is
that vision that propels our active participation in the
dialogue on issues as varied as reform of the Security
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Human Rights Council, and so on. In that way, we
believe, we are helping to create an Organization that
is modern, responsive, democratic and outward-looking
and that encourages and truly strengthens faith in the
principle of international organization. In the final
analysis, we believe that it is in our actions in those
disparate areas that we engage in the most practical
cooperation with the United Nations.
Mr. Salguiero (Portugal): On behalf of the States
members of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) — Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and
Principe and Timor-Leste — I have the honour to speak
on item 114 (f), “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries”.

08-58333

A/63/PV.36

Since CPLP was granted observer status to the
United Nations in 1999, it has engaged in multiple
activities that complement and support the work of the
Organization in the realms of political coordination,
facilitation, mediation, electoral assistance, institutionrebuilding, and the promotion of development and
cooperation in cultural and social areas.
In the two years since the adoption of resolution
61/223, under Guinea-Bissau’s chairmanship of CPLP
the Community’s relations with the United Nations
system have developed and strengthened in an
impressive manner, proving to be mutually
advantageous. I will highlight just a few concrete
examples of existing initiatives and partnerships.
CPLP and the United National Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization are jointly
organizing workshops for journalists on reporting on
elections and on HIV/AIDS prevention.
On 25 April 2008, a cooperation agreement was
signed between the Executive Secretariat of CPLP and
the Portuguese unit of United Nations Radio regarding
exchange of information and cooperation on the
promotion of journalistic content to a Portuguesespeaking audience and with a view to organizing
initiatives to promote cultural diversity within
Portuguese-speaking countries.
Last May, a technical cooperation project was
signed by the CPLP and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, aimed at the
formulation of a South-South/North-South cooperation
programme for the implementation of the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.
A
cooperation
agreement
between
the
International Fund for Agricultural Development and
CPLP, signed in November 2007, will intensify the
fight against rural poverty in Portuguese-speaking
developing countries.
A partnership between CPLP, the International
Labour Organization and the International Programme
on the Elimination of Child Labour, supported by the
Brazilian and Portuguese Governments, led to the
holding of a training course on combating child labour
in the Portuguese-speaking countries in December
2006.
CPLP is also preparing the launching of a
lusophone education network, in partnership with the
World Bank, aimed at accelerating the response of the

08-58333

educational sector in member States to the HIV/AIDS
pandemics.
Those actions, among others, described in the
report of the CPLP to the General Assembly,
transmitted in document A/63/343, and in the report of
the Secretary-General on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations,
contained in document A/63/228, demonstrate the
engagement of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries in multilateral actions initiated by the United
Nations towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and addressing the effects of
climate change.
In accordance with the pertinent dispositions of
the Charter of the United Nations that encourage
regional cooperation for the promotion of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries has also reached
cooperation agreements with a number of regional,
subregional and intergovernmental organizations,
including the African Union, the Council of Europe,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the International Organization of la Francophonie. A
memorandum of understanding with the European
Commission was signed in November 2007, which we
expect to be the basis for great improvements in the
multilateral CPLP cooperation framework.
At the seventh CPLP summit held in Lisbon on
25 July 2008, the heads of State and Government
recalled the far-reaching importance of sharing a
language spoken today by over 250 million people in
eight countries and four continents, and reached a
political commitment to promote the Portuguese
language in the international community, including in
international and regional organizations and United
Nations agencies and programmes. The promotion of
Portuguese as a global language and CPLP’s
contribution to peace, regional stability and food
security were the main topics of the summit and are the
main priorities of the current two-year Portuguese
chairmanship of CPLP.
The
Community
of
Portuguese-speaking
Countries supports the work of the Guinea-Bissau
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has been actively chaired by the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador Maria
Luiza Viotti, and in whose deliberations CPLP and all
its member States are proud to participate. The

31

A/63/PV.36

Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries is also
assisting Guinea-Bissau’s current electoral process, in
particular in the deployment of an election observation
mission.
In Timor-Leste, CPLP and its member States are
deeply committed to strengthening State institutions
and are working as prominent partners with the United
Nations and the Timorese authorities in efforts to
consolidate peace and promote development.

In the coming days, the States members of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries will
introduce a draft resolution under agenda item 114
stressing the progress achieved in the cooperation
between CPLP, United Nations agencies and other
bodies and programmes, and encouraging the
establishment of a formal cooperation agreement
between the secretariats of both organizations. I thank
in advance all Member States that may wish to offer
their support and sponsorship.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

32

08-58333
