United Nations

S/PV.9251

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9251

st meeting
Friday, 27 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2023/21)
Report of the Secretary-General on the internal review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (S/2023/36)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-02579 (E)
*2302579*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9251

implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, the transition process and
stabilization of country’s central regions.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Secondly, Mali is beginning a critical year on the
road to a return to constitutional order, with several
elections scheduled beginning in March.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2023/21)
Report of the Secretary-General on the internal
review of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(S/2023/36)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and
Ms. Aminata Cheick Dicko, civil society actor and
President of Association Protection Sahel.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/21, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali,
and document S/2023/36, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the internal review of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): I address the Security
Council at a pivotal moment in the ongoing collective
efforts to promote lasting peace and security in Mali.
Three aspects are worth highlighting in that regard.
First, we are halfway through the mandate cycle
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) renewed
last June, with an emphasis on supporting the
2/24

27/01/2023

Finally, we just concluded the strategic review of
the Mission requested by the Security Council, with
proposals on the way ahead.
Against that backdrop, this meeting takes on
renewed importance. It will allow us to consider
the developments over the past three months, while
bearing in mind the Mission’s overall performance and
the trajectories that could be contemplated after its
presence in Mali for nearly 10 years. I am grateful for
the opportunity afforded to me to make an intervention
at this stage, and I appreciate the Council’s continued
support to MINUSMA.
In my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9154), I highlighted the complexity of the security
environment. The situation has remained complex in
recent months, particularly in the centre and in the triborder area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.
The activities of Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin
(JNIM) and the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara
(ISGS) continue to fuel insecurity in Gao and Ménaka,
while the other northern regions are seriously affected
by the displacement of the affected populations.
Two aspects are worth highlighting in that
regard: first, the clashes between JNIM and EIGS, as
observed in various places in December and January, in
particular in the Ansongo cercle, in the Gao region, and
in the Anderamboukane cercle, in the Ménaka region;
and secondly, the continued deliberate attacks against
civilians by ISGS and JNIM. Among other examples,
I would point to the blockade of the village of Tessit,
in the Ansongo cercle, in December, and the attacks
carried out by extremists affiliated in JNIM against
the village of N’tillit, also in the Ansongo cercle, in
January. Similar pressure exerted by extremists on
civilians has been observed in the Ménaka region.
The Malian Defence and Security Forces have
intensified their efforts in the centre of the country,
which has made possible an improvement in some
localities and a decrease in the number of security
incidents. Nevertheless, extremist groups still have the
ability to carry out complex coordinated operations, as
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

evidenced by JNIM-claimed attacks in the Tenenkou
cercle, in the region of Mopti, and in the Macina cercle,
in the region of Ségou, on 10 January. In 2022, the Mopti
region experienced the highest number of incidents and
highest proportion of casualties.
Due to the persistence of security challenges, the
number of internally displaced persons remains high,
reaching just over 410,000 in December. In total,
8.8 million people need humanitarian assistance,
which is a 17 per cent increase as compared to the
beginning of 2022. Two million children under the age
of 5 remain affected by acute malnutrition. The safety
of humanitarian personnel remains a major concern,
with numerous incidents impacting humanitarian
personnel in 2022, including, unfortunately five
humanitarian workers killed in the regions of Kayes,
Ménaka and Ségou. Equally important is the need to
mobilize additional resources. To date, only 38 per cent
of the $686 million requested under the humanitarian
response plan for 2022 has been pledged.
Over the previous quarter, MINUSMA continued
to make sustained efforts to protect civilians despite
the difficult environment in which the Mission
operates and the significant capability gaps facing it.
Of course, that was done in support and to complement
the efforts of the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
Among other activities, I would like to highlight that
day and night patrols in Ménaka continue jointly with
the Malian Defence and Security Forces. In Gao, new
plans have been implemented with our Malian partners
to strengthen the protection of the sites for displaced
persons on the outskirts of the city. Those sites have
been the target of attacks perpetrated by extremist
elements, the most recent of which took place at the end
of December 2022 and beginning of January 2023. Our
operations are also ongoing in other regions of Mali, in
which we are deployed.
In the future, MINUSMA’s capacity to contribute
more effectively to improving the security situation in
support of the Malian Defence and Security Forces will
depend on several factors. The first factor relates to
making available the capacities required and the timely
replacement of troop-contributing countries that have
decided to leave the Mission. It is encouraging to note
that additional air resources from India, Bangladesh and
Pakistan are set to be deployed in Timbuktu, Gao and
Mopti, respectively, in the coming months. Moreover,
the Pakistani helicopter unit, which is currently based
in Timbuktu, will be transferred to Mopti.

S/PV.9251

We are also working with the Malian authorities
to make land available to allow for the deployment of
an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unit,
which has long been promised by China. Efforts are
under way to replace the units that are leaving the
Mission or that intend to do so. I cannot emphasize
enough the importance of those efforts, because
the number of troops expected to leave accounts for
17 per cent of the total number of authorized troops for
the Mission.
Secondly, we must strengthen coordination with
the Malian Defence and Security Forces, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Mission’s mandate
and the November 2017 protocol agreement between
MINUSMA and Mali. That is also a concern that
was raised by the Malian authorities. The judicious
use of existing resources and capacities, be they
Malian capacities or MINUSMA capacities, is vital,
in particular for the protection of civilians. During
the reporting period, we maintained contact with the
Malian authorities on those issues. On 18 January, the
Mission held an in-depth discussion with the Chief of
Staff of the Malian army with a view to strengthening
joint planning and coordination mechanisms. I hope
that tangible and diligent follow-up will enable us to
make progress on that important issue.
Lastly, respecting freedom of movement, in line
with the status-of-forces agreement, is crucial. More
specifically, I would like to underscore the importance
of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance flights
for the safety and security of our Blue Helmets. They
are also important for the implementation of our
protection of civilians mandate. We will continue to
work with the Malian authorities by drawing upon the
new procedures agreed on 15 November 2022 and in
subsequent discussions — the most recent having been
held on 18 January — to reach a lasting agreement on
the authorization of drone flights.
As has been said many times, the fight against
terrorism must necessarily have a military and security
component. However, in order to be successful, those
operations must be based on a holistic approach that
targets institutional, governance and socioeconomic
challenges, which together create a fertile breeding
ground for the spread of violent extremism. The
strategy for the stabilization of the central regions,
adopted by the Malian Government last August, is
an important step in that regard. Emphasis must be
placed on its decisive implementation. For its part,

23-025793/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

MINUSMA has strengthened its cooperation with
the permanent secretariat of the Cadre politique pour
la gestion de la crise au centre du Mali and supports
the operationalization of the regional governance
committees, as outlined by the strategy. Along with
the United Nations country team, we have aligned
our activities with the priorities set out by the
Malian Government.
Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law during military operations and
accountability obligations in cases of violations are of
the utmost importance in order to effectively address
the scourge of terrorism and extremism. In that regard,
the Mission has maintained dialogue with the Malian
authorities and has continued to provide technical and
capacity-building support.
In 2022, the Mission organized 122 training and
awareness-raising sessions for slightly more than
3,000 members of the Malian Defence and Security
Forces, including 563 women. The promulgation by
the transitional President of a law establishing the
modalities for compensation for damages resulting
from serious human rights violations is a measure we
welcome, and it should be commended. In the same
vein, I would like to underscore the Bamako Court of
Assizes’ conviction of an individual, on 24 January, for
a terrorist attack that was carried out in February 2019
and led to the death of three Blue Helmets.
The most recent assessment of the human rights
situation for the reporting period revealed that there
was a slight decrease in the total number of human
rights violations and that terrorist groups were the
primary perpetrators of such violations. MINUSMA
will continue to investigate alleged human rights
violations and abuses, and, to that end, we count on the
full cooperation of the Malian authorities.
I would like to express my appreciation for the
meeting between the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, which allowed for a productive discussion on the
human rights situation in Mali and Mali’s obligations
in that regard, including by strengthening existing
cooperation and collaboration efforts.
(spoke in English)
Mali is less than two months away from the
constitutional referendum that would mark the first
of a series of polls expected to culminate with the
4/24

27/01/2023

restoration of constitutional order in March 2024.
The Malian authorities continue to demonstrate a
commitment to holding the polls on time, as illustrated
by the establishment of the central structures of the
new Independent Authority for Election Management,
following the adoption of a new electoral law in June
2022, the drawing up of a preliminary draft constitution
and the update of the electoral register from October to
December, even though turnout remained low.
However, several challenges remain. They relate
in particular to the full operationalization of the new
Independent Authority for Election Management,
which requires the establishment of local offices across
the country, as well as the finalization of the ongoing
constitutional review process.
On that last point, it is worth mentioning that
in December, in view of the reactions of various
stakeholders, the transitional President established a
51-member committee to finalize the draft and ensure
sufficient buy-in within Malian society. Meanwhile,
a series of consultations with political parties and
civil society have been conducted by the transitional
authorities to discuss various aspects of the preparations
for the constitutional referendum and other elections.
Those initiatives must be encouraged and supported,
as inclusion and consensus are crucial for the overall
success of the transition process.
Two other aspects will determine the trajectory
of the electoral process. The first is the availability
of the necessary financial and logistical resources. To
date, only 60 per cent of the resources required for the
United Nations basket fund for electoral support has
been mobilized. I encourage international partners to
increase their support to Mali in that crucial endeavour.
For its part, MINUSMA, including in collaboration with
the United Nations country team, is providing technical
and logistical support to the electoral process. Steps are
under way to increase that support. The second aspect is
the evolution of the security situation, which affects all
stages of the electoral cycle. MINUSMA will provide
all possible support to the Malian authorities in their
efforts to secure the electoral process.
My last briefing to the Council took place against the
backdrop of renewed momentum in the implementation
of the peace process, following the August high-level
decision-making meeting among the Malian parties and
the subsequent ministerial session of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee in September 2022. Not only
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

did the parties endorse the Government’s proposal
for the integration of 26,000 combatants into State
structures, including the Defence and Security Forces,
but they also agreed to set up an ad hoc commission to
resolve the outstanding issue of grades and ranks for
senior officers of the signatory movements. The terms
of reference of the ad hoc commission were agreed, and
MINUSMA pledged to extend the necessary support
for its proceedings. Furthermore, the movements were
given slots in the ad hoc commission established by the
transitional President to finalize the draft constitution
to ensure that the institutional reforms required for
the implementation of the peace agreement are taken
into account.
Unfortunately, in the past two months, new
challenges arose with disagreement over the level
of participation of the Government in the ordinary
sessions of the Agreement Monitoring Committee and
other related issues. That culminated in the decision by
the signatory movements in December to suspend their
participation in the peace process.
MINUSMA, along with the other members of the
international mediation, led by Algeria, spared no
effort to promote dialogue among the signatory parties
to overcome the current difficulties. In December,
I travelled to Algiers to talk with Foreign Minister
Ramtane Lamamra, who subsequently visited Mali for
consultations with the Malian authorities. Follow-up
discussions took place in Algiers, with a visit by the
Malian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Malian
Minister for National Reconciliation in mid-January.
A few days ago, I met with the Malian Minister for
National Reconciliation to exchange views on the
way forward. Consultations were also held with the
signatory movements.
I encourage the parties to spare no effort to
overcome the current difficulties and achieve decisive
progress in the implementation of the peace agreement.
Ultimately, they bear the primary responsibility for the
success of that process. The ongoing transition offers
a unique opportunity to advance the agreement — an
opportunity that cannot, and should not, be squandered.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
Algeria’s steadfast commitment and role in the
efforts aimed at facilitating the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. I also
pay tribute to the other members of the international
mediation for their role.

S/PV.9251

Let me conclude by underlining that the situation
in Mali continues to warrant sustained attention and
engagement, particularly from the Security Council.
MINUSMA has now been deployed in Mali for nearly 10
years. Over that period, the Mission has accomplished
much, but the objectives that were set by the Council are
yet to be fully achieved and the context has witnessed
significant changes. In that regard, the review requested
by the Council provides the opportunity for Mali
and other members of the international community
to determine the best way forward. As the Council
considers the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral, it is worth keeping in mind that stabilizing
Mali is critical not only for the country itself, but also
for the entire region.
The President: I thank Mr. Wane for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Dicko.
Ms. Dicko (spoke in French): Speaking before the
Security Council as a member of civil society is not
only a privilege for my humble self, but also, above all,
a great responsibility — that of carrying the voice of
the voiceless and of the daughters and sons of Mali, my
country, of which I am proud.
Mali continues to face complex challenges. The
threat of terrorist groups is still present, and today it
affects all four corners of the country. Attacks on the
Malian Defence and Security Forces are increasingly
spreading to the south of the country, particularly the
regions of Sikasso, Koulikoro, Koutiala and Kayes,
and even in the vicinity of the city of Bamako. Other
attacks, including some with improvised explosive
devices, target public transport vehicles, logistics and
humanitarian convoys and even peacekeepers.
Terrorist and similar groups kidnap and execute
people, prevent farmers from carrying out their
activities, burn crops and deprive local communities of
their livelihoods or force them to leave their villages.
According to the data of the Mali Displacement Tracking
Matrix, 412,387 Malians, or nearly 80,000 households,
are internally displaced, 54 per cent of whom are
women. To those figures must be added nearly 200,000
Malian refugees in countries of the subregion.
Women are the first victims of such a situation.
They look after their children, while their husbands are
at large or have disappeared. They wander in the bush
and do not know exactly where to go. They brave the
bad weather and sleep in makeshift shelters. They are

23-025795/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

subjected to all sorts of violence, including conflictrelated. Moreover, those who were able to reach the
larger towns in the north and centre of the country
are subject to prejudice and have no help, hope or
opportunity because the response capacity is limited.
The situation is exacerbated by food insecurity
as a result of conflict, climate change and the forced
withdrawal of some humanitarian actors who were
supporting humanitarian and development projects
and initiatives.
The Malian army has increased its military
operations to combat terrorists. However, those
military operations should be regularly re-evaluated
in the light of the mixed results noted in relation
to human rights. It must be said that the presence of
Russian military partners alongside our Malian armed
forces, whose bravery is to be commended, far from
helps matters. Those actors are involved in committing
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Such violations were documented
by civil society organizations in Mali and are reflected
in official reports, particularly those of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
as well as other independent and credible organizations.
Moreover, in the course of those operations, which also
seek to target sources of funding for terrorism, such
actors systematically target the property of the civilian
population and valuable possessions and dispossess
communities of their livestock, which represents a
cultural legacy of considerable economic value.
I therefore call on the Malian authorities to
disassociate themselves from such acts, which could
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and to take preventive measures so as to discourage
their perpetrators, whoever they may be, and reassure
everyone. At the same time, I call on the judicial
authorities to take concrete steps to prosecute the
alleged perpetrators of those crimes, as well as the
perpetrators of the incidents of sexual and conflictrelated violence mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
6 January report on the situation in Mali of (S/2023/21).
The Malian army has become better equipped. In
the interests of greater transparency, the authorities
should reassure the Malian people about the current
spending on major military equipment to modernize
our army and make it more professional. They should
6/24

27/01/2023

take into account the need for a balanced distribution of
the national budget in relation to other essential sectors,
particularly education and health.
With regard to the pre-electoral process and
context, I welcome the political will of the authorities
to respect the electoral timetable. In that regard, I
would like to call for respect for civil liberties and
the democratic space guaranteed by the Constitution
in order to enable the daughters and sons of Mali to
express themselves freely during the process, which we
want to be inclusive, transparent and credible.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, the outcome of the Algiers
process, has not made significant progress, especially
given that women’s participation has remained
insignificant. Despite the adoption of the 30 per cent
quota law, which is considered a major victory, much
remains to be done. Malian women want to play a greater
role in the implementation of the peace agreement,
particularly through its various mechanisms.
I would like to commend the positive outcome in the
case of the 49 Ivorian soldiers who were pardoned by the
President of the transition after having been sentenced
by the Malian justice system. That is an encouraging
step that is part of the process of normalizing our
relations with neighbouring countries and resolving
bilateral disputes through responsible diplomacy. I
urge the international community and all partners to
support Mali in the reforms it has already initiated
and above all to explore opportunities for sustainable
development, because without genuine development in
the Sahel, Malians will continue to face terrorism and
insecurity in their daily lives.
I call on the Malian authorities to mobilize
resources and seek alternative partnerships with
humanitarian actors in order to address the issue of
internally displaced persons, whose numbers continue
to grow as a result of insecurity. We also hope to
reopen classrooms in the affected areas. I also call on
the authorities to strengthen their collaboration with
MINUSMA and draw on the staffing and logistical
resources available in order to protect civilians and
combat terrorism through coordinated and genuine
partnerships. Finally, I call on the authorities to ensure
more equitable protection for all communities, publicly
condemn any instrumentalization or stigmatization
based on ethnicity and strengthen dialogue with the
affected communities in order to ease existing tensions
and conflicts.
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

The President: I thank Ms. Dicko for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative El-Ghassim
Wane and Ms. Aminata Cheick Dicko for their briefings.
I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali.
The international community must pay the
necessary attention to the situation in Mali and the
Sahel region. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/36) on the internal review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) gives us the opportunity to do
so. I would like to begin by underscoring the quality
and lucidity of his strategic review. MINUSMA is
the main instrument deployed by the international
community in support of Mali. Its primary objectives
are to implement the Algiers Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, protect civilians and support
the transition. Considerable efforts and sacrifices
have been made through MINUSMA: it has an annual
budget of $1.2 billion, and 13,000 Blue Helmets have
been deployed, of whom 180 lost their lives in the past
10 years.
However, as the Secretary-General reminds us, in
Mali, as elsewhere, a peacekeeping operation cannot be
effective without credible political prospects and the
sincere cooperation of the host country. The SecretaryGeneral notes that the implementation of the Algiers
Agreement has stalled, restrictions in the political arena
are worrisome in terms of continuing the transition,
the security situation has seriously deteriorated, and
the obstacles to the freedom of action and the mandate
of MINUSMA have greatly increased. The SecretaryGeneral also notes the presence of mercenaries of the
Wagner Group, which is known to all and recognized
by the Russian authorities, as reflected in regular acts
of violence perpetrated against Malian civilians and the
increasing obstruction of the work of MINUSMA. That
is not acceptable.
On the basis of that very clear observation, the
Secretary-General draws useful conclusions for the
future. He lists the parameters that are essential for
MINUSMA to be able to continue its mission. The
Algiers Agreement, which remains the main instrument
for lasting reconciliation, must be implemented. The
political transition must be conducted according to
the timetable agreed with the Economic Community

S/PV.9251

of West African States (ECOWAS). There must be
freedom of movement and action for all MINUSMA
personnel and resources. Finally, all components of the
mandate of MINUSMA, including the human rights
component, must be implemented. Those parameters
must also lead to concrete actions by the Malian
transitional authorities. That is all the more urgent
since, as we heard, several major troop-contributing
countries have already decided to withdraw from
MINUSMA, which is in danger of being progressively
emptied of its substance, both externally because of the
constraints placed on it and internally because of the
weakening of some of its critical capacities.
Therefore, the next few months will be decisive for
the future of MINUSMA. As the Secretary-General
points out, the status quo is not an option. All options
are on the table, and they will have to be discussed
with all stakeholders: Malian actors, Algeria as the
leader of international mediation efforts, ECOWAS
and the African Union, neighbouring countries, troopcontributing countries and donors. The Security
Council must approach that discussion with an open
mind. The future of Mali and the future of MINUSMA
depend on the transitional Malian authorities. Without
clear commitments and tangible actions, it will
not be possible to rebuild trust or to re-establish a
dynamic partnership.
We must also rethink our collective approach
in the Sahel beyond Mali. It is in that spirit that we
have contributed to the work of the High-level Panel
on Security and Development in the Sahel, which was
given a mandate by the United Nations and the African
Union. When the time comes, we must be able to
respond at all levels to the proposals put forward.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Special Representative El-Ghassim Wane for briefing
us today. We recognize the work that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) is doing in extremely difficult
circumstances. I thank Ms. Aminata Cheick Dicko for
her contribution, and I welcome the participation of
His Excellency Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
First, I would like to take a moment to pay tribute
to the MINUSMA family for the sacrifices they make
every day. We honour the legacy of the peacekeepers
who have lost their lives in the line of duty. We must
also remember the tens of thousands of civilians killed

23-025797/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

and displaced by extremism and violence in the north,
the centre and now also the south of the country. We
must strive to discharge our responsibility as a Council
and ensure that Mali emerges more resilient, stable
and inclusive.
The strategic review of MINUSMA is a welcome
step forward that will help the Council to tailor the
Mission’s mandate to the needs on the ground. We
appreciate the opportunity to reflect on the options
outlined by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2023/36), because business as usual is no longer an
option for MINUSMA or for the Council. That review,
along with the forthcoming report from the High-level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel and
other regional initiatives, will be helpful as the Council
considers MINUSMA’s future and continues its support
to the people of Mali.
After more than a decade of United Nations
engagement in Mali, the situation remains alarming.
While there is no easy fix for the challenges facing
the country, the international community cannot
and must not fail. The 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali laid out the framework for peace
in Mali, and it is necessary to build on that foundation.
We encourage all parties to remain resolute and
committed to its implementation. More specifically,
attention should be paid to ensuring progress in the
electoral and constitutional processes. We acknowledge
Algeria’s constructive role in that regard.
Maintaining open channels of communication and
creating space for dialogue in the Security Council, in
the region and in Mali is critical. To that end, we note
the positive steps taken towards regional engagement,
including the return of members of the Ivorian
forces. Good-neighbourly relations will be critical to
overcoming Mali’s and the region’s interdependent
challenges. The Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and MINUSMA continue to
be key partners in supporting national State-building
efforts. In the light of the complex challenges that Mali
continues to face, I would like to highlight three key points.
First, as extremism continues to spread, a
comprehensive response is needed. In Mali, extremists
exploit communities’ existing vulnerabilities and
distort religion to radicalize and recruit followers. Such
political and social challenges are inextricably linked
to the deteriorating security situation and must be
addressed accordingly. In order to be effective, counter8/24

27/01/2023

terrorism operations need to work in tandem with the
extension of State authority and the provision of basic
services. The growing presence of State authorities in
the north and centre of Mali can, for example, contribute
to the implementation of policies that will help protect
the population, address their basic needs and create an
environment where extremism cannot thrive. That must
be a strategic priority for the Mission, and it behoves
the Council to take action in ways that complement
regional counter-terrorism efforts.
Secondly, the human cost of violence is unacceptable.
We cannot ignore the complex humanitarian crisis
that is being exacerbated by insecurity, including
through its far-reaching consequences for women and
children. Mali’s social fabric is being torn apart and
its future is in jeopardy. More than 587,000 children
are still affected by the closure of 1,950 schools. As
we focus on the most pressing needs, we should ensure
that in addition to more immediate responses we also
prioritize medium- and longer-term planning. That will
in turn lay the ground for rebuilding a more resilient
and sustainable Mali.
Thirdly, in considering the review and
MINUSMA’s future configuration, we are greatly
looking forward to engaging constructively with all the
relevant stakeholders. The Council’s decision should
not be merely the lowest common denominator of our
respective positions but rather a significant, resultsoriented push in support of the people of Mali. For that,
engagement with African stakeholders must be given
a central role in addressing the challenges facing Mali
and the region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates will
continue to support all efforts aimed at preserving
stability and peace and alleviating the suffering of the
people of Mali. As a Council, we must remain engaged
and prioritize their stability and prosperity.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Wane and
Ms. Dicko for their informative briefings. I want to
start by expressing my deepest condolences to Nigeria
and Chad, which together have lost six peacekeepers
serving in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
since the last time the Security Council convened to
discuss the Mission (see S/PV.9200). We honour the
sacrifices made by the brave men and women who risk
their lives for the people of Mali and the prospect of
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

peace. We echo the Secretary-General’s deep concern
about the exceptionally high level and frequency of
violence in Mal and condemn the horrific attacks by
terrorist groups on civilians, Malian security forces and
MINUSMA personnel. We are particularly alarmed
by the grave impact of the conflict on the safety and
livelihoods of Mali’s women and girls.
While we are encouraged to hear about the many
ways in which MINUSMA continues to deliver
on its mandate, we are extremely concerned about
the significant political, operational and capacity
constraints limiting the Mission’s success. It is clear
both from Special Representative Wane’s briefing and
the report of the Secretary-General on the internal
review of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (S/2023/36)
that MINUSMA is at a critical juncture. Unfortunately,
its extremely volatile operating environment is made
more dangerous by the restrictions that the transition
Government continues to impose on the Mission and
which needlessly put peacekeepers — and the civilians
they seek to protect — in harm’s way. The fact that
in his most recent report (S/2023/21) the SecretaryGeneral indicates that the Malian authorities denied
or gave no response to 237 MINUSMA flight requests
is completely unacceptable. It means that on 237
separate occasions the transition Government blocked
the Mission from deterring or responding to attacks,
investigating alleged human rights abuses and violations
and ensuring safety for travelling convoys. To make
matters worse, those restrictions typically occur where
protection is most needed. It is not an exaggeration to
say that those continued obstructions have become an
existential issue for the Mission and a bit of a crisis for
the Council.
Once again, we demand that the transition
Government lift all restrictions on MINUSMA and
allow all the Mission personnel to operate freely
and safely in service of its mandate. As the internal
review states, MINUSMA’s success will hinge on
the support and cooperation it receives from the
transition Government. The continued obstructions
of MINUSMA’s mandate, in addition to the blatant
violations of the status-of-forces agreement, should
force the Council to seriously reconsider its support for
MINUSMA in its current form. They are preventing the
international community from seeing the full scope of
human rights violations and abuses reportedly being
perpetrated by violent extremist groups and by Malian

S/PV.9251

armed forces in partnership with the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group forces. We strongly urge the transition
Government to cooperate with all MINUSMA’s human
rights activities, particularly requests for access to sites
of alleged human rights abuses and violations, and for
the United Nations to report with full transparency
on alleged abuses and violations. The promotion and
protection of human rights is not a political agenda
possessed by one or a few Member States, but a priority
task that the Council has authorized MINUSMA to
carry out since the Mission’s inception.
The United States welcomed the acknowledgement
by the United Nations of the Kremlin-backed Wagner
Group’s presence through an explicit reference in
the strategic internal review. We hope that future
United Nations reporting on Mali will be similarly
candid about the threat posed by Wagner Group forces
to Malian civilians. As we made clear last week, the
Wagner Group is a criminal organization that is
committing widespread atrocities and human rights
abuses in Mali and elsewhere. The United Nations must
be able to provide an honest and transparent analysis
of the destabilizing role of such criminal organizations
in places where United Nations field missions operate.
Reporting by expert panels remains a key source
of information on the situation in Mali. We want
to reiterate the call in resolution 2374 (2017), on the
existing sanctions on Mali, for all Member States
to facilitate the work of the Panel of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), including the timely issuance of visas.
Turning to the political situation, we commend
the progress made by the transition authorities on
electoral reform. MINUSMA’s support to that effort is
indispensable and demonstrates that the Mission remains
vital to overcoming the many complex challenges related
to electoral capacity-building, awareness, registration,
mobilization and security across Mali’s vast territory.
The United States continues to offer its full support and
encouragement to the Mission and to those within the
transition Government who are endeavouring to restore
democracy, civilian rule and constitutional order.
After welcoming the resumed functioning of the
Algiers accords monitoring committee last fall (see
S/PV.9154), we have been deeply discouraged to see
that progress being undone in recent months. The
unwillingness of the transition Government to engage
at the appropriate levels has led to a splintering of the

23-025799/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

mediation process, whereby signatory armed groups
must negotiate with the international mediation group
without participation from the transition authorities. The
recent suspension of participation by signatory armed
groups in the monitoring committee is cause for serious
concern. We extend our full support to MINUSMA,
Special Representative Wane and Algeria’s Government
in their efforts to reinvigorate the mediation process. We
call on the transition authorities, the signatory armed
groups and other actors in the region to demonstrate
renewed political will by taking immediate steps to
restart the monitoring committee’s activities.
In closing, I want to once again echo the SecretaryGeneral in saying that given the current context in
Mali, business as usual is not an option. While the
Council must ultimately vote on the Mission’s mandate,
the future of MINUSMA also rests in the hands of the
Malian authorities, the parties to the Algiers accords
and actors in the region, whose actions we will monitor
closely in the months to come.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council, Gabon, Mozambique and my own country,
Ghana (A3).
We welcome the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on Mali (S/2023/21) as well as his report on
the internal review (S/2023/36) of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), which is currently being reviewed.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral El-Ghassim Wane for his insightful briefing,
as well as his diligent engagement in helping to find
durable solutions to the situation in Mali. We also
thank Ms. Aminata Cheick Dicko for her perspective
and welcome the presence in this meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop.
The A3 appreciates the positive contribution of
MINUSMA to the stability of Mali, and as this year we
mark MINUSMA’s decade-long presence in Mali, we
urge support in consolidating the gains made in helping
our brother people of Mali to address the myriad
challenges facing their country. We understand Mali’s
continuing concerns regarding the security situation
there and believe that with the support of the Security
Council and the cooperation of the Malian authorities,
the implementation of MINUSMA’s mandate, which
remains relevant, will help the Malian people to achieve
10/24

27/01/2023

their aspirations for a peaceful, stable and united nation.
In that regard, we will closely engage the SecretaryGeneral and the other members of the Council on
the best configuration for MINUSMA following the
present review. We look forward to the joint military
and police capability study to be carried out during this
quarter by the Department of Peace Operations.
While acknowledging the gains made on the
political track, our quest for lasting peace for the
people of Mali should continue unabated considering
the complex political challenges, heightened insecurity
and deteriorating humanitarian situation that persist in
the country.
On the political situation, the restoration of
constitutional order remains a critical enabler for peace
in Mali. In that regard, we welcome the submission
of the draft constitution as well as the adoption of the
electoral law, which form part of the broader reforms
required to take forward the political transition and fulfil
the Algiers peace agreement. However, we encourage
enhanced outreach among the stakeholders that have
expressed some concerns about the ongoing reforms
to ensure inclusivity and national ownership of the
process. We urge support for the work of the commission
established to monitor the timetable for political and
institutional reforms to help achieve that goal. We call
on all the signatories to the peace agreement to remain
engaged in its implementation, including the resolution
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) processes. We also underscore the importance
of adequate funding for the success of DDR processes,
which form part of the conditions for the return of peace
and security in Mali and the region.
We reaffirm our support for the decisions taken
by the Authority of the Heads of State of Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) at its sixty-first and sixty-second ordinary
sessions and encourage international support, where
required, for the national processes in realizing
the March 2024 electoral timeline. We welcome
the improvement of relations between Mali and its
neighbours and appreciate the diplomatic efforts that
led to the release of the 46 Ivorian soldiers. We hope
that improving regional solidarity will help in the
coordination of security arrangements that would inure
to the benefit of Mali.
Concerning the security situation, we express our
deep concern about the unabated attacks by terrorist
groups on military and civilian targets, including
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

through the use of improvised explosive devices. We
strongly condemn all such attacks and express our
condolences and sympathy to all the families of the
victims of terrorism in the region.
We remain concerned by the limited State presence
in the centre and north of Mali and the impact that that has
had in ensuring the security of the civilian populations
who are captive to the activities of terrorist groups.
We commend the important role that MINUSMA has
played in maintaining presence in areas with little or no
State presence and note the impact that the withdrawal
of international counter-terrorism partners and their
assets is having on MINUSMAs capacity to stretch its
resources to more distant locations.
We encourage the Malian authorities to work
with MINUSMA to urgently address the issue of
misinformation and disinformation, which threaten
the safety of the Mission’s personnel and undermine
their impact on the ground. We therefore hope that
the Council can converge on the Secretary General’s
recommendations contained in his internal review
report for adopting innovative communication
strategies to enhance the Mission’s role in tackling the
complex security situation.
Beyond MINUSMA’s presence, we underscore the
useful role played by regional mechanisms in helping
to ensure regional security, including the Group of
Five for the Sahel Joint Force, the Accra Initiative
and the Multinational Joint Task Force. While we
note the augmentation of Mali’s security capabilities,
we encourage regional joint efforts to undertake the
required counter-terrorism operations until such a time
as Mali’s security personnel are able to take full charge
of the security situation in the country.

S/PV.9251

The deteriorating humanitarian situation resulting
from the heightened insecurity as well as other
aggravating factors, including climate change, food
insecurity and the dire socioeconomic conditions in the
aftermath of the coronavirus disease pandemic, are of
great concern. The aggravating factors, including the
climate menace, do not only affect the environment but
also have the propensity of escalating conflict in the
country and region.
The closure of over 1,000 schools and the increasing
number of incidents of sexual exploitation of women and
girls, among other vices, are regrettable and undermine
the fundamental human rights of the victims. We
encourage the Malian authorities to continue their
efforts in clamping down on the violations of the rights of
its citizens, including through speedy investigation and
prosecution of culprits. We also reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an increase in funding support from
donor partners and the international community to help
meet the needs of the over 5.3 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance.
It is important to prioritize efforts in tackling the
root causes of instability in the country, which cannot
be dissociated from regional dynamics. Addressing the
instability would include investing more in women and
youth and enhancing their participation in governance
processes as well as the creation of employment
opportunities to enable them to contribute meaningfully
to the country’s development. We also underscore
the critical role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
including its involvement in climate-related peace and
development interventions, as well as in the promotion
of community-based dispute resolution mechanisms.

It is our hope that the upcoming independent report
of the High-level Panel on Security and Development
in the Sahel, led by Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, former
President of the Niger, will leverage the best elements
of the regional initiatives in proposing a robust response
to the security challenges of the Sahel. We underscore
our position for adequate, sustainable and predictable
funding for those regional mechanisms, which in essence
are acting on behalf of the international community.

In conclusion, we reiterate our solidarity with the
people of Mali and reaffirm our respect for its territorial
integrity and sovereignty. We believe that a business-asusual approach in restoring lasting peace in Mali would
not be helpful. What is required is a multi-dimensional
and multi-stakeholder approach characterized by strong
political will among all the stakeholders, including the
host authorities, the United Nations, the African Union,
ECOWAS and donor partners. Now more than ever, we
all need to make good our commitment to help restore
lasting peace for the people of Mali.

We urge coordinated action in addressing the
spillover effect on the Sahel of the lingering crisis in
Libya and in managing the threat that the return of
foreign terrorist fighters and the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons pose to the stability of Mali.

Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Let me start by thanking
Special Representative El-Ghassim Wane for his
comprehensive briefing and Ms. Aminata Cheick Dicko
for the tangible views expressed. I also acknowledge
the presence of the Foreign Minister of Mali.

23-0257911/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

I express Malta’s condolences to Nigeria and Chad
over the loss of lives and thank all peacekeepers for
their service.
Our message today is one of mutual respect,
cooperation and engagement to ensure that the
United
Nations
Multidimensional
Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continues
to carry out its mandate effectively. The Mission’s
relevance in executing its duties should remain central
to our efforts. Any external restrictions of movement
imposed on its operations could potentially subject
personnel and civilians to life-threatening risks. We
hope that the new modalities for flight requests agreed
to last November will constitute a first step in the
withdrawal of any restrictions on the Mission.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/36) on the
internal review of MINUSMA provides a solid and
comprehensive starting point for critical reflection on
the Mission’s future and must be well-considered at this
critical juncture for the country. The current environment
in Mali is especially challenging for peacekeepers. On
that note, we express our deepest gratitude for their
service in the region and strongly condemn recent attacks
targeting them. Ensuring the utmost safety and security
of Mission personnel when carrying out their mandate
remains paramount. We would also like to commend
MINUSMA for its efforts in creating a more inclusive
environment for women police peacekeepers through the
Elsie Initiative Fund for Women in Peace Operations.
The full implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, resulting from the Algiers
process, remains vital. We regret to note that progress
on its implementation has been lacking. We call on all
parties to focus on strengthening dialogue and taking
pragmatic steps, with the support of the Malian public,
in the hope of restoring their trust. We look forward to
efforts to reset the peace process through the work of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee and call for an
inclusive dialogue.
Malta is encouraged by the submission of the draft
constitution. Consensus must remain the driving force
behind its drafting and adoption process.
We acknowledge the operationalization of the
Independent Authority for Election Management as a
positive step and welcome the appointment of women
to the National Transition Council. Their full, equal
and meaningful participation in all local and State
authorities, local dialogues and electoral process
remains of fundamental importance.
12/24

27/01/2023

We strongly encourage the Malian authorities
to continue their engagements with MINUSMA,
the Economic Community of West African States
Commission and the African Union to meet the
transition deadline of March 2024.
Today nearly one in five people in Mali need one or
more forms of assistance as a result of conflict, sociopolitical instability, climate change and multifaceted
insecurity. Conflict-driven food insecurity is emerging
as a major threat in a region already heavily impacted
by climate-related issues, such as decreased rainfall
and desertification. The humanitarian consequences of
both conflict and climate change will be a worsening
of existing inequalities, as violence and the further
loss of livelihoods will exacerbate the cycle of forced
displacement and deprivation. We call on all actors
to respect and to facilitate rapid, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access in Mali. Now more than ever, it
is essential that humanitarians can reach those most in
need, when they need it the most.
The proliferation of violence and human rights
abuses committed against civilians by armed groups
and private military companies, such as the Wagner
Group, are very concerning. Conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls
and the alarming number of grave incidents committed
against children are deplorable.
Malta strongly condemns all violations and abuses
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Such heinous acts must cease
immediately, and we welcome MINUSMA’s support
for the justice sector response to conflict-related sexual
violence. We call on the Malian Authorities to ensure
accountability and a safe environment in which its
population can be protected.
Malta reiterates its continued support for the
work carried out by the Special Representative and
MINUSMA. The way forward truly depends on a route
that is underpinned by mutual trust and respect among
all stakeholders.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Special Representative Wane for his briefing today
and to commend the important work carried out by
the personnel and peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), who operate in very difficult
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9251

conditions. I also extend my thanks to Ms. Dicko for
her frank assessment and welcome Minister Diop to
this meeting.

enhanced engagement and coordination among relevant
stakeholders to implement the agreement and achieve
long-term peace in Mali.

The political and security situation in Mali has faced
significant challenges and setbacks. The socioeconomic
crisis has deepened, humanitarian needs have risen, the
civic space is shrinking and the number of internally
displaced persons continues to increase, with women
and children being the most affected.

We are also deeply concerned about the persistent
restrictions MINUSMA continues to face, including
on ground and air movements and the denial of flight
requests, especially in areas where counter-terrorism
operations are conducted. The review clearly states
that the Mission cannot continue with the status quo.
The Malian authorities must work with MINUSMA
and allow the mission to operate safely and freely,
without obstacles, as mandated, including in its human
rights monitoring.

We welcome the release of the Ivorian soldiers
by the Malian authorities and the diplomatic efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the United Nations and other actors.
As mentioned by the civil society representative,
those efforts are very important when it comes to
regional relations.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and coordination with
all the relevant actors is key in that process. In that
context, the implementation of the electoral calendar,
within the agreed timelines, with ECOWAS must be
a priority to facilitate a democratic transition. We
urge the Malian authorities to focus their efforts on
advancing outstanding legislative matters and the
constitutional process, including establishing a single
legislative management body. We welcome the support
of MINUSMA in that process.
The growing violent extremist and terrorist threat
is alarming. We are concerned that, if not properly
addressed, the changing security architecture in Mali
has the potential to create security vacuums, which can
destabilize the country and the region. In that regard,
we fear that the presence of the Wagner Group poses
a significant threat to the safety of peacekeepers and
civilians. As highlighted by the Secretary-General,
MINUSMA has documented serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law during
military operations with the involvement of foreign
security personnel belonging to the Wagner Group. We
condemn those acts and urge the Malian authorities to
reassess their partnership and to release the findings of
ongoing investigations.
Furthermore, we regret the signatory movements’
decision to suspend their participation in the Agreement
Monitoring Committee and stress the importance of the
peace agreement in stabilizing the situation. We call for

Albania welcomes the Secretary-General’s detailed
internal review of MINUSMA, which we consider
to be a good basis to begin our discussions on the
future of the Mission. We commend the work of the
United Nations in preparing the review, in consultations
with the Malian authorities, as mentioned by the
Special Representative, which is essential considering
the importance of MINUSMA’s presence in Mali and
the need to strengthen the Mission to better deliver
its mandate.
In conclusion, we look forward to engaging with
Council members and relevant stakeholders in the
coming months to ensure the best course of action for
MINUSMA and the people of Mali,
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Wane for his briefing.
I join others in expressing our deepest condolences
following the deaths in December of two peacekeepers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We salute
the dedication of all personnel and condemn any attacks
on peacekeepers.
Let me begin by underlining that the United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting the people
of Mali, as we are doing through humanitarian,
stabilization and development aid and as we have
done through our contributions to MINUSMA. The
Malian people deserve the support of the international
community to address the challenges they have faced in
recent years. In that context, we welcome the publication
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/36) on the
review of MINUSMA and thank the Secretariat and the
Mission for all their efforts. I have three points to make
on the report.

23-0257913/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

First, we agree with the Secretary-General, and
others who have said it today, that business as usual is
no longer an option. The Mission cannot continue as it
currently stands, with restrictions hindering operations
and without the full cooperation of the host Government.
The safety and security of peacekeepers are at stake,
as well as the reputation of the United Nations if it
cannot effectively deliver its mandate and uphold
United Nations principles, including on human rights.
Secondly, we agree that the fulfilment of the four
parameters set out in the review are essential for the
continued viability of the Mission. We need to see
tangible progress on the political transition and renewed
commitment and dialogue on the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, including a way forward
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
urge the Malian authorities to adhere to the status-of
forces-agreement, while ensuring freedom of movement
for peacekeepers. We expect to see greater access for
the Mission to investigate human rights allegations.
Thirdly, we need to re-evaluate the support provided
by MINUSMA to the Malian Defence and Security
Forces. As the Secretary-General highlights, a number
of military operations have been marred by allegations
of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. As others have said, the report also
confirms the presence in Mali of the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group. In that context, we need a hard look at
the relationship between the Mission and Malian forces.
The Council should use this review to take stock of
the challenges and ensure that the Mission adapts as
needed in order to remain effective in a changed reality.
There is a short window until the next mandate renewal.
Progress against the Secretary-General’s parameters
will be essential if we are to empower MINUSMA to
make a meaningful contribution to building the peace
and stability the Malian people deserve.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by thanking Mr. Wane, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his
detailed and comprehensive briefing. Brazil welcomes
His Excellency Mr. Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali, to this
meeting. We listened carefully to the briefing by the
representative of civil society.
14/24

27/01/2023

We received with dismay the news of the
terrorist attacks against MINUSMA in Timbuktu on
16 December. We regret the deaths of two peacekeepers
from Nigeria and offer our sincere condolences and
solidarity to the Government of that country, the
families of the victims and MINUSMA.
Brazil reiterates its firm condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. There is no
justification for such acts. We support the efforts of the
Malian armed forces to fight terrorism, which remains
a major challenge to the restoration of State authority
in the centre and the north of Mali. While MINUSMA
remains committed to assisting the Malian authorities
in that crucial task, it is our duty in the Council to seek
safer conditions for peacekeepers and civil personnel
alike as they perform their tasks. In that regard, we
note with concern the persistence of incidents involving
protests of the local population against the Mission and
acts that seek to prevent peacekeepers from discharging
their core duties. Taking into account that such
episodes primarily result from disinformation, we take
this opportunity to underscore the need to develop the
strategic communications component of MINUSMA.
We count on other Council members to pursue that
objective collectively when the Mission’s mandate
and tasks are reviewed. The safety and security of
peacekeepers should be a top priority.
At the same time, we welcome the final settlement
reached between Mali and Côte d’Ivoire on the
liberation of the Ivorian troops who had been detained
in Malian territory for several months. We hope the
transition authorities will, in future, handle the issue
of the rotation of contingents more promptly and in a
manner that is more compatible with our common aim
to make MINUSMA’s work safer and more effective.
In the light of the magnitude of the threats in the
security field and the key contribution that cooperation
may provide to the Malian armed forces, we not
only encourage improvements in collaboration with
MINUSMA but also urge further consideration to be
given to re-establishing or increasing coordination with
the Group of Five for the Sahel. Cross-border problems
often require regional responses. We believe that
regional cooperation can be equally beneficial to Mali
at the political level. In that regard, Brazil fully supports
the decision of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), taken at the Summit of the
Heads of State and Government last month, to continue
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

the dialogue with Malian authorities on collaboration
in order to develop and implement a transition plan that
is conducive to the restoration of constitutional order.
Brazil supports confidence-building measures
among the Malian political forces. The return to
democratic normality, including the drafting of a
new constitution, is a collective endeavour that must
include women, young people, and ethnic and religious
minorities. It is encouraging to see the renewed
engagement with the transition process and the lead-up
to elections. However, as an ECOWAS official rightly
pointed out recently, the transition plan means little
without the peace agreement. Therefore, we encourage
the Malian political forces to remain engaged in
dialogue and redouble their efforts towards the full
implementation of all provisions of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
In concluding, and in view of the humanitarian
situation and the socioeconomic assessment contained
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/21), my
delegation would like to underscore once again the
need to address the root causes of conflict. In that
sense, we can certainly draw valuable lessons from the
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund with the Sahel. We wish all the
best to Mali and the Malian people in overcoming this
moment of challenge.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I also
welcome the representative of Mali and Ms. Aminata
Cheick Dicko, civil society actor from Mali.

S/PV.9251

of those incidents, and we take note of the action plan
to counter the threats of improvised explosive devices
developed by MINUSMA and the Mine Action Service.
We reiterate the value of strategic communications
for overcoming those challenges. We deplore the land
and air movement restrictions that MINUSMA faces.
Those restrictions hinder the gathering of intelligence,
which threatens the safety of Mission convoys and
undermines the protection of civilians. We urge the
Malian authorities to support MINUSMA’s freedom of
movement and other related activities, in accordance
with the status-of-forces agreement. We condemn the
terrorist attacks, which have claimed hundreds of lives
and displaced hundreds of people in the northern regions.
We are concerned by the illicit trafficking in small arms,
which fuels armed violence. We therefore encourage the
continued development of the border management and
security strategy.
We encourage the work to prevent radicalization and
violent extremism in prisons, the strengthening of the
Specialized Judicial Unit on Terrorism and Transnational
Organized Crime, and the work undertaken by the
Ministry for Justice and Human Rights to implement the
national criminal policy and the prosecutorial strategy
on terrorism-related and international crimes, which was
developed with MINUSMA’s support.
We recognize the work and efforts of the Mission in
the area of political transition, with confidence-building,
dialogue-facilitation and mediation tools, including in
promoting the full implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

I express my condolences to the Government
of Nigeria and the families of the Blue Helmets who
were killed and wounded in the attack of 16 December.
Ecuador also stands together with the families of the
peacekeeping personnel who suffered casualties as they
discharged their mandates.

In that regard, we are concerned by the decision
of certain movements to suspend their participation
in the implementation process of the Agreement, and
we support the Secretary-General’s call for the parties
to cooperate constructively with each other and with
the international mediation team led by Algeria, with
the support of MINUSMA, in order to advance the
peace process.

The analysis of the situation in Mali presented
today reflects the more complex security environment.
We condemn the disinformation and misinformation
campaigns, in particular those directly targeting
MINUSMA. They imperil the security of Mission
personnel, as seen in the Mopti region, which has been
affected by the proliferation of improvised explosive
devices. We are concerned by the increasing number

The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in the mechanisms set out in the Agreement is a
priority. We call for the further strengthening of women’s
presence in all political functions and positions so as to
not only comply with the minimum quota of 30 per cent,
but exceed it. The dialogue on the draft constitution
must be inclusive. That requires the participation of all
political actors and civil society, including women.

23-0257915/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

On electoral reform, we support the joint work of
MINUSMA and the United Nations agencies involved
in the preparation and logistics of the electoral process.
We appreciate the role of the Economic Community
of West African States and the African Union in
mobilizing resources to meet the March 2024 transition
deadline. The Council should take the necessary
measures to increase the capacities of MINUSMA,
which is experiencing operational difficulties in terms
of personnel, equipment, transport and supplies.
Finally, we call for an end to human rights violations
and abuses and urgently call for enhanced cooperation
between the Malian forces and MINUSMA and the
support of the international community, with a view
to creating conditions to alleviate the humanitarian
situation aggravated by the increase in internally
displaced persons. Women and girls are always the
most affected in such situations.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Wane for his briefing. We
listened attentively to the remarks by Ms. Aminata
Cheick Dicko. We welcome His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Abdoulaye Diop, to today’s
meeting. His briefing today will help the Council fully
and accurately grasp the situation in Mali and the needs
of the country.
Special Representative Wane mentioned in his
briefing that Mali has made major strides in promoting
the political transition, advancing the peace process
and combating terrorism, none of which would have
been possible without the joint efforts of the Malian
Government and the international community. As we
speak, the political and peace process in Mali stand at
a critical juncture. They require the ongoing attention
and support of the international community. We must
help the Malian Government properly address the
various challenges it faces.
First, Mali must maintain unity and stability.
Recently, Mali initiated the constitutional process,
set up a more inclusive National Transition Council
and made progress on election preparations. China
welcomes those positive outcomes. A political
transition can hardly be achieved overnight. It is
essential to ensure broad-based participation, take into
account the interests of all parties, safeguard unity and
stability and address differences through dialogue and
consultation, thereby creating conditions conducive to
the constitutional referendum and the electoral process.
16/24

27/01/2023

When providing support, the international
community should respect Mali’s sovereignty and
ownership. The African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States should continue
to play a constructive role. The implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is of
vital importance. We welcome the efforts made by all
parties concerned to reopen the dialogue mechanism,
including the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
commend the important role played by Algeria in leading
the international mediation team and look forward
to greater contributions from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
Secondly, Mali must strengthen its counterterrorism capacity-building. Recently, Mali conducted
counter-terrorism operations in Mopti, Ménaka and
Gao, among other areas, in order to maintain local
stability and protect civilians. Those efforts merit our
full recognition. That said, terrorist forces remain
rampant and are constantly harassing villages and
kidnapping and attacking civilians. Such security
threats are spilling over to neighbouring countries.
Mali stands at the forefront of counter-terrorism
efforts in the Sahel and West Africa. To support
Mali in combating terrorism is to safeguard regional
peace. The international community should help Mali
strengthen its counter-terrorism capacity-building,
provide financial, material, intelligence and logistical
support and respect Mali’s sovereign right to engage
in external security cooperation. The countries of the
region should preserve the momentum in counterterrorism cooperation and forge synergies.
Thirdly, MINUSMA should continue to improve
its peacekeeping performance. Under the leadership of
Special Representative Wane, the Mission has worked
diligently to maintain peace and stability in Mali.
However, the nation faces a great many new problems
and challenges. The Secretary-General’s most recent
report on the internal review of MINUSMA (S/2023/36)
provides a series of recommendations on strengthening
the work of the Mission and its reconfiguration.
Improving the peacekeeping performance of the
Mission is a shared aspiration of all Council members.
We should seize the opportunity presented by this
internal review to strengthen the Mission’s top-level
design, streamline and optimize its mandate and focus
its resources and strength on the most central and urgent
tasks, thereby coming up with a practical and viable
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

plan. The relevant position papers submitted by the
Malian Government should be taken seriously by the
Council. When reconfiguring the Mission, the Council
should fully heed the views of Mali and accommodate
its legitimate concerns. The report referred to the
problems encountered by the Mission in air and ground
operations and in implementing the status-of-forces
agreement. Those problems should be resolved through
dialogue and consultation between the Mission and the
Malian Government so as to create a sound environment
conducive to the Mission’s mandate delivery.
Fourthly, Mali must enhance its sustainable
development. Mali faces a grim economic situation,
with a quarter of its population in need of humanitarian
assistance. We should work together to help alleviate
its difficulties, ensure that relief funds are in place
and forestall the recurrence of humanitarian disaster
in Mali. It is necessary to scale up investment in
peacebuilding, support Mali in implementing projects in
such areas as agriculture development, infrastructure,
education and health, and help Mali enhance its
own development capacities. Many young Malians
are caught up in conflict, violence and poverty. It is
important to increase policy support and investment in
that sector of the population. In December, phase two
of the Kabala campus of the University of Bamako, the
largest educational infrastructure project built with
Chinese aid in West Africa, was completed. China
stands ready to work with the international community
in order to make greater contributions to lasting peace
and development in Mali.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Ms. Aminata Cheick Dicko
for their informative briefings, and I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
Mali has been a priority and partner country
of Swiss cooperation since 1977 — over 40 years.
Active primarily in the regions of Sikasso, Mopti
and Timbuktu, Switzerland is committed to the fight
against poverty, focusing on local education, economic
development, sustainable peace and respect for human
rights. There is still a long way to go towards such peace.
I take this opportunity to say that our thoughts are with
all the families of the victims, members and troops
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
Malian civilian population. We welcome the steps taken

S/PV.9251

to move the political transition forward, in particular
the enactment of an electoral law, the draft constitution
and the updating of the electoral list. Such a path should
be taken forward in an inclusive, impartial, transparent
and time-bound process. We encourage the authorities
to work closely with the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union. Let me highlight
four key points.
First, the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali remains the cornerstone for
peace, democracy and prosperity in Mali. The continued
commitment of the signatory parties to reviving that
process remains crucial and pressing. We welcome
the efforts made by the international mediation in that
direction, and we call for the rapid operationalization
of the ad hoc commission and the resumption of regular
dialogue among the parties. Switzerland is ready to
support those processes. We see encouraging signs
of women’s representation and active participation.
Their inclusion at all levels of decision-making and
the mainstreaming of their capacities and input in all
processes are essential.
Secondly, the ongoing insecurity, including the
threat of terrorism, is worrisome. Peace efforts are
undermined by the lack of security and violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, for which the civilian population pays a high
price. In addition, impunity plays a role in perpetuating
cycles of violence. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/21) informs us that non-State armed groups,
including violent extremist groups, as well as State
actors and foreign security personnel, are responsible
for those violations and abuses. In order to ensure the
protection of the civilian population and restore their
trust in Malian institutions, Switzerland calls on all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Thirdly, humanitarian needs, including food
needs, have increased. The lack of security and climate
change are exacerbating the food crisis and forced
displacement, leading to an even more precarious
security situation. We are concerned that 1,950 schools
remain closed, affecting almost 590,000 children
in the centre and north of the country. The future of
those children, especially girls, is at stake. We call on
all actors to ensure and protect humanitarian access
and on the international community to respond to the
urgent humanitarian needs.

23-0257917/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

Fourthly, Switzerland thanks the Secretary-General
for the good internal review of MINUSMA, which
notes that its overall strategic priorities remain relevant.
Regardless of the future configuration of the mandate
and the Mission, two points seem important to us. First,
to fulfil its mandate and effectively support the Malian
efforts, MINUSMA must have the necessary resources.
Together with the Malian authorities, it must be able to
create and maintain a security environment that allows
it to operate effectively. In addition, a relationship of
mutual trust between Mali and MINUSMA must be
based on respect for the existing agreements, particularly
the status-of-forces agreement. The Mission’s freedom
of movement is critical to the fulfilment of its mandate.
The four parameters identified by the internal review
could therefore form the basis for a stable and predictable
relationship between the Mission and its host country.
The insecurity in Mali has an impact on regional
stability. The continued and united support of the
Security Council is crucial to seeking a common
understanding and, by working with local and regional
stakeholders, improving the current situation in Mali.
Switzerland is pleased to contribute to that.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, and
Ms. Aminata Cheick Dicko for their briefings. We
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, at this meeting.
We firmly believe that the Malian authorities are
determined to do their best to address the challenges
facing their country, especially in terms of security
and internal political stability. Malians have shown a
strong commitment to restoring constitutional order
in the country within the agreed time frame. Efforts
are being made to fully implement the transitional
road map. Work is continuing on the drafting of a new
constitution that takes into account the key provisions
of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali emanating from the Algiers process.
It is important that the Malian leadership be
committed to upholding that document, which
remains the basis for achieving peace and national
reconciliation in the country. At the end of last year,
after a break of almost a year, the Agreement Monitoring
Committee convened and adopted some important
decisions, including with regard to the disarmament,
18/24

27/01/2023

demobilization and reintegration process of former
combatants. We call on the signatories, particularly
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad, to
renew their participation in the substantive work of
the Committee. We hope that a mutually acceptable
solution regarding the modalities for the meetings will
be found.
We agree with the current Malian authorities
that the issue of security is an overriding priority of
the transition period. The country continues its tough
and challenging fight against terrorism. Because of
the security vacuum due to the hasty withdrawal
of French and European military contingents from
Malian territory, terrorists from the Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara and the Group for the Support of
Islam and Muslims became significantly more active.
Those groups, affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and Al-Qaida, continue to carry out
regular raids against civilians, Malian army units and
United Nations peacekeepers. However, despite some
obvious difficulties, in recent months, the Malian
armed forces have demonstrated that they are capable
of achieving results in the fight against terrorists.
We express our support for the activities of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) aimed at
helping the Malian authorities and people to address
the problems facing them, particularly in order to
stabilize the situation. We are aware of the threats
that deployment in Mali, especially in the central and
northern regions, poses to the Blue Helmets. We pay
tribute to the peacekeepers and Malian soldiers who
gave their lives for the sake of peace and security in
that country.
We are satisfied with the progress made in the
dialogue with the transitional Government and that
there has been progress in ensuring an adequate level
of coordination. We regret the fact that some troopcontributing countries decided to withdraw or suspend
their participation in MINUSMA. We believe that
MINUSMA must strictly adhere to its human rights
mandate, namely, to support the Malian authorities in
carrying out their investigations. The politicization of
that file is unacceptable.
In the context of evaluating the modalities of
MINUSMA’s work and the Mission’s internal review,
we would like to stress that we continue to consider
ways to reconfigure the United Nations presence. We
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

hope that that entire process will be geared towards
Mali’s needs and support for its efforts. Since the
opinion of the host State is crucial, we believe that
consultations should continue.
In general, we believe that the effective
implementation of Mission’s mandate, including with
regard to helping to restore constitutional order and
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation,
as well as other areas, will not be possible without
support for the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
Only they are capable of mounting the required
offensive against terrorists.
Russia
provides
comprehensive
assistance
to the Malian army, including by increasing its
combat capacity and training military personnel.
Such engagement, undertaken at Bamako’s request
and in strict compliance with the relevant norms of
international law, is yielding results. The Malian armed
forces are carrying out successful counter-terrorist
operations in the central regions of the country. They
are also taking consistent steps to liberate areas in the
north and east of the country from militants. In our view,
the negative response of our Western colleagues to the
enhanced cooperation between Mali and Russia is yet
another manifestation of the neocolonial policies that,
combined with a lack of tangible results in the efforts
to stabilize Mali after years of a military presence
in the country, were the very reason Mali decided to
find new partners. The Secretary-General’s internal
review report on MINUSMA (S/2023/36) makes it clear
that those efforts were ineffective. We saw a similar
situation in Afghanistan, where 20 years of a United
States presence led to total failure accompanied by
numerous crimes. As in the case of Afghanistan, the
Security Council is going to have to fix everything, and
yet somehow Russia is to blame.
Unlike some of our Western colleagues, Russia
does not try to interfere in Mali’s politics or attach
conditions to the assistance it provides that could
undermine the country’s sovereignty. Our relations are
based on our years of equitable bilateral cooperation
and our understanding of our common aim of combating
the global evil of terrorism. It should therefore come
as no surprise that we have heard no complaints from
our African partners regarding the parameters of our
interactions. Using the platform of the Security Council
to settle scores with Russia is not only irresponsible but
disrespectful to millions of Malians.

S/PV.9251

We have noted the official statement from Paris
that France will no longer be funding development
assistance programmes in Mali. The Malian
Government’s response was understandable when
in November of last year the authorities banned
non-governmental organizations receiving material or
technical support from France from operating there.
France’s decision could clearly further exacerbate the
dire humanitarian situation in Mali, where according
to United Nations data, more than 5.3 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance and the number
of internally displaced persons now stands at 440,000.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian appeal for Mali remains
chronically underfunded.
Russia intends to continue to provide constructive
support for normalization efforts in Mali both through
the Security Council and via comprehensive bilateral
assistance to Bamako. We believe that effective
assistance to the Malian authorities for the purposes of
ensuring security and implementing a balanced policy
on issues relating to a resolution of the crisis is in our
common interest. Without a collective effort it will
be very difficult to achieve solid peace and stability
throughout the Sahara-Sahel region, which to this day
has been unable to overcome the challenges created
by the West’s illegal intervention in Libya in 2011.
That said, we firmly believe that it is the people of the
Sahara-Sahel who must play the main role in advancing
peace and security there. We support the States of
the region in implementing a genuinely independent
policy based on the principle of African solutions to
African problems.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank Special Representative Wane and Ms. Dicko
for their insightful briefings. I also welcome the
participation of Minister Diop in today’s meeting. Japan
joins others in expressing its condolences regarding all
the peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the line of
duty, including the recent deaths of two Nigerians.
Peace and stability in Mali are the hope and desire of
the Malian people. A return to constitutional order and
the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law are
therefore imperative if Malians are to decide their future
for themselves. Japan notes the political progress that
has been made, including through a presidential decree
in December, to establish a committee to finalize a draft
constitution. We command the continued efforts of the

23-0257919/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

27/01/2023

Economic Community of West Africa States, with the
support of the African Union and the United Nations,
to assist the Malian authorities in meeting the transition
deadline of March 2024. Japan stresses the importance
of the unobstructed and constructive participation
in the transitional reform process on the part of all
stakeholders, including political parties, civil society,
women and young people. Japan believes that the
2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
remains the only existing framework for achieving
sustainable peace and ensuring Mali’s territorial
integrity. Japan encourages all parties to continue to
engage in productive and decisive dialogue towards the
implementation of the peace agreement.

and the international community is the best way
forward. I would like to reiterate our solidarity with the
people of Mali and their hopes for a stable and peaceful
country, as well as our strong support for MINUSMA.

We are deeply concerned about the worsening
security situation in Mali. Japan acknowledges the
continued efforts of the Malian forces to address
insecurity. However, we are disturbed by the
documentation by the United Nations of human rights
violations allegedly committed by Malian and foreign
security personnel. Japan will continue to support
efforts to build the capacity of security officers
regarding international humanitarian law, human rights
law and gender issues.

The Government of Mali takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/21), under consideration
today. I thank our brother Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his
briefing and updates. The Malian Government’s
comments in response to the Secretary-General’s report
are contained in a memorandum that has already been
circulated to the members of the Council. I would now
like to convey the Government’s views on several issues.

The role of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
remains pivotal as Mali’s multifaceted challenges
continue. Japan applauds MINUSMA’s efforts amid its
continuing high toll of casualties, about which Japan
is greatly concerned. The high number of improvised
explosive device attacks remains alarming. Japan
thanks the troop- and police-contributing countries and
pays tribute to all who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
Considering the unprecedented difficulties that the
Mission is facing, Japan urges the Malian authorities
to cooperate with MINUSMA to ensure the Mission’s
secure and uninterrupted movement in fulfilling
its mandate. We also call on MINUSMA to further
improve its communication with the Malian authorities
and local communities. Japan welcomes the issuance
of the internal review of MINUSMA (S/2023/36),
providing us with a clear view of MINUSMA’s status
and the parameters that the discussion of options for
MINUSMA should be based on. We look forward to
engaging with our colleagues in discussing the future
of MINUSMA in the coming months.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Council is here to assist the people and the Government
of Mali. Strengthening cooperation between Malians
20/24

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and wish you and
the other new members of the Council every success.

On the political front, I welcome the consensus
on the significant progress made during the reporting
period. In its desire to rebuild the Malian State, the
Government is continuing its implementation of political
and institutional reforms as part of a process that is both
transparent and inclusive. In that regard, I am pleased
to inform the Council that following the submission
of a draft of the new constitution to His Excellency
Colonel Assimi Goita, Transitional President and Head
of State, the commission mandated to prepare the new
constitution remains engaged in consultations with key
sectors of Malian society to achieve a foundational text
that enjoys broad consensus with regard to the major
aspirations of the Malian people. Following those
consultations, the Government intends to submit the
draft constitution for a final decision to be taken by the
Malian people via a referendum that is scheduled for
March. The Government is also resolutely committed to
implementing other priority initiatives that are already
on its calendar. They include the election of a local
communities adviser in June, the election of members
of the National Assembly in October and November
and lastly the election of the President of the Republic,
scheduled for February 2024.
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

In line with the Government’s desire to see
constitutional order restored, the members of the
Independent Authority for Election Management were
installed by the President of the transition and Head
of State on 10 January 2023. In addition, the first
joint meeting between the Authority and the Steering
Committee for the Referendum and General Elections
was held on 23 January. Arrangements are under way
for the establishment of the Independent Authority for
Election Management’s offices in all constituencies
throughout the national territory and in diplomatic and
consular missions, with a view to better organizing
the referendum and elections. I would also like to
underscore that the convening of a social conference
from 17 to 22 October 2022 and the forthcoming adoption
of a pact on social stability, with the involvement of
the trade unions, will contribute to calming the social
climate. The Government has furthermore accelerated
its administrative reorganization of the territory by
adopting six draft laws in the Council of Ministers,
notably on establishing the boundary lines of the newly
created regions.
With regard to the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali resulting from the Algiers
process — the subject of much debate by the
Council — I would like to solemnly reiterate the
commitment of the Malian Government to pursuing
its rigorous and unequivocal implementation, as we
remain convinced that it is paramount for achieving
lasting stability in our country. I can assure members
that undeniable progress has been made, particularly
in the framework of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process.
We have integrated 1,718 ex-combatants from the
Coordination des Mouvements de l’Azawad, the
Plateforme and the Mouvements de l’inclusivité
into the national defence and security forces. The
Government is also working towards the development
of a new DDR programme for the period 2023–2027,
as well as an integration programme for 2023–2025
to further strengthen the process. With a view to
speeding up the implementation of the Agreement,
the Government adopted a decision in the Council
of Ministers on 18 October 2022 to set up an ad hoc
commission responsible for resolving outstanding
issues, in particular those relating to the chain of
command in the national defence and security forces
and the integration of senior civilian officials from the
signatory movements into national institutions.

S/PV.9251

The development aspects of the Agreement have
also received sustained attention from the Government,
which is working to enhance development in the
northern regions. The Government remains determined
to implement the 16 projects it launched in 2021,
with the full involvement of the signatory parties, so
as to create conditions conducive to delivering peace
dividends to all the people of Mali.
Despite the undeniable progress that has been made,
I regret that the reporting period was marked by the
withdrawal of signatory groups from the mechanisms of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee. That decision is
all the more regrettable as it runs counter to the positive
momentum that has accumulated in recent months.
We hope to reach a common understanding with the
signatory movements in the near future, because they
are indeed our brothers from the same country. We also
appreciate the participation of the signatory movements,
standing alongside us in the same Government.
To address the specific issue raised by the
representative of the United States with regard to his
request that the Government participate at an appropriate
level in the Agreement Monitoring Committee, I would
like to recall that the Government remains committed
to the implementation of the Agreement. Allow me to
clarify the situation. We are a State, whereas the other
parties are signatory movements. The Government has
indicated that for a minister of the Malian Government
to participate in meetings of the follow-up committee,
it would like the principal leaders of the signatory
movements to be present. There is an imbalance owing
to the fact that every time the Malian Government
sends ministers, we are talking about experts. As
States, we should all understand that there are protocols
for working together in such a framework. Mali has
not demanded anything but reciprocity. Whenever
the principal leaders of the signatory movements are
in attendance, Mali will also send members of the
Government. That has absolutely nothing to do with the
Government’s level of commitment, because when an
expert participates, they have the full authority to take
decisions on such issues. We would be glad if members
were better informed about the situation, but that is all
I have to say on that specific issue.
With regard to the suspension of the work of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, Mali has asked
Algeria, as leader of the international mediation
efforts and Chair of the follow-up committee, to hold a
ministerial-level meeting of the Agreement Monitoring

23-0257921/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

Committee as early as February 2023 in order to
resume the dialogue. I commend those members of the
Council that have appealed to our brothers to return to
the table so that we may continue working together to
overcome the challenges we face. I welcome Algeria’s
constructive actions and enormous efforts to bring the
parties together to find a solution. I appreciate all and
any support that could be extended to us in that regard.
On the security front, the Government regrets
that the report of the Secretary-General once again
fails to mention the efforts and actions of the Malian
Defence and Security Forces in securing the territory
and protecting civilians. Such progress is to the great
satisfaction of the Malian people, although we recognize
that major challenges persist in some places. I believe
that the position adopted by the Secretary-General’s
report is also reflected in what I have heard around this
table. Few delegations have praised the work carried
out by the Malian Defence and Security Forces or
paid tribute to the thousands of Malian soldiers who
have died on the ground — I believe it is important
to highlight those facts. The Malian Defence and
Security Forces remain determined to continue their
offensive actions, which were launched in December
2021 and are aimed at preventing and combating the
indiscriminate attacks and reprisals perpetrated by
extremist groups against our civilian populations and
their property. The offensive posture adopted by the
Malian Defence and Security Forces has resulted in
not only the neutralization of many terrorists and the
destruction of their safe havens but also the voluntary
surrender of several of those terrorists, particularly in
the regions of Douentza and Mopti.
As part of the implementation of the new integrated
strategy for the centre of Mali, as mentioned by the
Special Representative, the State is strengthening
its presence across the territory, contrary to the
figures provided in the report. In 2022, the situation
of vacant posts in the centre of the country improved
significantly, the details of which may be found in the
note published yesterday. That increased State presence
is contributing to improvements in the provision of
basic social services to the population in the areas still
affected by insecurity.
On the question of human rights, which has also
been subject to much commentary around this table,
the 58 per cent reduction in cases of human rights
violations noted by the Secretary-General is the result
not only of the offensive operations undertaken by the
22/24

27/01/2023

Malian Defence and Security Forces against extremist
groups, in strict compliance with international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, but also
of the increased State presence over a large part of the
country’s territory, despite the security challenges.
I assure the Council that the Government of Mali,
while firmly opposing any idea of instrumentalizing or
politicizing the issue, will continue to work tirelessly
for the protection and promotion of human rights on
our territory in accordance with Mali’s ancestral
humanist values, as reaffirmed in our contemporary
national and international commitments. In terms of
justice and reparations, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General pointed out, the President of
the transition enacted laws on 15 November 2022 that
established the general rules for reparations for harm
caused by grave human rights violations.
Regarding MINUSMA’s operational challenges,
I note that the report of the Secretary-General
acknowledges the positive development of the new flight
request procedure agreed to on 15 November 2022,
which has enabled an increase in the number of approved
flights. I think the Council should register the good news
rather than just focusing on the so-called obstacles and
restrictions, and those positive results can be attributed
to the new procedure’s emphasis on decentralizing
coordination and clarifying responsibilities. That
encouraging progress is unfortunately undercut by the
fact that the data collected by the drones is sometimes
partial or unusable, and I believe that collaboration
should be strengthened in that regard. I would like to
remind the Council that despite everything the drone
flights have been resumed, and we can hope that Mali’s
expectations will be met. I would like to remind the
Council once again that my Government’s actions are
critical to the degree that they are dictated by national
security concerns, and we remain open to working
with the Mission to identify the solutions needed to
move forward.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, the
Government remains concerned about the issue,
especially since the humanitarian needs in Mali are only
34 per cent funded, as we all know. That gives me an
opportunity to appeal to the international community
as a whole to give the Sahel, especially my country, the
same degree of attention it has accorded other regions
of the world in crisis. For its part, my Government will
continue to work to provide the necessary assistance
to our compatriots in vulnerable situations, including
23-02579

27/01/2023

The situation in Mali

those living in camps for internally displaced persons
and refugees. We also continue to believe firmly that
improving the humanitarian situation is very closely
linked to stabilizing our territory.
I would like to assure the Council that Mali remains
faithful to its commitment to pan-Africanism, peace and
its policies of good-neighbourliness, non-interference
in the internal affairs of States and the strengthening
of friendly relations based on mutual respect and trust.
It was in that spirit that Colonel Goïta, President of the
Transitional Government, decided in full independence
to grant pardons to and fully revoke the sentences of the
49 Ivorians convicted under the Malian justice system.
I would now like to make some preliminary
observations about the Secretary-General’s report on
the internal review of MINUSMA (S/2023/36). The
Government of Mali has taken note of the report. We
note at first glance that its proposals do not take into
account the legitimate expectations of the Malian
people, which as the Council knows are about security
first and foremost. The fact is that for the most part,
the Secretary-General’s options for reconfiguration
are limited to changing the number of personnel in
MINUSMA or converting it into a special political
mission, which in fact is not far from the actual status
quo, which has not really responded to the situation.
The Government of Mali would like to point out
that the main challenge facing MINUSMA is its ability
to adapt its mandate to the security conditions in which
it is deployed, and as we all know, improving that
requires a change of doctrine in this house and of the
rules of engagement, but above all it requires genuine
political will in order to help our country emerge from
the crisis. There needs to be a real willingness between
MINUSMA and the Malian Defence and Security
Forces to cooperate on the ground and turn the situation
around. It was with that in mind that the Government of
Mali contributed positively to the consultations for the
internal review, in the hope that it would respond to the
Malian people’s aspirations. Unfortunately it did not.
However, the Government of Mali will remain open to
dialogue in the coming months with the United Nations
to identify a way forward.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the people
of Mali’s sovereign choice to control their own destiny.
Under the authority and guidance of the President of the
Transitional Government and Head of State of Mali, the
Government will continue to pursue its current actions,

S/PV.9251

which should culminate in a return to a peaceful and
secure constitutional order. We also remain committed
to defending our national territory, protecting the
people and their property, implementing the peace
agreement, respecting and ensuring respect for human
rights and improving the country’s governance and
the living conditions of our fellow citizens. To achieve
those ambitious goals, the Government of Mali remains
ready to cooperate with all its partners — I repeat,
all — including our neighbours, the countries of the
region and regional and international organizations,
naturally in strict respect for Mali’s sovereignty, its
strategic choices and the choices of its partners, and the
interests of the people of Mali.
Let me remind the Council once again that the
President of the Transitional Government established
three key principles that will govern our relations with
our partners going forward, one of which — related to
comments I have heard around this table regarding the
cooperation between Mali and Russia — is State-toState cooperation. Mali will not continue to justify its
choice of partners. We make those choices based on
specific contexts, and as the representative of Russia
has just indicated, that cooperation in the areas of
training and equipment is being undertaken in full
respect for international standards. We hope that will
understood in order to enable our country to move
forward and ensure its security. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to
all of Mali’s friends, bilateral and multilateral, for the
significant efforts they have made in support of ending
the crisis. Lastly, I want to pay tribute to the memory
of all the victims of the crisis in Mali — civilian and
military, foreign and Malian — who have sacrificed
their lives on the battlefield.
Before I finish my statement, I want to express my
delegation’s great surprise on discovering that a Malian
would brief the Council at today’s meeting, and I have
to say that we were not informed about it. We do not
know that person, the organization she represents or on
whose behalf she was speaking, and we naturally doubt
her representativeness and credibility in appearing
before the Council. It is important for the members of
the Council themselves to remember that using civil
society to pursue hidden agendas does not serve the
cause of civil society. That person could have instead
met with the Malian authorities in order for us to work
together to protect the entire community.

23-0257923/24

S/PV.9251

The situation in Mali

It goes without saying that Mali is an ancient
country with a multi-confessional tradition, and a
multi-ethnic country with a mosaic of peoples. Neither
our Government or even its army would ever engage
in fighting any part of its own population. I think that
the people with hidden agendas who have succeeded
elsewhere in pitting communities against one another
and creating ethnic wars have tried to do the same
in Mali. But it has not worked. The Malian army, a
professional, multi-ethnic force, will continue to work to
defend all Malians — the entire Malian community — to
strengthen our national cohesion. I believe that what
the country needs today is not messages of division but

24/24

27/01/2023

messages that unite us. Mali will continue to work to
that end in full respect for human rights and with the
aim of bringing Malians together. And we hope that
within the framework of our partnership, the Council
will also be able to review its working methods so as to
strengthen its collaboration with my country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

23-02579
