24
743 (Vlll).

General Assembly-Eighth Session
Educational conditions in Non-Self•
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by resolution 445 (V) adopted on
12 December 1950, it approved the special report 2
on education drawn up in 1950 as a brief but considered indication of the importance of educational advancement and of the problems still to be faced in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the further report prepared in 1953 by the
Committee on Information s from Non-Self-Governing Territories on educational conditions in these Territories,
1. Approves. this further report of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
as a supplement to the report approved in 1950;
2. Emphasizes that the objeLtives of education in
Non-Self-Governing Territories are:
(a) To develop moral and civic consciousness and
responsibility among the peoples, and to enable them
to take an increasing share of responsibility in the
conduct of their own affairs;
(b) To raise the standards of living of the peoples
by helping them to improve their economic productivity
and standards of health;
(c) To promote the social progress of the Territories, taking into account the basic cultural values
and the aspirations of the peoples concerned;
( d) To secure the extension of the intellectual
development of the peoples so as to provide for them
access to all levels of culture;
3. Affirms that, in accordance with the above objectives, the process of education should be designed
to familiarize the inhabitants with and train them
in the use of the tools of economic, social and political
progress, with a view to the attainment of a full
moo.sure of self-government;
4 .. Recommends to the Administering Members
that, m order to carry out the said objectives and in
general to solve the educational problems of the NonSelf-Governing Territories, they should seek the technical advice of the United Nations Technical Assistance Administration and make the greatest possible use
of the facilities of the specialized agencies;
5. Recomme!"d~ further to the Administering Members that they similarly make the greatest possible use
of offers that may be made to them by other States
Members of the United Nations through the SecretaryGei:ieral or through_ the specialized agencies concerned
or m other appropriate ways, for the purpose of facilitating the educational advancement of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories by such means as making avail~ble fellowships, scholarships and internships to qualified students from these Territories·
6. Invites the Secretary-General' to communicate
the report on education and the present resolution to
the Mer:i~ers '?f the United Nations responsible for
the adm1mstrat~on of Non~Self-Governing Territories,
to the Economic and Social Council to the Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agencies concerned
for their consideration.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly Fifth Session
Supplement No. 17, part II.
'
·
s Ibid., Eighth Session, Supplement No. 15, part II.

744 (VIII). Association of representatives from
Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work
of the Committee on Information from Non•
Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Whereas the direct association of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies has been considered as an effective means of promoting the progress
of the populations of these Territories towards a status
of equality with the States Members of the United
Nations,
Whereas it has been recognized that the direct association of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
work of the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories can be of further assistance in
promoting the p;ogress of these Territories and their
peoples towards the goals set forth in Chapter XI of
the Charter of the United Nations,
. Whereas the Administering Members have been invited to. make po~sible the association of qualified rep:
resentattve inhabitants of the Territories in the work
of the Committee,
Consid_e~ing .the technical difficulties advanced by
!he Admm1stermg _Mer:ibers on the question of acceptmg the collaborat10n m the work of the Committee
of Non-Self Governing Territories as "associate members",
. Considering th~t t~e principle of unity of representation must be mamtamed,
Noting th~t the M_em?er States administering NonSelf-Governmg Terntones have from time to time attached representative inhabitants of the Territories to
their delegations,
Considering that this practice should be stimulated
and developed,
l. Invite~ the M~mb~r State~ administering NonSelf-Govermng Terntones, the mhabitants of which
have_ attai1:ed a large measure of responsibility for economic, _social a!ld educational policies, to attach to their
?elegattons, without prejudice to the principle stated
m the fitth parag:raph of the preamble, indigenous representatives specially qualified to speak on these matters as they relate to these Territories;
2. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to.continue in accordance with General Assembly resolution 647 (VII) of
10 Decem?er. 1952, the study of means of securing
~ progressive mc_rease in the participation of duly qualified representatives of the peoples of the Non-SelfGovernmg Territories in its work.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
745 (VIII). Representation on the Committee
o'!1 l~ormation from Non-Self-Governing Terntor1es
The General Assembly,
. Noting that the work of the Committee on lnforma!JOn fro;n N on-Self-G~verning: Territories, particularly
m rel~tl?~ to the special studies of certain functional
fields 1mttated under General Assembly resolution 333
(IV) of 2 December 1949, has been materially assisted
~Y th~ action <;Jf States members of the Committee,
mcl_u~mg c~rtam 7:1-on-administering Members, in assoc1atmg with their delegations perspns with special

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee
qualifications in the functional fields studied by the
Committee,
Considering that this is a practice which might be
extended with advantage to the work of the Committee,
in that the pooling and exchange of knowledge and
experience thus achieved will enable it more efficaciously
to assess the economic, social and educational problems
of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the light of the
solutions being found to those problems elsewhere in
the world,
1. Commends the action of those Members which
have included specialist advisers in their delegations
to the Committee;
2. Expresses the hope that those Members which
have not hitherto found it possible to do so, will find
it appropriate to associate with their delegations persons
specially qualified in the functional fields within the
Committee's purview.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

746 (VID). Employment of international staff
from Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Considering that the paragraph 3 of Article 101 of the
Charter of the United Nations, regarding the employment of the staff of the United Nations, states that, in
addition to the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity in employment of Secretariat staff, due regard should be paid to
the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible,
Having regard to the objectives set forth in Chapters XI and XII of the Charter in respect of the advancement of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
and Trust Territories,
Considering that the services of individuals from
Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories in the Secretariat of the United Nations will contribute to a
wider geographical coverage in the recruitment of staff,
Considering the statement 4 made by the SecretaryGeneral that he has already taken note of the wishe~
expressed in the Fourth Committee on this matter,
l. Recommends that the Secretary-General consider
the desirability of continuing and increasing the recruitment of suitably qualified inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories for the Secretariat of the
United Nations;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the specialized agencies to the present resolution with a view to a similar policy being followed as far
as possible in the secretariats of those agencies.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
7 4 7 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam
The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 650 (VII) of 20 December 1952 it invited the Committee set up to study

the factors which should be taken into account in deciding whether a Territory is or is not a Territory
whose people have not yet attained a full measure
of self-government to examine carefully the documents
submitted by the Netherlands Government relating to
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam in the light of
resolution 648 (VII) of 10 December 1952,
Having received and considered the report 6 of the
Ad Hoe Committee on Factors (Non-Self-Governing
Territories) established by resolution 648 (VII),
Having taken note of the statement 6 of the representative of the Netherlands that the negotiations between representatives of the Nether lands, the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam, which were adjourned in
the year 1952, will shortly be resumed,
1. Notes urith satisfaction the progress made by
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam towards selfgovernment ;
2. Considers that the new status of the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam can only be rightly appraised after
the said negotiations have led to a final result and this
has been embodied in constitutional provisions;
3. Expresses to the Netherlands Government its
confidence that, as a result of the negotiations, a new
status will be attained by the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam representing a full measure of self-government
in fulfilment of the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter;
4. Invites the Government of the Netherlands to
communicate to the Secretary-General the result of these
negotiations as well as the provisions mentioned in
paragraph 2 above;
5. Invites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to examine these communications in connexion with the information already transmitted and to report thereon to the General Assembly ;
6. Requests the Government of the Netherlands
to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General the information specified in Article 73 e of the Charter in
regard to the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam until
such time as the General Assembly takes a decision
that the transmission of information in regard to these
Territories should be discontinued.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

748 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of Puerto Rico
The General Assembly,
Considering that, in resolution 222 (III) of 3 No~ember 1948, the General Assembly, while welcommg any development of self-government in Non-SelfGoverning Territories, considers it essential that the
United Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional status of any such Territory as a result of
which the government responsible for the transmis~ion. under Article 73 e of the Charter, of information
!n respect_ of that T~rritory thinks it unnecessary or
mappropnate to contmue such a practice,
Having received the communications 7 dated 19 January and 20 March 1953 informing the United Nations
'' See document A/2428 .
See Official Reco,:ds of the General Assembly, Eighth Sess10,1, Fourth Co111mittec, 343rd meeting, para. 70.
7
See document A/ AC.35/L.121.
•

4
•
See Official RecC!rds of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 342nd meeting.

25

6
