UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

14 JULY

197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

571)

. . . . . . . + . . , , , . . . . . I , . a. . . I , q

. . . . . . ,. . . . .. . .. .. . . , .. . .. .. ..... ... ..

Complaint
by Senegal:
Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1025 I) .

S/PV.1571

1
’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supphmts

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly vo!ums of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIRST MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
Presidcnl: Mr. J. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

14 JuIy

1971, at 10 a.m.

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rench): The
representatives of Togo, Mauritius and Zambia have requested by letter to be invited to participate in the debates
of the Council [S/l 0263, S/10264 and S/10265J. I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite them to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
5. I invite the representatives of Mauritius, Togo and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them in the Council
chamber, it being understood that they will be invited to
take places at the Council table when it is their turn to
speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 571)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Senegal:
Letter dated 6 JuIy 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations addressedto
the President of the Security Council (S/1025 1).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. K. Ramphul
(Mauritius), Mr. M. Y. Eklo (Togo) and Mr. K. S. B. Nyirenda (Zambia) took the places reserved for them in the
Council chamber.

Adoption of the agenda

6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frencbj: The
Security Council will now resume consideration of the item
on its agenda. The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Mauritius, whom I invite to take a place at
.
the Council table and to make his statement.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Senegal
Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 025 1)

7. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius) (interpretation
from
Frenchj: Mr, President, while thanking the Security Council
for allowing me to take part in this debate, I should like to

I. The PRESIDENT {interpretation from French): In
accordance with the previous decision of the Security
Council, I shall invite the representatives of Senegal,
Guinea, Mali, Sudan and Mauritania to participate, without
the right to vote, in the debate on the item before the
Security Council.

express our satisfaction at seeing the representative of a
friendly country conducting these proceedings. On the
occasion of your national holiday, which I trust you will
still have time to celebrate today, I should like to extend to
the French people, io which we are bound by so many past
and present ties, our sincere wishes for happiness and
progress.

2. 1 invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal to
take a place at the Council table.

8. In regard to the armed aggression perpetrated last
November by Portugal on the sister Republic of Guinea, 1
said in this chamberJ1560th meeting] that the Portuguese
colonial wars in Guinea (B&au), Angola and Mozambique
represented a threat to the neighbouring States since these
colonial wars, if the United Nations did not put a stop to
them, could spread to those countries in the form of acts of
aggression or even general armed conflict.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. K. Gaye
(Senegal) took a place at the Security Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Rench): In view
of the limited number of places at the CounciI table, I
invite, in accordance with the Council’s practice, the
representatives of Guinea, Mali, Mauritania and Sudan to
take the places reserved for them in the Council chamber, it
being understood that they wiI.I be invited to take places at
the Council table when it is their turn to speak.

9. The day before yesterday /I%Pth
meetingj, in an
eloquent and detaiIed statement, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal adduced facts and figures adding to the
already crushing weight of evidence that there is indeed an
escalation of acts of hostility and blatant aggression by
Portugal against Senegal. ‘an escalation which may well end
in war between Senegal and Portugal and which accordingly
constitutes a threat to international peace and security in

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E.-H. A. Tour&
(Guineaj, Mr. S. Daore’ (Mali), Mr. M. E. M Bal (Mauritania) and Mr. A. Eisa (Sudan) took the places reserved for
them in the Council chamber.
1

/.

c
- .

\

the region. It is even a threat to the peace of all
independent Africa, becausethe other Statesof Africa are
resolved to forestall events like thosewhich took placein
Guinea last Novemberandwill no longer tolerateencroachments on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of any
one OF them. If Senegalhas once again appealedto the
highest organ of the United Nations,the Security Council,
it is becausethe African States continue to believein the
Council’s mission, that of maintainingpeacein the world.
IO. VChenthey becameMembersof the United Nations,all
the African countries, including Mauritius, affirmed their
devotion to the idealsof peacewhich we are all supposedto
follow and defend at all costs,peacewhich canbe ensured
only if the Security Council agreesto play the important
role incumbent on it under the Charter. The States
membersof the Organizationof African Unity still believe
in the United Nations andthe Security Council, and it is to
be hoped they will continue to do so, for we must avoid a
situation in which they may have unilateralrecourse,that is
t0 say, outside the United Nations, to actionswllich might
be necessary to defend, through solidarity, one of their
number which wasthe victim 0f armedaggression.

14. These are questionswhich one cannot help asking
It is therefore desirable, if not essential, that
Portugal’s partners in NATO should make their views
oneself.

clearly known so as to avoid any misunderstanding. We
believe that by deciding to take measurescommensurate
with the seriousness
of the situation the Council asa whole
will help to clarify the situation and thereby to induce the
countriesconcernedto face up to their responsibilities.
15. Last December,after the publication of the report of
the United Nations Special Mission,2 I said here in this
chamber, refening to the decisionthat the CounciI was to
take, that that decisionshould be the one appropriate to a
specific case of aggressionby one Member State against
another MemberState pursuant to the pertinent provisions
of the Charter. So long as Portugal has reason to believe
that the Council will not have recourseto theseprovisions,
it will continue its acts of aggressionnot only against
Senegalbut alsoagainstGuinea, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the People’sRepublic of the Congo, the
United Republicof Tanzaniaand Zambia.

16. At its recent sunlmit conference the Organization of
African Unity reaffirmed its determination to free the
1I. At its last summit conference* the Organization of
continent of Africa from foreign domination and conseAfrican Unity confined itself to condemningthe aggressive cIuently considered ways of rendering more effective
acts of Portugal againstSenegal,but it did not state that it
assistanceto the liberation movementsin the Territories
would limit itself to verbal condcmnatjonsif the escalation concerned.We might recall in passingthat the ovcrwhelmOf the aggressionagainstSenegalshould continue, OJ,to
ing majority of StatesMembersof the United Nations have
speakmore generaliy. if an armedconflict like that already
recognizedthe legitimacy of the struggleof theseliberation
undergone by the Republic01”C;uineashouldbreak out in
movements.
one of the cnuntries bordering on the African Territories
17. I would venture to suggestthat members of the
under Portuguesedomination.
Security Council shouldtake account of this context of the
legitimate struggle of the freedom fighters in considering
12. Despite the irrefutable proof conccmingcriminal acts
the questionnow before them.
by Portugal against Guinea, these acts have gone unpunished. We believe that it is this very impunity which
18. Obviously the problem the United Nations must face
encouragesPortugal to continue its acts of aggression
and
now openIy to attack a neighbour of Guinea (Bissau), is the generalproblem of the complete decolonisation of
Senegal. Furthermore, asgrecedingspeakers
have reminded Africa. Until an end is put to Portuguesecolonialism,peace
will be threatenedin Africa. This meansthat it is necessary
us, the Council hasalready requestedPortugalto ceaseall
not o~dy to prevent Portugal from committing aggression
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
against
its colonies’neighboursbut also, and above all, to
Senegal. Thus the escalation of Portugueseaggression
against Senegal is a challengeby Portugal to this august impel it to withdraw from the territories it continues to
occupy contrary to United Nations resolutions.
body, a challengewhich the Council must vigorously take
.
up in the very interest of the maintenanceof international
19.
In
this
debate particular account should be taken of
peaceand security.
the caseof Guinea (Bissau).For everyone knows that the
13. It is clear that it is no longer sufficient to condemn valiant freedom fighters in the African Party for the
independenceof Guinea and CapeVerde-described by the
Portugal; it is now necessary to take energetic and
Lisbon authorities as mere subversive elements-already
appropriate measures.In this regardwe mustemphasizethe
control vast regions freed from the Portuguese colonial
fact that Portugal is a memberof NATO. Sinceits more
yoke. Fallen back on the last bastions, which must
powerful Atlantic partnershappen to be membersof this
inevitably fall, Portugal, in despair,may have recourseto
Council, we arc entitled to wonder whether all precautions
more and more serious acts of aggressionagainst the
are being taken to prevent Portugal from usingin Africa the
neighboursof Guinea (Bissau)on the pretext that they are
weapons to which it may have accessas a member of
contributing to its defeat, which is inevitable.
NATO. It may alsobe wonderedwhetherPortugalis not t0
someextent encouragedby a certain solidarity on the part
20. Against this background, we believe that the situation
of its Atlantic partners.May there not evenbe a question0f
is grave indeed. Senegal,in calling for the present debate,
Complicity?
hasgiven the Security Council an opportunity to act before
-.-...--it is too late.
1 Eighth session of the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity held at Addis Ababa from 21 to 23
June1971.

2 SeeOfficial Records of the Secun’ty Council, Twenty-ffth
Special Supplement No, 2.

2

Year,

21. There is no doubt as to the position of my country.
Faithful to the Charter of the Organisation of African
Unity, Mauritius declares its support not only for Senegal
but for any African country that is the victim of aggression.
22. We should like once again to emphasize the importance of the role which could and should be played by the
countries members of NATO in solving the problem before
the Council. Some of them are our friends. We hope that
we shall not find ourselves in a situation in which we must
choose between that friendship and our soljdatity with the
brother peoples of Africa.
23. The PRESiDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Togo. f
invite hiin to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

31. Senegal once again is the victim of acts of aggression
by Portugal, as was tile courageous people of Guinea nine
months ago.
32, But what is at issue? Senegal is an African country
and does not have a common border with Portugal, which is
more than 6,000 kilometres away from Dakar in Europe.
The people of Senegal has never bothered and indeed could
never bother the people of Lisbon, One wonders, then, why
Portugal assumes the right to disrupt peace in Africa, to
sow death and destroy homes?
33. The reply to this question may be found in a system
which is more than 400 years old. For more than four
centuries Africa has been in torment, Its illness is wellknown : colonialism.
34. Colonialism is not, as some would have us believe, a
civilizing mission, but is designed to seize by force foreign
territory and take from the inhabitants the wealth oftheir
mines and forests. President Jomo Kenyatta was right when
he stated twenty years ago: “When they came, we had the
land and they had the Bible. Today, we have the Bible but
they have our land.” Colonialism has thus been defmed. It
is, in fact, a permanent act of aggression, and struggles for
national liberation are legitimate means of selfdefence.

24. Mr. EKLO (Togo) (interpretation
from Frcrzch):
Mr. President, first I should like to perform a pleasant duty
and express to you, on behalf of the African group in the
United Nations, which it is my honour and privilege to
preside over in the course of this month of July, as well as
to aB the members of the Security Council, our thanks for
this opportunity to participate in the debate without the
right to vote.

35. f have laid heavy stress on the problem of colonialism
because this is in the opinion of our delegation the very
substance of the matter before us. As long as there remains
any plot of African land which is colonized, there will
always be strugdes for liberation, the support of African
peoples, acts of aggression by colonial countries, threats to
peace and meetings of the Security Council called for the
purpose of issuing condemnations. But what is the result of
these condemnations if we refuse to strike at the heart of
the evil? What would be the purpose of trying to fell a tree
by only tearing off its leaves? There is no point in
condemning colonialism alone without trying to eliminate
it at all costs.

25. Mr. President, your courageous people-the people of
France-today
celebrates its national holiday, 14 Jufy,
symbol of the French fight against injustice and for liberty,
equality 3~1d fraternity among men.
26. Equality and fraternity in Angola, Mo/.ambique and
Guinea (Bissau)? They certainly have not existed ever since
Portugal took over these Territories: Portugal has destroyed
these ideals.
27. And what of liberty? The Guineans in Guinea (Bissau)
have not the slightest freedom--not even to flee the colonial
war and seek asylum in neighbouring States-were they to
try to do this, they would only step on mines.

36. These barbarous acts of aggression committed by
Portugal against the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
People’s Republic of the Congo, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia, Guinea and today Senegal are but the
symptoms of a dying regime. ‘This is an encouraging sign
which proves that the liberation movements are doing very
well within their respective countries.

28. Today, the Security Council is meeting to consider
and condemn, if necessary, an act of injustice committed
against a peaceful African country: Senegal, For Africa, it
would seem that there are still perhaps latter-day Bastilles
to be stormed: one in Lisbon, another in Pretoria. This is an
indication of the importance that African countries ascribe
to Senegal’s complaint against Portugal.

.37. By greeting the freedom-fighters and @ving asylum to
those who flee Portuguese barbarism, Senegal and Guinea
have, with honour and courage, performed their duty of
solidarity toward the African peoples that still live under
ihe yoke of coloniafism.

29. In November of last year, the Security Council met as
a matter of urgency to deal with a serious situation which
was created in Africa as a result of an armed attack by
Portugal against the Republic of Guinea, an independent
and sovereign country. But before that, the Security
Council had already met on a number of occasions to
condemn Portugal which tramples underfoot the most
elementary rules of international law.

38. One wonders, then, what right Portugal has to deny
the colonial people they stiff control their freedom, dignity
and independence? What right does Portugal have to wage
an atrocious war against millions of Africans who only wish
to live as free men on their own soil?

30. Today, once again, Africa, as a whole, in support of
Senegal, has brought a complaint to the Council against the
same country which is a Member of the United Nations and
a signatory to the Charter.

39. There can be no compromise between freedom and
slavery. There can be no compromise between colonized
countries and colonizing countries. The former fight for
3

their freedom; the latter oppress in order to continue to
exist and to exploit and pillage with impunity.
40. Portugal remains the only country that is unaware that
throughout history there has never been a foreign army, no
matter how powerful, that has been able to put down an
insurrection on its own soil.
41. My country, Togo, gave its support to the brother
people of Senegal and unconditionally condemns colonialism in all its forms. As recently as 21 June last, General
Etienne Eyaddma, President of the Togolese Republic,and a
true son of our country, inaugurated at Piya, in the
northern part of Togo, a monument to the martyrs of
colonialism who laid down their lives for a free and
independent Togo. This is a great tribute which my country
and government have paid to the great African freedomfighters,
42. As for the African Group in the United Nations, our
Support of the sister Republic of Senegal is unanimous. A

letter, signed by alI the members of the Group /S/10259
04 Add.l/, was sent to you, Mr. President, calling on the
Security Council once again to condemn the aggressor:
Portugal.
43. What difference exists between invading countries
with armed force and laying deadly mines in those
sovereign countries? In both instances there exists a
criminal premeditated intention to kill men, women, old
people and children.
44. If yesterday Portugal wasable, with powerful means at
its disposal, to invade Guinea, it can certainly quite easily
lay deadly mines in Senegal. This would undoubtedly be
well within that country’s capability. Senegal’s complaint
and the irrefutable evidence presented by the Foreign
Minister of Senegal, Mr. Gaye, are, we believe, beyond
question,
45. The African Group &Is upon the Security Council
vigorously to condemn Portugal once again for its acts of
aggression against the people of the Republic of Senegal.
46. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Fkenchj: The
next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
47. Mr. NYIRENDA (Zambia): Mr. President, I wish first,
through you, to thank most sincerely all the members of
the Security Council for having kindly permitted the
delegation of the Republic of Zambia to participate,
without the right to vote, in this very crucial Council
consideration of a grave situation.
48. Once again, within a period of about eight months,
this Council has before it a serious complaint, contained in
document S/l0251 of 6 July 1971, from a peace-loving
Member State of the United Nations, this time the sister
Repubiic of Senegal, against no other Member State of the
United Nations than the same unrepentent FascistPortugal.
Today, as on numerous previous occasions, Portugal stands
condemned for its repeated heinous acts of untold murders
and kidnappings of innocent populations, wanton armed

attacks and the violation of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Senegal. As is well known,
these acts are contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and to the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States ln accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution
2625 (XXV)l. to which Portugal 1sa signatory,
49. It goes without saying that the catalogue of Postuguese criminaI acts of aggression against the Republic of
Senegal so eloquently represented to this Council on
Monday by the Foreign h%inister of Senegal (1569th
meeting/ was staggering and sobering and, indeed, should
be a ready conscience-bothering reminder to Portugal’s
allies of darkness,
50. It is disturbing to note that other neighbouring
independent African States such as the Republic of Guinea,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United RepubIic of Tanzania and, indeed, my own country Zambia have
similarly been constant targets of Fascist PortugaI’s ini@tous acts of aggression and blackmaiL It is evident that if
each of those States, including the Republic of Senegal
itself, had complained to the Security Cou~~cil flowing
each act of aggression this Council would have been sitting
almost continuously during the past few years to consider
the serious complaints brought before it against one and the
same State, Portugal.
51, Is it not strange that within a period of eight months
after the consideration of Portugal’s treacherous invasion of
the peace-loving sister State of the Republic of Guinea last
November and December the Council should again convene
to consider the iniquitous acts of that same State? One
even wonders whether Portugal and her supporters have the
very rudiments of conscience and international morality.
52. The people of Zambia, and Indeed the peopfe of
Africa as a whoIe, share with the innocent people of
Senegal their cries of agony, their immense pain and sense
of loss. The great Senegalese people have expressed their
firm desire and determination to remain free and independent, at the same time as wishing their oppressed brothers
and sisters in Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) to
be equally’freeand independent. Like the people of Senegal
the people of Zambia deeply cherish those indivisible
principles and aspirations, which cannot be compromised.
As a faithful Member State of the United Nations, the
Republic of Senegal, in conformity with the accepted
norms of international law, vigilantly respects and abides by
the ideals and principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and in numerous General Assembly and Security
Council decisions which, in sharp contrast, imperialist
Portugal evidently does not.
53. Thus Zambia, a similarly constant target of Portugal’s
crimina1 acts of banditry and aggression, cannot possibIy
stand idly by whenever a peace-loving State l&e the sister
Republic of Senegal is threatened,
54. My delegation has time and again maintained before
this Council and elsewhere that the crux of the whole
matter regarding these disturbing and criminal events

4

squarely hinges on the question of outmoded Portuguese
colonialism, which is contrary to the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and other relevant United Nations decisions. To
date, Portugal has not recognized that important Declaration on the inalienable right of all colonial countries and
peoples to selfdeterminatlon
and independence. The
peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) are
instead still languishing under the rigid yoke of Portuguese
colonial rule and oppression. To that extent the indepen.
dent African States bordering on those Territories have in
particular become victims of the Portuguese and allied
imperialist complex in Africa.
55. Consequently a situation of immense instability, constituting a grave threat to international peace and security,
prevails on the whole continent of Africa. Unless colonialism is liquidated in the African continent that untenable
‘situation is bound to continue in the future.
56. We have stated time and again, and we again firmly
maintain today, that the numerous Portuguese infamous
massive acts of aggression against independent Africa, and
the very waging of its iniquitous colonial wars in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (B&au), could not have been
meaningfully sustained without the loyal supporting hand
of the NATO allied countries, It was for that basic reason
that last December we unreservedly condemned the choice
of Lisbon as the venue for the NATO Ministerial Council
meeting as it constituted a further demonstration of
support for and the giving of a certificate of respectability
by the NATO countries to Portugal’s colonialism and
exploitation in Africa,
57. In spite of world-wide protest the NATO countries
went ahead and held the meeting in Lisbon last June. It is
therefore significant that Portugal’s latest acts of aggression
against the Republic of Senegal were intensified following
that ministerial meeting. I leave it to you, Mr. President, to
make your own interpretations and conclusions. My own
President, Mr. Kaunda, in his former capacity as Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), just a few
days before the NATO meeting said:
“It is, however, with a deep sense of frustration and
shock that we have learned that, quite contrary to OUT
hopes and expectations, NATO countries have decided to
hold a meeting of Defence and Foreign Ministers in the
fascist capital of Portugal. By this blatant action, NATO
countries are openly giving a certificate of apparent
respectability to Portugal and encouraging it to continue
its colonial occupation and exploitation of innocent
African people.
“On behalf of the leaders and the people of the OAU
and the non-aligned States, we appeal once more and
before it is too late to the Governments of NATO
Member States who enthusiastically approve the Lusaka
Manifesto of 1969 to do everything possible to put
pressure on Portugal-the only NATO member to reject
arrogantly this genuine offer of Africa to put an end in a
peaceful and noble manner to the colonial oppression and
crimes in Africa. Failure to do this will clearly prove that
Portugal was right when its representative boasted arro-

gantly that whatever happens Portugal can rely on its
NATO allies whose only preoccupation was to pay
lip-service to the high ideals and honourable objectives
contained in the Lusaka Manifesto, a document univeraally hailed as affording a significant and positive contribution to international Peace and security.”
58. To my delegation it seems that the alternatives before
this Council are therefore quite clear: first, whether to
continue to enter&
Portugal’s heinous crimes in the
future or to decide once and for all to punish severely that
recalcitrant State; secondly, and most important, whether,
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, to take
the necessary measures designed to liquidate OIW and for
all the whole state of colonialism and oppression in Africa
or to continue to entertain consideration of grave situations
arising therefrom,
59. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
&+ench): Mr. President, -before taking up the subject on ow
agenda I should like to extend to you the cordial
congratulations of my delegation on the occasion of the
French national holiday, Too many historical ties of all
kinds-cultural, economic and pohtical-exist between our
two countries, too many ccmmon trials have been borne by
both our peoples in the course of history and at the present
time, too many common undertakings bind us together for
me to fail to mention this event which the French people
are celebrating today in joy, peace and prosperity.
60. Once again the Security Council has before it a
complaint by Senegal against Portugal. We listened with
very special attention to the clear and restrained statement
which the Foreign Minister of Senegal made the day before
yesterday /ibid.] on a number of incidents, all too
frequently leading to fatalities, which occurred mainly in
the region of Casamance, along the border with Guinea
(Bissau). We were shocked to learn that again during the
last few days-after the Permanent Mission of Senegal to
the United Nations by letter /S/10227] had already
brought to the attention of the President of the Council for
June a list of serious incidents which had occurred during
the course of last month-more families have been bereaved
and more property haa been destroyed and damaged. We
take this opportunity to express once again to the Foreign
Minister5 Mr. Karim Gaye, the sympathy of the Government and the people of Belgium for Senegal, a courageous
country devoted to peace and which has lofty humanitarian
traditions.
61, The day before yesterday we were all once again
shown the magnanimity and far-sightedness of the leaders
of that country. The concrete and realistic proposals that
wre made by the eminent statesman President Senghor,
and recalled by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, could
promote a negotiated settlement of outstanding problems.
.
62. Reprisals and acts of’ violence or repression of which
innocent civilian populations are the victim are always
regrettable.
63. My Government’s position on the problem of the
decolonization of the peoples and Territories under foreign

administration is well known to the members of the
Council. Belgium voted in favour of the General Assembly
resolutions which proclaimed the right to independence of
peoples still under colonial rule.

six months? By what means can adequate compensation
ever be made for the invaluable lives already lost? These
are questions that need to be given serious consideration by
this august body.

44. The experience acquired by many members of the
Council in the course of the past decade shows that it is
possible to develop excellent bonds of friendship when they
are based on strict and mutual respect for the sovereignty
of others. Hence, it is our hope that a dialogue will begin
that wiI1 lead to a solution of outstanding problems through
negotiation. We believe that that is the right course to
follow, for resorting to violence has never brought about
the final settlement of disputes.

70. Portugal is not an African country, and by no stretch
of the imagination could it ever become a part of Africa. It
is a Western European colonial Power, based in the Iberian
peninsula, and it chooses to hold on almost irrevocably to
antiquated concepts of imperialism and colonialism instead
of giving heed to the forces of liberation which have now
engulfed the world. Can Portugal hold on to its Territories
in that continent irrespective of the changes that have taken
place, and will continue to take place, in International
morality? There was a time when colonialism might have
been a praiseworthy phenomenon; there was a time when
the colonizer could have regarded himself as the selfelected, holy crusader with the Bible in one hand and a gun
in the other, carrying Western culture and civillzation to
unknown parts of the earth. Fortunately, those times are
now past and those views have become totaIly outmoded.
Unlike other colonial Powers which have seen the light and,
in some cases, bowed to the storm of change, Portugal has
not yet seen its way clear to taking a similar course. Instead
it continues to entrench its hold on its African Territories
and attempts to cement that hold by entering into a racist
alliance with South Africa and Southern Rhodesia. By that
move those three countries have carved up the southern
part of Africa for the purpose of perpetuating colonialism.
Portugal. in control of Angola and Mozambique, and in
co-operation with Soulh Africa,has contributed in no small
way to nullifying
the implementation of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia, thereby frustrating the authority of the
Council, The purpose of this alliance is essentially to
prevent the liberation of the oppressed African peoples, as
well as to carry out imperialist policies and actions against
that continent-actions and policies which, if unchallenged,
will virtually submerge it in a perpetual colonial status.

65. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): in accordance with the
growing convention of the Council I shall refrain from
extending the congratulations of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the all-important
office of President of the Security Council for the month of
July. For the same reason I shall also refrain from
congratulating your predecessor, Ambassador Liu.
66. My delegation shares the kind sentiments you expressed in reference to our Secretary-General concerning his
rcccnt indisposition. We trust he is now in the best of
health and sufficiently recovered to continue with his
arduous tasks.
(37. It is a matter of great concern to my delegation that
amled acts of aggression by Portugal against the tenitorlal
integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Senegal
continue to take place in spite of Security Council
resolutions 178 [1963), 204 (1965) and 273 (1969) which
strongly condemned Portugal and warned that country to
desist forthwith from acts of violation against Senegal.
68. This Council has in its exalted wisdom condemned the
wanton and premeditatd acts of aggression against Senegal.
It has denounced Portugal’s colonial policies and practices.
It has called upon Portugal to mend its ways or face the
consequences of its actions. But it would seem that all these
warnings have produced little or no results, Portugal still
continues to hold on to its Territories on the African
continent against the will of the indigenous peoples and
against a host of resolutions of the United Nations. It also
continues to violate the sovereignty of African States. As a
result, therefore, we witness an example of a Member State
defying the will of the international community with
impunity and of the Organlzation being powerless to bring
such a State to heel.

71, The Republic of Senegal is not at war with Portugal,
ncr has it ever been. It has the right to live in security
within its defined frontiers. The intrusion of Portuguese
forces for the purpose of planting mines within Senegalese
territory, shelling its civilian population, ambushing and
kidnapping its citizens, and causing death and devastation
to life and property indiscriminately, leaves the clear
impression that Portugal is bent on a policy of wanton
destruction and brutal attack. That policy, as you all know,
is totally inadmissible in international law and must
therefore be unreservedly denounced.
72. The Portuguese authorities may find satisfaction in
these dastardly acts of murdering innocent civilians and
causing destruction to their homes and belongings and
unmitigated suffering to their families; but such actions
vjolate basic human rights which the United Nations
strenuously promotes, and we are shocked to see them
perpetrated in the second half of the twentieth century.

69. The Foreign Minister of Senegal, Mr. Amadou Karim
Gaye, has provided the Council with an impressive list of
atrocities committed by the Portuguese authorities against
his country. He has confirmed the accounts of the
representative of Senegal, contained in documents S/IQ227
of 16 June and S/10251 of 6 July. The list is indeed
extensive, and the more we ponder on them, the more
odious and repulsive they become. Need I recount the
bombardment of villages and civilian communities? Need 1
cmphasize the indiscriminate shellings and reduction to
ashes of valuable property in the form of houses, vehicles,
cattle and granaries that have taken place during the past

73. A country dedicated, like Senegal, to the observance
of peace and justice has no recourse but to turn to this
Council when it is confronted with situations of this nature,
Senegal is the least deserving of such a hostile attitude. It
has, under its philosopher-statesman, the great President
6

Le’opold Senghor, shown its willingness to live at peace with
its neighbours, however repugnant some of their policies
may bc. To that end it proposed, in 1969, a peace plan for
Guinea (Bissau). The prestige of Senegal, deriving from the
great respect in which it is held by other countries, is
unquestionable. Such malicious attacks shodd, if anything,
evoke sympathy and concerted action from the international community. They should never be condoned.
74. Portugal, on the other hand, imposes its obnoxious
rule on peoples that do not want to be identified with it,
The brave people of Guinea (B&au), who have been
engaging the Portuguese oppressors in a guerilla war of
liberation, have regained a substantial part of their God.
given land. They will never rest conlent until they have
driven the colonial occupiers out into the Atlantic, And
when that happens, Portugal will have only itself to blame
for its obduracy and for its refusal to read and digest the
signs of the times. Portugal has consistently refused to
comply with the provisions of the Charter which establish
the accountability of the administering Powers of NonSelf-Governing Territories and the pledge on the part of the
administering Powers to enable the peoples of the NonSelf-Governing Territories to attain their independence. We
ail know that Guinea (Bissau), like Angola and Mozambique, is a Non-Self-Governing Territory within the meaning of Chapter XI of the United Nations Charter.
75. My delegation subscribes to the view that the NATO
Powers are aiding Portugal in its colonial policies, both
materially and morally. Arms, no doubt supplied for
European defence. still find themselves employed in the
annihilation of defenceless Africans. The support which
Portugal receives from its Western allies helps to build up its
confidence to continue acts of aggression against peaccloving nations sharing common frontiers with its overseas
possessions. Notwithstanding a campaign to change the
venue of NATO last spring, the allies of Portugal, indifferent to non-European interests, convened the meeting in
Lisbon. Small wonder, then, that after such a reassurance of
co-operation from its friends Portugal should demonstrate
its indifference to enlightened world opinion by launching a
series of attacks against the Republic of Senegal. These
attacks, coming on top of those of last year when a massive
but abortive invasion of the Republic of Guinea was
launched, are examples of Portugal’s contempt for the
international community. This must not be allowed to
continue. The Council has adequate means at its disposal,
without departing from the Charter, to put an end to such
actions once and for all. It would thereby be carrying out
its all-important task of maintaining international peace and
security,

76. Senegal, like all members of the Organization of
African Unity, has a moral obligation to the liberation
movements in Africa. These freedom fighters, in their just
struggles against the occupiers of their territories, deserve
all the assistance they can get. Gradually, the world is
coming around to this paint of view, and we look forward
to the day when this Organization will provide unrestricted
aid on their behalf. It is not without significance, therefore,
that the recent intensification
of Portuguese acts of
aggression followed the adoption by the Organization of
African Unity of a resolution to increase aid to African
liberation movements.
77. We have absolutely no reason to doubt the statement
of the Foreign Minister of Senegal. Both he and the
Government he represents have so admirably shown great
restraint here before the Council as well as in their handling
of the situation in general. They have provided US with
details in great number of the atrocities committed by
Portuguese authorities in Guinea (Bissau) against Senegalese
nationals. The Council must set an example: it must
discourage, once and for all, attempts by this recalcitrant
nation to harass a peace-loving and brotherly African state,
Portugal has shown its contempt for this world Organization by its bombardment of Casamance while the members
of the group of experts sent by the United Nations were
making on-thespot investigations. Reference in this connexion should be made to chapter V of their report in
document E/CN.4/1050 and Corr.1, of 2 February 1971.
What further evidence of Portuguese hostility do we need?
None, so far as my delegation and my Government are
concerned. But to satisfy those who may still entertain
some elements of doubt, my delegation would urge that a
special mission of the Council be sent to investigate the
reports.
78. The PRESIDENT (interprelation
fic1171 Frettch):
Before adjourning this meeting, I should like, as the representative of France, to thank ail those who have been so kind
as to express, publicly or privately, their friendship on the
occasion of the 14th of July. They felt that a meeting of
the Security Council was a rather odd way for its President
to celebrate his national holiday; but after all, this day is
the day of “Liberty, equality and fraternity”, and it is the
realization of that ideal that we desire for all the peoples of
the world, particularly Africa. There is assuredly a long way
yet to go in that respect, and perhaps, alas, many more
meetings of the Security Council.
Tire meeting

7

rose at Il.30

a.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

moy
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PU8LlCATlONS

COMO

SE PROCURER

CONSEGUIR

10s publicocioncr
en todos porler
Ventor,
Nucvo

in

United

Nations,

PUBLKATIONS

Uniled
Notions
publicolion~
the world.
Conrulf
your
or Geneva.

Ler publicotionr
der
d6posifoirer
du mande
Nahm
Unicr,
Section

Litho

NATIONS

New

York

be

obtained
w write

Nations
Unicr
soof
cnlier.
Informez-row
des venler,
New York

PUBLICACIONES

from
bookslores
lo: United
Nolionr,

DES

0.~0

dirlribulors
Soles Section,

lhroughout
New York

NATIONS.lJNIES

en vente
dons
ler librairier
el ICI ogencer
ouprls
de votre libroirit
ou odrersar-vou.s
6:
ou Gen&ve.

DE LAS NACIONES

de Ios Nociancs
Unidor
estdn
dcl munda.
Conrultc
a su librero
York o Ginebra.

Price:$U.S.

and

(or equivalent

UNIDAS

en venlo
en librcriar
y CQSOS diclribuidoros
o dirlioss
o: Naciones
Unidar,
Secci6n

in other

currencies)

de

82030--July

197%--2,0s”
