S/2021/1030

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 December 2021
Original: English

United Nations humanitarian operations in the Syrian
Arab Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2585
(2021), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a substantive
report, with particular focus on transparency in operations and progress on cross-line
access in meeting humanitarian needs. The Council also called upon humanitarian
agencies to support efforts and initiatives to broaden humanitarian activities,
including early recovery projects. The report complements the inputs for the report
of the Secretary-General on the Syrian Arab Republic, which is provided on a regular
basis every 60 days, as also requested in resolution 2585 (2021).
2.
The information contained in the present report is based on available data from
the United Nations system, compiled from humanitarian agencies, partners and other
relevant sources. Information was gathered both in writing and through meetings held
during visits to Damascus, Gaziantep and Amman.

II. Transparency in United Nations humanitarian operations in
the Syrian Arab Republic
3.
The Syrian Arab Republic is one of the most complex humanitarian operations
in the world. Given the array of potential access and delivery constraints in the
different areas of operation, systems have been put in place to ensure transparency in
operations, both from within the country and across the border, providing United
Nations entities and partners with a clear view of all aspects of needs and the response.
Through independent needs assessments, due diligence, monitoring and risk
management systems, at both the system-wide and the individual organization levels,
the United Nations is able to understand challenges and m itigate them in a way that
safeguards humanitarian principles and ensures accountability for humanitarian
action.
4.
Humanitarian actors across the humanitarian response for the Syrian Arab
Republic have enhanced their standard due diligence practices and have committed
to following a baseline of monitoring standards across all humanitarian programming
and across all response modalities, in line with or exceeding international standards.
System-wide guidance has been developed to guide partners, while in -depth

21-18228 (E)

171221

*2118228*

S/2021/1030

engagement on humanitarian operations is carried out with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, other relevant Member States, humanitarian partners, affected
people and other stakeholders.
Assessments of humanitarian need
5.
Independent needs assessments are the first step in ensuring transparency in the
humanitarian response. Without a full understanding of humanitarian needs, it is
impossible to understand the impact of delivery. Humanitarian operations for the
Syrian Arab Republic benefit from sector-specific response data at the community
level and disaggregated sector-specific needs data at the subdistrict level. The data on
humanitarian needs, collected independently by the United Nations, ensure overall
accountability for affected populations by putting beneficiary needs and concerns at
the centre.
6.
The humanitarian needs overview is based on a multisectoral needs assessment,
as well as sector-specific assessments. In 2021, the multisectoral needs assessment
was conducted by 475 enumerators and reached 33,171 households across all 267
subdistricts in the Syrian Arab Republic, with a 95 per cent confidence level and a
10 per cent margin of error. There were also sector-specific assessments conducted at
the household and community levels in the water, sanitation and hygiene, protection,
early recovery and livelihoods and food security sectors, in addition to other needs
assessments. The scope and depth of the data collected provide a solid evidence base
for a more effective and accountable humanitarian response.
7.
In addition to these assessments, sectors include further assessments in their
planning. For example, the health sector manages a Health Resources and Services
Availability Monitoring System, which allows for the collection and a nalysis of
information on the availability of health resources and services in the Syrian Arab
Republic and the functionality of health facilities. The World Food Programme (WFP)
is conducting a nationwide vulnerability needs review to better understand th e depth
of food insecurity at the household level. The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO) conducts a crop and food supply assessment to ascertain
production levels and the impact on food supply and food security. The United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) undertakes systematic data collection to better
understand the needs of children and communities across the 14 governorates through
baseline and post-distribution monitoring surveys. It also conducts real-time
monitoring for its programmes, including for children outside of schools, national
examination and coronavirus disease (COVID-19) risk communication and
community engagement. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) conducts
regular geographical needs assessments to better identify who is in need,
disaggregated by different categories of people (e.g. all affected persons, pregnant
women, internally displaced persons and persons with disabilities), different types of
needs (e.g. reproductive health, gender-based violence services and protection) and
the severity of their needs. This helps to pinpoint the type of assistance that they
require and ensures prioritized, focused response planning.
Transparency in Damascus-based operations
8.
To ensure that aid reaches people in need in a transparent and principled manner,
humanitarian actors operating inside the Syrian Arab Republic have reinforced
standards of due diligence and monitoring procedures. The approach begins with a
global framework of mandatory indicators, tools and guidance documents, as well as
tailored monitoring and evaluation strategies outlining specific commitments and
methods for the Syrian context. For example, UNFPA is implementing its global last mile assurance approach, whereby it has developed standard operating procedures
and monitoring tools amended to the Syrian context to ensure that medical goods and
2/16

21-18228

S/2021/1030

supplies, dignity kits and other commodities reach their intended destination, while
bolstering the overall tracking system and minimizing stock-outs of essential
medication. Resilience interventions by the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat), including those focusing on the restoration of basic service
functionality in conflict-affected locations, are underpinned by a systematic risk
management modality during project design and implementation to safeguard against
environmental and social risks throughout all phases.
9.
Project implementation is monitored both directly by the United Nations and
through third-party monitors. For example, WFP directly monitors about 30 per cent
of its projects through 37 field monitors placed in all field offices, who conduct
distribution and post-distribution monitoring activities. The remaining 70 per cent are
regularly monitored through third-party monitors. WFP increased direct monitoring
by its field monitors from an average of 381 visits per quarter in 2019 to an average
of 913 visits per quarter in 2021 – an increase of 139 per cent. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has 30 focal points in all governorates, who conducted 206
monitoring site visits during the period from July to October 2021 to follow up on
and monitor the implementation of projects supported by WHO. Since the beginning
of the year, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has conducted over 560 monitoring missions to projects and partners
across the country. The frequency of such missions is contingent on the receipt of
approvals, COVID-19 precautionary measures and security considerations in the
areas to be visited. While there remain access challenges for United Nations staff
inside the Syrian Arab Republic, direct management of projects occurs regularly.
10. Third-party monitors complement the regular United Nations visits, with
monitors conducting regular on-site visits to oversee project implementation,
monitoring, reporting and evaluation. They scale up monitoring activities
implemented by limited numbers of United Nations staff, as well as opening access
in areas that the United Nations has more difficulty reaching. A total of 4,084 thirdparty monitoring missions took place in all governorates between July and November
2021 (see figure), an average of around 30 missions per day.
Figure
Number of third-party monitoring missions, 1 July to 15 November 2021

11. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) currently deploys 37
third-party field monitors from its field offices across all governorates, in addition to
its core programme and monitoring and evaluation staff and personnel. Field monitors
conduct regular field visits to project sites, monitoring the selection of beneficiaries
21-18228

3/16

S/2021/1030

and the progress of activities. Third-party monitors contracted by WHO use
specifically identified criteria to measure performance on the basis of economy,
effectiveness, efficiency, ethics and equity. Since October 2021, six
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have been visited, with a beneficiary survey,
focus group discussion and individual interviews undertaken and an observation
checklist completed. UNICEF addresses feedback from communities through field
staff, facilitators and third-party monitors equipped with the capacity and tools to
assess needs and collect feedback. Where in-person monitoring cannot take place,
UNHCR has in place robust systems that ensure regular communication and reporting
with partners and beneficiaries to assess project implementation. It has set up a
database to monitor the monthly progress of all activities being implemented. The
database allows for real-time analysis at the subdistrict level of programme
deliverables by UNHCR and its partners and strengthens its evidence -based planning
and reporting. An integral part of the standard partnership agreements are risk -based
project monitoring plans, which are developed jointly by UNHCR and its partner s.
12. A high degree of due diligence in humanitarian programming in the Syrian Arab
Republic is contractually obliged through strict agreements between donors and
partners and between partnering organizations, as with any humanitarian
programming. Such procedures help to ensure accountability to and for all
stakeholders. Donors often conduct capacity assessments of prospective financial
partners to determine whether the partner has a sufficient level of capacity in terms
of institutional, managerial, financial and technical expertise. Projects are regularly
audited by independent auditors to prevent corruption.
13. Many humanitarian organizations have developed robust control mechanisms to
ensure compliance with due diligence measures as well as protect st aff, partners and
beneficiaries. Examples include monitoring various stages of project implementation,
as well as procurement processes, utilizing multiple sources.
14. In addition to the monitoring described above, feedback mechanisms have been
developed to help agencies to better understand whether deliveries are meeting
household needs and improve accountability to affected people. WFP manages a
dedicated helpline through a call centre staffed by WFP employees. In 2021, it
received and processed an average of 1,200 calls per month through its community
feedback mechanism. WHO also has a dedicated telephone number for beneficiary
input, which all partners are directed to post in an easily visible location for everyone
receiving health services. UNICEF has a direct service line for accountability to
beneficiaries and uses multiple channels with partners to receive and act on feedback
from beneficiaries, including surveys, suggestion boxes and focus group discussions.
UNFPA implementing partners all have suggestion and complaint boxes at their
facilities for beneficiaries to provide feedback on services received. FAO employs
social media to facilitate two-way communication with beneficiaries for both
feedback and technical support. UNHCR has introduced a numb er of hotlines and
other online tools, through which people of concern can seek counselling and advice
and provide feedback. Since January 2021, almost 30,000 calls have been received –
an average of about 2,900 a month. In addition, UNHCR is rolling out a feedback
survey in community centres to evaluate the quality and efficiency of services
provided, which will further support and improve the planning and delivery of
assistance to those most in need. This is in addition to other, more standard
accountability mechanisms put into place to receive feedback and complaints during
distributions, at offices and community centres. UNDP set up a stakeholder response
mechanism and a local hotline number.
15. Community feedback, coupled with monitoring data, are utilized to constantly
improve the delivery of humanitarian activities. United Nations entities also conduct
evaluations to assess the effectiveness, efficiency and relevance of programmes.
4/16

21-18228

S/2021/1030

UNICEF is currently running two formal and independent evaluations of its country
offices, while two programmatic independent evaluations were carried out on support
for infant and young child feeding and explosive ordnance education programmes.
16. Despite the systems in place, there remain significant risks to the deliver y of
humanitarian assistance inside the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations
continuously assesses the operating environment and regularly conducts stocktaking
exercises to ensure that its assessments of risks are current. On the basis of such risks,
it is able to develop mitigating approaches. For risks that cannot be prevented, it also
allows for a more transparent discussion with donors and other partners. A total of 72
risk mitigation measures have been implemented, although six priority risks have
been identified for which a moderate residual risk remains after the mitigating efforts
are implemented. These include access impediments, efforts to influence
programming by outside actors, limitations on protection programming and the risk
of sexual exploitation and abuse.
17. The United Nations country team in the Syrian Arab Republic has developed a
risk management system, which includes each entity’s individual enterprise risk
management system, and a risk management working group within the country te am,
which is supported by a Risk Management Unit in the Office of the Resident
Coordinator. The Risk Management Unit was established in June 2021 and provides
analysis and coordination support to ensure that the United Nations and its partners
and donors have a transparent view of risks and mitigating measures being applied.
The Unit supports robust risk management, due diligence and information -sharing
aimed at improving programme planning and implementation, informing decision making, improving fiduciary accountability, doing no harm and opening dialogue
regarding risk management challenges.
Transparency in cross-border operations
18. The Secretary-General detailed the steps taken by United Nations cross-border
operations to monitor the delivery of aid from the border until it reaches people in
need in two previous reports (S/2018/617 and S/2020/401). He described the
monitoring carried out at four distinct levels: (a) at the border by the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic; (b) at warehouses inside the
Syrian Arab Republic; (c) at distribution points; and (d) after distribution with
beneficiaries. It has been, and remains, a transparent operation in which the United
Nations knows the status of aid deliveries at every step of the process, despite it being
a remotely managed operation.
19. Since 2014, the humanitarian nature of the cross-border assistance has been
consistently checked by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism at the trans shipment hub in Reyhanlı, near the Bab al-Hawa crossing point, as well as at other
crossing points that had previously been authorized for use by the Security Council.
When humanitarian cargo is brought to the trans-shipment hub by Turkish trucks,
offloaded and then reloaded onto Syrian trucks to cross the border, the Mechanism’s
monitoring officers supervise the loading. After verifying the waybills and ensuring
that the cargo is consistent with the assistance previously announced, they check the
consignments physically, performing random checks and verifications. When loading
has been completed, monitoring officers ensure that the trucks are properly closed
and monitor the application of seals by customs officials.
20. Once the loading of all the trucks has been completed, they are assembled in a
convoy under the oversight of the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism. The
monitoring officers accompany the convoy to the border, ensuring that no
manipulation of the consignments or reopening of the trucks takes place. Once the

21-18228

5/16

S/2021/1030

trucks have crossed the border, the Mechanism issues a notification for the attention
of the Syrian authorities, confirming the humanitarian nature of the consignm ent.
21. In October, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism monitored and
confirmed the humanitarian nature of 11 consignments consisting of 1,020 trucks.
Some 80 per cent of the United Nations assistance that crossed during that month into
the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic was food aid, while non -food items,
including shelter and winterization assistance, represented 19 per cent of the total
volume. The remaining aid included health supplies, such as essential medicines,
medical equipment, COVID-19 vaccines and prevention material, as well as school
materials. From its start in July 2014 until November 2021, 47,498 trucks with
humanitarian aid have crossed into the north-west of the country under this closely
monitored system. There have been no incidents of non-humanitarian items found in
the consignments.
22. Deliveries of aid are confirmed upon arrival at warehouses by trusted and vetted
implementing partners and by third-party monitors contracted by the United Nations.
Similar to aid operations inside the Syrian Arab Republic, third-party monitors
observe distribution to beneficiaries or to facilities such as schools and health centres.
At distribution points, videos and time-stamped, geotagged photographs are used to
confirm delivery. For example, WFP third-party monitors conduct on-site monitoring
of food distribution activities, monitoring around 150 final distribution points per
month. On a monthly basis they collect prices and submit, on average, around 40 price
reports from markets in the north-west of the country. They also visit WFP
warehouses and implement warehouse monitoring using a checklist developed by the
WFP Supply Chain Unit.
23. United Nations entities have adopted individual accountability systems suited
to individual operational needs. For example, the International Organization for
Migration utilizes a commodity tracking system for its delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Items contain unique QR codes, which are scanned upon arrival at the
warehouse in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic and again upon distribution
to the beneficiary. WHO tracks supplies from warehouses to health facilities and on
to patients through a third-party monitoring system. Inputs for monthly supply needs,
utilization rates and gaps are collected at the facility level, aiming to identify essential
needs for life-saving and life-sustaining medical care.
24. Modalities for post-distribution monitoring include focus group discussions,
complaint and feedback mechanisms at supported facilities and bene ficiary
satisfaction surveys. Many deliveries include telephone numbers on or in packaging
to enable direct beneficiary feedback. So far in 2021, UNHCR protection third -party
monitoring exercises have surveyed 1,040 beneficiaries of protection activities. The
findings indicate that the activities were well received by communities and that no
obstacles to accessing the activities were observed. Accessibility for all, including
vulnerable groups such as persons with disabilities and older persons, was ensured .
All surveyed beneficiaries considered the services provided to be useful.
25. In addition, core relief item monitoring exercises surveyed 1,525 beneficiaries,
showing that the great majority (98 per cent) were satisfied with core relief item
content, the distribution process and the staff engaged in the distributions. Third -party
monitors observed six warehouses managed by UNHCR implementing partners,
which overall were found to be in very good condition. Shelter installation third -party
monitoring exercises included 1,129 surveys as well as the monitoring of eight sites
for internally displaced persons, which showed that the installation process was
conducted in an orderly and safe manner. All monitored sites were deemed safe and
secure. Moreover, COVID-19 safeguards were found to be in place throughout the
activities.
6/16

21-18228

S/2021/1030

26. Cross-border operations are subject to accountability mechanisms between
donors and partners, which include verification that partners are humanitarian in
nature, and to compliance with sanctions or counter-terrorism measures, external
reviews and the maintenance of risk management measures. The United Nations
provides training to implementing partners and local authorities on international
humanitarian law and advocates principled delivery in areas where non-State armed
groups operate within the Syrian Arab Republic.
27. Despite the high degree of monitoring in place, and as with any large
humanitarian operation in a complex environment, risks exist in relation to cross border humanitarian operations. Risk factors include the fact that the operation is
remotely managed and that part of the area served is under the control of a local
authority widely believed to have close ties with a non-State armed group that has
been designated a terrorist group by the Security Council. Minimizing the risk of aid
diversion and ensuring that armed groups do not benefit from any aspect of
humanitarian deliveries has long been a priority for humanitarian organizations
involved in the cross-border humanitarian operation.
28. While individual agencies have managed risks, there has been an effort to
consolidate those efforts into a coherent approach among the United Nations and its
partners over the last few years. In March 2019, the Humanitarian Liaison Gro up
endorsed the document entitled “Strengthening risk management of humanitarian
cross-border operations from Turkey into Syria to prevent interference and aid
diversion”. The Group then undertook a joint risk analysis and created a joint risk
framework that provided a tool that any organization could use to inform risk
management measures, but will also be used to help the broader humanitarian
community to analyse and manage risk as a collective. A proposal was shared with
donors in November 2021 to support the creation of a risk management unit in the
office of the Deputy Regional Humanitarian Coordinator, which would further
consolidate efforts to jointly assess and respond to risk in cross -border operations,
and the development of a risk management working group, which would support the
Group and the humanitarian community more broadly.

III. Progress on United Nations cross-line operations in meeting
humanitarian needs
29. There are 6.9 million people living in areas not under government control in the
Syrian Arab Republic, of whom 5.6 million are in need of humanitarian assistance.
People in need in areas not under government control are concentrated across northern
parts of the country, with a smaller population located in the south -east, in Rukban.
Humanitarian needs in areas not under government control are considered severe,
owing to intense levels of hostilities in the north-west and north-east over prolonged
periods and the high proportion of internally displaced people, many living in camps,
informal settlements or collective centres.
Cross-line operations in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
30. Of the estimated 2.7 million people living in areas of the north-east that are not
under government control, 2.2 million need humanitarian assistance, including half a
million internally displaced people. Almost 140,000 are living in camps, including
the Hawl camp, which hosts some 57,588 people, the majority of w hom are children.
The deteriorating socioeconomic situation has led to more vulnerable people moving
into camps in the hope of finding better access to services. The north -east is accessed
both cross-line from within government-controlled parts of the country and crossborder from Iraq. In 2020, however, authorization for the United Nations to send aid
21-18228

7/16

S/2021/1030

cross-border to the north-east through Ya‘rubiyah was not renewed. Therefore, today,
only NGOs operate cross-border operations through the Fish Khabur crossing into the
Syrian Arab Republic, as well as from within the north-east of the country itself.
31. The term “cross-line” in the context of the north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic refers to moving from areas under government control to areas under the
control of local authorities. The movement of relief items between such areas happens
on a daily basis. Between 1 July and 31 October 2021, 625 trucks carrying
humanitarian supplies crossed from government-controlled areas to the north-east
through the Tabaqah crossing point. Such access has always been possible for most
supplies, with the exception of health items, and the movement of items between areas
has been happening regularly over the past 10 years.
32. In the north-east, the United Nations maintains regular and sustained
humanitarian access from its Qamishli sub-offices to most parts of Raqqah and
Hasakah Governorates. WFP provides food assistance to some 650,000 people on
average each month with general food assistance. During the second half of 20 21,
UNICEF expanded operations to reach more than 983,000 people in 2021 in Hasakah,
Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates, including through the rehabilitation of water
infrastructure (e.g. water stations and extensions of water pipelines). UNFPA has
delivered 259 reproductive health kits in 2021 to support health services in Dayr
al-Zawr, Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates, including to the Hawl, Mahmoudli and
Arishah camps. FAO supported 126,000 people in Hasakah and Dayr al -Zawr
Governorates with emergency agriculture input packages and animal health services.
In the second half of 2021, UNHCR distributed more than 24,500 non -food items and
winterization kits to some 85,000 people in the north-east. In addition, about 7,490
tents were distributed and replaced in camps there in the same period. UNHCR
continues to support inter-agency efforts in the north-east, including in the camps, to
address the protection and assistance concerns of affected populations in a
coordinated manner.
33. WHO reports that it has provided nearly 30 per cent of the pharmaceutical needs
for the area in 2021. Between July and November, it delivered 11 cross-line shipments
(four road convoys and seven airlifts), carrying 196,910 kg of supplies sufficient to
provide for 164,142 treatments and 18,092 trauma cases. The shipments included a
range of medical items (haemodialysis sessions, chlorine tablets, cholera kits,
laboratory supplies, medical equipment, medicines, trauma kits and intensive care
unit beds), as well as vaccines, including COVID-19 vaccines and vaccines used for
routine immunization. These supplies were provided to 120 primary health -care
centres and 19 hospitals.
34. Efforts were made to increase access in order to further address needs. The size
of the United Nations offices in Qamishli in the north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic grew, with 135 staff members, including 14 international staff members,
working for nine United Nations entities at five different office locations. Access
routes became more efficient, with a new access route recently approved for United
Nations aid deliveries in order to transport food directly from Homs to Raqqah,
without having to send it first to warehouses in Qamishli.
35. Nevertheless, access constraints remain. The United Nations humani tarian
response in camps has become challenging owing to a range of factors, including
prolonged approvals for project implementation, lack of access and insecurity, in
particular in the Hawl camp. Access remains difficult in parts of Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate, with a limited operational presence due to insecurity as well as
extensive contamination by unexploded ordnance. In September, UNHCR expanded
its operational presence by establishing an office in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate to
ensure more direct outreach to support people of concern in the Governorate, and one
8/16

21-18228

S/2021/1030

more field office was opened by an international NGO. Other areas, including Manbij
and Ayn al-Arab, remain difficult to access from Damascus, owing to the lack of
agreement between parties and insecurity.
36. Despite the large operation under way, needs continue to outstrip the response.
This is particularly true for the health response, the area most utilized by the United
Nations cross-border operation through Ya‘rubiyah before its closure. The availability
of medical supplies in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic remains a major
challenge, due in part to the difficulties in importing supplies to the country,
specifically to the north-east. For example, the central laboratory in Qamishli – the
only testing facility in non-government-controlled areas of the north-east – has been
unable to process COVID-19 tests since 10 November owing to a lack of RNA
extraction, polymerase chain reaction testing kits and other laboratory consumables.
In addition, the Shahil hospital, which provides comprehensive health -care services
and COVID-19 treatment for 362,000 people living in Dayr al-Zawr, is at risk of
closing owing to a lack of support. Other critical health facilities across the north -east
are suffering critical gaps and operational cut-offs, including the maternity hospital
in Raqqah.
37. Cross-line access continues to be restricted to the area between Ra’s al-Ayn and
Tall Abyad, with no United Nations cross-line aid deliveries currently being
conducted to that area. The United Nations requested cross-line access to the area in
2019 and 2020 to assess the situation, but it was not possible to reach agreement
among all the parties on the composition of the mission. The latest request for an
inter-agency assessment mission, submitted to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic on 6 October 2021, remains pending. WHO and UNICEF requested access
on 7 November to distribute COVID-19 vaccines, and their request was approved by
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic on 6 December.
38. Access for technicians of the water and electricity directorates to Uluk water
station, which lies in the area between Ra’s al-Ayn and Tall Abyad, remains subject
to local agreements between parties to the conflict. Although teams have been able to
obtain access to the water station on many occasions to undertake repairs, there have
also been critical periods when no access was possible, in particular when electricity
provision from Darbasiyah has been cut off. Most recently, this was the case between
20 August and 10 September, when pumping stopped. Since 19 November, the water
station has operated at low capacity owing to insufficient electricity supply. On
26 November, the station stopped functioning completely, directly affecting access to
water for 500,000 people.
Cross-line operations in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
39. Of the estimated 4.2 million people living in areas of the north -west that are not
under government control, 3.4 million are in need of humanitarian assistance,
including 2.8 million internally displaced people.
40. While access challenges exist in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
cross-border humanitarian actors are generally able to access most parts of the north west that are not under government control and carry out sustained and unimpeded
deliveries. The most significant access restrictions are in sparsely populated front line areas in southern Idlib and western Aleppo, where an increase in hostilities has
been reported in the past six months. In October and November, there were numerous
incidents of shelling or other missile attacks affecting humanitarian operations,
including in areas close to supply routes and close to warehouses of United Nations
entities and NGOs. Despite access to most areas, humanitarian needs continue to
outstrip the response in the north-west.

21-18228

9/16

S/2021/1030

41. Since April 2020, the United Nations has engaged with the various parties
involved to facilitate cross-line operations. From July 2021, it has been in regular
contact with the various parties to identify an operational modality that is agreeable
to all sides and takes into account diverging views, including on who would be
involved in conducting cross-line deliveries and who would be authorized to
distribute the aid. All parties indicated support in principle for cross -line operations.
Five notes verbales have been sent to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
requesting access, and each received a positive response. Numerous contacts with
representatives of the Government of Turkey and local authorities in Idlib have taken
place as part of the access negotiations. However, obtaining all the necessary
approvals and the corresponding security guarantees remained challenging in such an
insecure environment, leading to some of the delays that have been experienced.
42. Following the access negotiations, two cross-line convoys were deployed. On
31 August, WFP successfully completed the first cross-line delivery of food and
nutrition assistance from the government-controlled city of Aleppo, in Aleppo
Governorate, to a warehouse in the city of Sarmada, in Idlib Governorate. The
assistance delivered was sufficient for 43,500 people for one month. The second
cross-line delivery took place on 9 and 10 December following the necessary
clearances received from all parties. It provided multisectoral assistance, including
food and nutrition assistance for another 43,500 people, as well as items from
UNFPA, WHO and UNICEF, to the warehouse in Sarmada. The convoy was initially
scheduled for 9–11 November, then rescheduled for 28–30 November, pending the
receipt of security guarantees from local authorities, before being successfully
completed. Less than four days’ notice was provided to the local authorities to gather
the security guarantees necessary for the initial convoy date.
43. The United Nations continues to engage with the parties concerned regarding
further cross-line assistance to the north-west from inside the Syrian Arab Republic
through inter-agency cross-line convoys. A plan has been developed for a series of
regular and predictable United Nations inter-agency cross-line operations to deliver
multisectoral assistance over the coming six months. The plan envisages regular
deliveries of cross-line aid to the identified locations, supported by monthly cross line convoys to stock warehouses. The plan is focused on the implementation of
unaccompanied humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys to communities in
prioritized sub-districts in Idlib and Aleppo Governorates, where 593,000 people in
need reside. Prioritization is based on the objective of maximizing impact. The sixmonth plan was shared with all parties on 27 October.
44. On 17 November, WFP received approval from the parties concerned to move
forward with its planned distribution modality for humanitarian items delivered cross line into the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic at the end of August.
Distributions through a local WFP team are expected to commence in the second half
of December. Under this direct distribution model, WFP will distribute the transported
commodities to beneficiaries, with full WFP ownership and oversight. The local
selection, recruitment and training of the distribution team has commenced. The
United Nations envisages replicating the model for future United Nations cross -line
missions, where feasible, allowing assistance delivered through cross-line channels
to be distributed under United Nations ownership and supervision.
45. Despite progress made in completing an initial cross-line convoy and steps made
towards additional convoys and aid distribution, challenges still need to be overcome
in order to achieve regular and sustained cross-line operations into the north-west of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Receiving the necessary and timely security guarantees
from parties to the conflict remains critical to ensure the saf e passage of cross-line
convoys and their personnel, while shelling, air strikes, landmines and improvised
explosive devises represent real security threats to humanitarian staff. A new system
10/16

21-18228

S/2021/1030

for distributions was set up, because parties could not agree on the use of existing
delivery mechanisms. Commitment by all parties to non-interference in humanitarian
activities of the cross-line delivery at all stages is essential. Accountability to affected
populations is also an important aspect that needs to be considered, in terms of both
ensuring community acceptance for the deliveries and engaging to minimize the
possibility of negative responses of neighbouring communities or other groups after
the aid is delivered.
46. With access challenges for regular convoys, entities have also taken innovative
approaches to reaching people in need cross-line from government-controlled areas.
UNICEF has implemented water, sanitation and hygiene programmes in
non-government-controlled areas of Idlib Governorate as well as in non-government
controlled areas of western rural Aleppo. The work was carried out through
partnership with the private sector. In 2021, it provided around 23,400 people in four
communities (Burayj, Atarib, Babtu and Kafr Karmin) in western rural Aleppo with
water trucking and reached 379,600 people through repairs to water pumps and
control panels in four districts in Idlib (Idlib, Harim, Ariha and Jisr al -Shughur).
Cross-line operations in the south-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
47. In the south-east, an estimated 12,000 people remain in Rukban and surrounding
areas. In the absence of regular humanitarian deliveries and owing to other factors,
conditions in Rukban have steadily deteriorated since the most recent humanitarian
aid convoy reached the area in September 2019. This has included an increase in food
insecurity, compounded by the disruption of informal commercial supply routes to
the settlements since February 2020. Measures related to the COVID -19 pandemic
have also disrupted access to United Nations health-care facilities in Jordan.
Protection concerns remain. As a result of the dire humanitarian conditions,
spontaneous departures from Rukban have continued throughout 2021, with some
people departing in need of immediate medical assistance. The United Nations and
partners continue to provide assistance to people who spontaneously depart Rukban.
While the Organization continues to engage on the matter and explore all options, full
humanitarian access to Rukban remains elusive.

IV. Early recovery in United Nations operations
48. The resilience of the people of the Syrian Arab Republic has been severely
reduced by a decade of conflict, acute socioeconomic crisis, successive water and
COVID-19 crises and the winter season. Around 90 per cent of the population are
now living in poverty and significant parts of the civilian infrastructure have been
destroyed or are disintegrating. In 2020, the average monthly income in the country
could no longer cover basic needs (see table). Despite record l evels of humanitarian
funding in 2020, this is one of the factors that contributed to the significant increase
in the number of people in need that year (21 per cent), which only continued to grow
through 2021.

21-18228

11/16

S/2021/1030

Table
Gap between average monthly income and basic monthly expenses, by year 1
(Syrian pounds)
2019

2020

2021

Average monthly income

95 997

147 724

301 377

Average monthly expenses

95 622

177 721

449 642

–

29 997

148 265

Income gap

49. Reduced resilience means that smaller shocks risk sending more people into
situations of need – a trend likely to continue into 2022. Three-quarters of households
have reported that they are currently not able to meet their basic needs in a sustained
manner. With growing water stress and a low-yielding grain harvest in the 2021–2022
season, the chance of further food shortages is considerable. Some 60 per cent of the
population is already facing food insecurity. Water, sanitation and hygiene, health and
education services have been assessed as dysfunctional in almost half (131) of all
Syrian subdistricts owing to the loss of technical staff and infrastructure requiring
urgent repair because of damage and/or a lack of maintenance. Lack of access to
health facilities remains severe; in 2021, there were 7.78 million people in 100
subdistricts where the number of doctors or functional medical facilities did not meet
globally accepted minimum standards. Despite the rising needs, funding for the
humanitarian response plan is lower than in 2020: by late November 2021, the
response had received over $200 million less than at the same time in 2020.
50. Early recovery activities are aimed at preventing a further increase in the
number of people in need, as well as reducing immediate and protracted humanitarian
needs by strengthening the self-reliance of affected populations, improving individual
and community welfare and therefore reducing dependence on external assistance.
Early recovery assistance enables individuals, households and communities to better
manage shocks and stresses through projects seeking to ensure sustained access to
crucial basic services. Early recovery activities also play a critical role in building
social cohesion at a time when increasing competition over scarce resources is
generating community tensions. It is also what people are requesting; beyond food
aid, livelihoods and employment support and basic services such as electricity rank
among the highest needs indicated by people in the Syrian Arab Republic in the latest
multisectoral needs assessment.
51. UNDP support to persons with disabilities is built on the human rights -based
approach in line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In
2020 and 2021, it has provided more than 3,000 persons with disabilities with
rehabilitation treatment, including psychosocial support as the basis for the inclusion
process, and with access to employment, education and other basic services for their
socioeconomic integration. It has been building the local capacity of technicians to
improve the quality and sustainability of services for this vulnerable target group.
52. Early recovery activities in the humanitarian response plan are focused on five
main integrated areas: (a) light repair and rehabilitation of critical civilian
infrastructure; (b) removal of debris and solid waste; (c) income -generating activities
and market-based interventions; (d) vocational and skills training; and (e) social
cohesion and community interventions. Moreover, by adopting a conflict-sensitive
approach, all early recovery activities seek to strengthen social cohesion, namely by
building the capacities of communities to lead inclusive early recovery processes at
__________________
1

12/16

Based on the findings of the 2021 multisector needs assessment.
21-18228

S/2021/1030

the local level. There is a stand-alone sector for early recovery and livelihoods, but
the early recovery response is multisectoral, being integrated across the sectors. This
is done through the inclusion of strategic objective 3 of the humanitarian response
plan, the aim of which is to “increase the resilience of affected communities by
improving access to livelihood opportunities and basic services, especially among the
most vulnerable households and communities”.
53. An example of an early recovery project meeting immediate life -saving needs
as well as building resilience in communities is a recently completed WFP project to
rehabilitate seven public bakeries in Aleppo, Dar‘a and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates,
supporting the bread needs of some 1 million people. The project was part of efforts
to enhance the value chain for the delivery of bread that also included the light
rehabilitation of mills and the provision of flour to the bakeries. UNDP, WFP and
FAO implemented a joint project to enhance the wheat-to-bread value chain in
Hasakah, aiming to enhance food security for more than 23,000 people. The initiative
is now being scaled up in Dar‘a. A project conducted by UNFPA in Aleppo in 2021
combined the training of midwives with the provision of clean delivery kits to help
pregnant women who are unable to access health facilities during an emergency to
avoid deadly infections. In 2021, the training of seven midwives has already led to
support for nearly 800 safe births. Given the continued electricity shortages in the
country, solar photovoltaic energy has been identified as an effective solution to
ensure the sustainability of critical health services, including vaccination. In response,
UNICEF has already installed 39 solar power systems for primary health-care
facilities and cold chain infrastructure, with a significant scale -up planned for 2021
and beyond. Similarly, in order to advance progress on the climate and financial
sustainability of water systems and sustained services to vulnerable communities,
UNICEF has completed the integration of 20 wells with solar systems in 2021.
54. To date, early recovery projects have, for example, included 6,000 households
in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate were able to cultivate 10,000 tons of wheat through the
rehabilitation of community irrigation systems in 2020 supported by WFP and FAO.
The cost of the irrigation project was less than providing general food assistance to
the 6,000 households for one year. With water running, farmers have been able to
cultivate summer and winter crops, reducing their immediate food needs and allowing
for increased livelihoods. As part of its wider efforts to strengthen local capacity for
sustainable management and the operation of water systems in the Syri an Arab
Republic, UNICEF is assessing how to support the population by strengthening the
water sector in order to restore and reinforce the supply chain (especially locally) for
various water, sanitation and hygiene products, focusing initially on water tr eatment
chemicals. For instance, in August 2021, two chlorine production factories supported
by UNICEF began operation in Rif Dimashq and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates,
producing more than three tons of chlorine daily. The chlorine produced by the Rif
Dimashq factory is being used to chlorinate water from the Fijah spring in Rif
Dimashq Governorate, the main water source for more than 1.8 million people in
Damascus.
55. One element that has aided the delivery of early recovery projects has been the
use of an area-based response to programming. Area-based early recovery
programming delivers early recovery activities in an integrated manner to support
resilience more sustainably in targeted communities. For example, rehabilitating a
school in a rural community will have a limited impact on children’s access to
education if their families’ rural livelihoods are not equally supported. Likewise,
supporting rural families to increase production will have a limited impact on their
livelihoods if nearby urban markets are not functional.
56. Early recovery requires structural support to be handed over to appropriate
entities to manage upon completion (e.g. bakeries, hospitals and schools). Handover,
21-18228

13/16

S/2021/1030

however, needs to ensure that service provision is equitable, responsive and
accountable to affected populations. By decentralizing operations, the United Nations
has been able to increase engagement in projects of communities and local authorities
at the local level. Engagement is critical to ensure that communities have a gr eater
say in the rehabilitation and distribution of critical services. For example, FAO has
supported the creation of water user associations and farmer cooperatives to ensure
the fair distribution of water resources. In eastern Aleppo, UNDP is facilitatin g an
inclusive, multi-stakeholder planning process involving community representatives
and local authorities to prioritize early recovery activities based on community needs.
57. In addition to its urban profiling work, UN-Habitat has supported the
development of participatory recovery plans in numerous locations across the Syrian
Arab Republic. In Aleppo, Dar‘a and Dayr al-Zawr, this has been followed by the
implementation of a package of multisectoral projects to address the restoration of
basic service functionality, mobility, social cohesion and economic recovery. The
process of recovery planning and project implementation is underpinned by various
mechanisms that support community engagement, monitoring and accountability.
58. Early recovery is an important part of the humanitarian response in all parts of
the country, including the north-west where the severity of needs and the large
displaced population has kept much of the focus to date on meeting immediate life saving needs. For example, through early recovery projects in the north-west in 2021,
more than 319,900 people benefited from the rehabilitation of infrastructure in sites
for internally displaced persons. This included road gravelling, tent levelling and rain
drainage system connections. Some 62,000 people were reached by shelter
rehabilitation activities, including the rehabilitation of collective centres, unfinished
buildings and damaged houses. A total of 199 primary health care facilities are now
functional in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, six health facilities have
been rehabilitated and 404 communities have benefited from the repair and
rehabilitation as well as the operation and maintenance of 270 water systems.
59. UNHCR supports self-reliance and builds resilience for the most vulnerable
people through its community-based protection approach and extensive network of
community centres in all 14 governorates. Early recovery initiatives include the
provision of basic start-up livelihood support such as agriculture kits, livestock and
small-scale business support and light repair of community facilities such as irrigation
networks or marketplaces, which enable communities to have access to markets or
increase production, among other things. These actions are complementary to
UNHCR life-saving humanitarian activities in the protection, shelter and non -food
items sectors.
60. The shift to a two-year humanitarian response plan will support the delivery of
early recovery projects. By expanding the time frame by a year, projects can more
sustainably address needs and be based on more participatory, community -led plans
focused on the multiple factors inhibiting local resilience. Projects can also be
implemented across value chains. For example, a UNFPA midwifery project included
the light rehabilitation of a training facility, the provision of equipment and the
training of midwives. In the city of Dayr al-Zawr, UNDP implemented a series of
integrated projects, including emergency livelihoods for debris removal, the light
rehabilitation of critical services and livelihoods support for local shop owners, to
spur local recovery in neighbourhoods that were previously central to the city’s
economic activity. The various steps must occur in succession, and slightly extended
timelines will allow for projects to better make such important linkages. Mine action
is also important for effective early recovery projects, in particular in areas hardest
hit by conflict. The rehabilitation of schools, hospitals or other civilian infrastructure
damaged by conflict, as well as agricultural land in conflict areas, must be safe before

14/16

21-18228

S/2021/1030

they can be renewed and used again, and the populations involved must also
understand the risks.
61. Within the humanitarian response plan, in addition to projects focused solely on
early recovery, there are significant projects in other sectors implementing early
recovery under strategic objective 3. For example, in 2020 and 2021, WHO completed
the light rehabilitation of eight primary health centres and began the rehabili tation of
another six hospitals, one primary health centre and one laboratory in seven
governorates across the country, all under the health sector response.
62. The United Nations has undertaken efforts to scale up early recovery activity
since July 2021. The Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund is completing an
allocation of approximately $20 million for early recovery activities. The Syria
Humanitarian Fund that operates from Damascus has allocated 37 per cent of the over
$42 million distributed in 2021 for early recovery objects (projects under strategic
objective 3). As the 2022 humanitarian response plan is being developed, there is an
expectation that the number of people in need targeted for the early recovery sector
will increase.
63. On 24 November, the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States
Department of the Treasury amended the sanctions regulations for the Syrian Arab
Republic in order to expand the authorizations for NGOs to engage in certain
transactions and activities. The amendment authorizes them to engage in the
following additional transactions and activities in support of certain not -for-profit
activities in the Syrian Arab Republic: (a) new investment in the country; (b) purchase
of refined petroleum products of Syrian origin for use in the country; and (c) certain
transactions with elements of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. These are
authorized only in support of the not-for-profit activities already authorized under the
general licence, including humanitarian projects that meet basic human needs.

V. Observations
64. Despite a complex set of challenges, the United Nations and its partners have
broad visibility on all its operations. The Organization has seen improvements in
access allowing for more opportunities for monitoring, building on the robust
monitoring by third-party monitors already in place. The risk management systems in
place further aid the transparency of operations by providing a clear assessment of
challenges, mitigating factors and residual risk.
65. Security Council resolution 2585 (2021) extended authorization for the critical
cross-border operation that provides life-saving support for 3.4 million people in need
in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. United Nations cross-border operations
through the Bab al-Hawa border crossing authorized by the Council currently
constitute the essential channel for the Organization to assist the north -west at the
scale necessary to support humanitarian needs. The findings of the present report
outline how the cross-border operation is one of the most closely monitored
operations in the world, subject to multiple layers of checks to ensure a high degree
of transparency. The United Nations cross-border operation also continues to innovate
and improve, finding new areas in which transparency can be further enhanced, such
as in expanding the systems in place for risk management. The United Nations and
its partners are able to deliver assistance in a difficult operating environment.
Deliveries are based on a thorough understanding of humanitarian needs, with
visibility on what is being delivered and where the assistance is going. The cross border operation remains an essential part of the humanitarian response and will
continue to be as long as needs cannot be addressed at the same scope and scale
through any other modality.
21-18228

15/16

S/2021/1030

66. I am encouraged that clear progress has been made on cross-line operations and
that all parties have confirmed their willingness to ensure the delivery and distribution
of cross-line aid. In a matter of months, new approaches have been negotiated among
parties to the conflict, and a system is nearly in place to deliver aid to people in need
in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic in a predictable and sustained manner.
More needs to be done to ensure that access translates into meeting humanitarian
needs, and I call upon all parties to the conflict to ensure that these operations are
able to deliver aid without delay. In that regard, I urge all parties to provide the
necessary permissions and security guarantees in a timely manner. I also call upon all
parties to give the process the time needed to succeed, recognizing the complexities
of delivering aid across an active conflict line.
67. Even with the full implementation of the United Nations six-month plan, crossline convoys will not be able to replicate the size and scope of the cross -border
operation. They will be an important complement to the cross-border operation,
offering another avenue for aid to be delivered to people in need in the north-west of
the Syrian Arab Republic. The cross-line operation must also be integrated into the
overall humanitarian response to ensure that there is not a negative impact on priority
needs in other parts of the country. I recall my position that, with more access and
more funding, the United Nations would be better able to meet the needs of people
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
68. Early recovery activities, benefiting all people across the whole of the Syrian
Arab Republic, are critical to the continued success of the humanitarian response in
the country. Needs continue to grow, outpacing the generous support of humanitarian
donors. The response needs to become more sustainable, otherwise more and more
people will be unable to meet their basic needs. This can only be done by building the
resilience of the Syrian people. While life-saving activities are a central part of the
humanitarian response, early recovery is key to addressing rising needs.
69. After a decade of conflict, the humanitarian response in the Syrian Arab
Republic continues to support millions of people in need each month without critical
life-saving assistance. Despite challenges, humanitarian aid is delivered and services
are provided in a principled and transparent manner throughout the country. Every
opportunity must continue to be taken to address humanitarian needs, including by
further increasing access and further expanding early recovery efforts. However, what
people in the Syrian Arab Republic need most remain s a sustainable solution to the
conflict, in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).

16/16

21-18228
