UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES.VERBADX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 8

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 8

FOUR HUNDRED AND FOURTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT QUATRlEME SEANCE.

Held at Lake Success, New York,

Tenue d Lake Success, N e':t/-York,
le ieudi 27 jan7;iflT 1949, 11 heut'cs.

on Thlwstky, 27 January 1949, at 11 a.11t.
President: General McNAUGKTON (Canada).

a

Presidant: Le general McNAUGHTON (Canada).
Prescnts: Les representants des pays suivants:

Present: The representatives of the following
countries; Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republk, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America,

Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste soviHique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes 50vietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats·Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 404)

1. Ordre du jotU' proviaoire
(S/Agenda 404)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The Indonesian question.
3. Letter elated 14 January 1949 from the Secre~
tary-Generaladdressed to the President of
the Security Council transmitting the resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its
163rci meeting, 19 November 1948, concerning prohibition of the atomic weapon and reduction by one~third of the armaments and
armed forces of the permanent members of
the Security Council (5/1216).

1. Adoption de l'ordre dLt jour.
2. La question indOllesienne.
3. Lettre, en date du 14 janvier 1949, adressee
par le Secretaire general au President du
Conseil de securite., transmettant le texte de
la resolution adoptee par l'Assemblee ge.nerale a sa cent-soixante~troisieme seance, le
19 novembre 1948, sur l'interdic.tion de l'arme
atomique et la reduction d'un tiers fles armements et des forces armees des membres per~
manents dll (onseil de securite (5/1216).

2. Adoption of the agenda

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

Members will note tlmt the
provisional agenda includes both items which
were on the agenda adopted at our last meeting
[4041h mee'ting]. I propose that we first continue
the discus.sion of the Indonesian question.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit dc fa.nglais): Les
membres du Conseil remarqueront que l'oI'dre da
jour proviwire mentionne les deux points qui se
trouvaient a ['ordre du jour adopte lors de notre
derniere reunion [404 ~me s~ance]. Je propose
que, en premier 1.ieu, .notls p~tlrsuivions la discus~
sion sur la question mdoneslenne.

Mr. MALJK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I requested
at the last meeting that the consid'eration of the
second q.uestion should be postponed for a few
days. As my request was made on the evening
of 25 January, that is to say the day before yesterday, and as we are again meeting this morning, we bave postponed the discussion for one
day only.
I therefore wish to ask,! for a postponement of
the discussion of the second question until Mon~
day Qr Tuesday.

M. MALlK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (tl'ilduit du russe); All' cours de
la clemiere seance du Conseil, j'ai demande de
differer l'examen de la deuxieme question. Mais,
Hant dOl1ne que ceHe seance s'est tenue avanthier apre-midi et que nous noUs reuni~sons de
nouveau ce matin, la question n'a done ete differee
que d'un seul jour.

Tlle PRESJDENI:

Je demande par consequent que l'examen en
soit re.mis au lundi DU an mardi.

~.
I

2

I

The PRESIDENT: Unless there is objection, the
request of the representative of tIle USSR will
be accepted, namely, that item 3 of our agenda,
the letter from the Secretary-GeneraL be not
taken up until Monday or Tuesday of next week
Mahmoud FAWZl Bey (Egypt): I wish to call
the attention or the Security Council to the fact
that on Monday there will be a meeting of the
Interim Committee. It will be diffieult to hold a
meeting of the Secnrity Council and of the
Interim Conunitee on the same day and at the
same time.
The PRESIDENT: I appreciate the observation
of the representative of Egypt, and I assure him
that either I 01' my Sllccessor in the Presidency
will take account of this.
There being no further comment, I declare the
agenda adopted, as amended.

The agenda as amended 'Was adopted.

•

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : A mains
qu'il n'y ait une objection, la demande farmulee
par le representant de l'URSS sera acceptee; le
point 3 de notre ordre du jour, l<l lettre du SeCf(~­
taire general, ne sera mis en disct\ssion que le
lundi ou le rnardi de la semaine prochaine.

I.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Je desire attirer l'attention du Coaseil
de securite SLlr le fait que lundi doit se tenir une
seance de la Commission interimaire. Il sera difficile de tenir le meme jour et a la meme heure une
seance du COllseil de securite et une seance de la
Commission interimaire.

\

Le PRESIDENT (trad1lit de l'anglais): J'apprecie

a sa juste valeut la remarque du representant de

l'Egypte et je peux IUI garantir que cela sera
pris en consideration, soit par moi-meme, soit par
mon successel1r i la presidence.
Du moment qu'il n'y a pas d'autres observations, je declare que l'orclre du jour te1 qu'il a ete
amende est adopte.

L'ordre du jour tel qu'it a. Cte amende est
adopte,

3. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question

3. Suite de la discussion sur la que!ltion
indonesienne

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hood,
representative of Australia,' Mr. van Langenhove,
representative of Belgium; U So Nyun, representative of Bm·ma; Sir Benegal Rama Rau,
representative of IlIdia; Mr. van Roijen, representative of lite Netlte1"lands; Mr. InglCs, npreseJttative of the Philippines; alld Mr. Palm',
representative of the Republic of Indonesia, took
thei.r places at the Council table.

Sl/Y 1"i'1witation du President, M. Hood, repr~­
sentant de l'Australie; M. van LangrJnho1le, represell/ant de la. BelgiqHe; U So Nyun, ref'resentard
da la Birmanie; Sir Benegal Rama Ralt, represell/ant de l'Inde; M. 11an Roijen, represcrdani
des Pays-Bas; M. Ingles, representa.nt des Philippines, et M. Polar, representant de la Repl~
blique d'lndonesie, prennent place a la table du
Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: As ustml, interpretation will
be cons~cutive for members of the Security
Council and simultaneous for all other speakers.

Le PRESIDENT (iraduit de l'anglais) : Comme
d'habitude l'interpretation sera consecutive pour
les interventions des membres dll Conseil de securite et simultanee pour toutes les autres interventions.
Nous poursuivons maintenant la diseussio~ d.e
la ql1estion indonesienne en tenant compte prmc~­
palement du projet de resolution Comml1TI SOU~lS
le 21 janvier par 1es representants de la Chme,
de Cuba, de la Norvege et des Etats-Unis
[5/1219J.
M. PAUN. (Indonesie) (traduit de l'angrais) :
Je vais citer un extrait d'tlO article paru le 18 janvier dans le New York Times et envoye de La
Haye:
"Les parte-paroles officiels neerlanc1ais affirment que les depenses effectuees en Indonesie ne
tombent pas toutes a la charge des Pays-Bas!
mais sont financees principalement par ceux qUt
ant repris la suite de l'ancien Gouvernement des
Indes neerlandaises. Ainsi, sur la somme de
436.297.874 dollars qui, corn me il a ete i!!dique
a Batavia le 12 janvier, represente le cout des
operations militaires en Indonesie en, 1?48,
44 millions de dollars seulement sont rotS a la
charge du budget de la dHense nationale des
Pays-Bas. Cette annee, pour la· meme region, ces
depenses s'eleveront a 29 millions de dollars
environ."
Aucune declaration officielle n'a rcv6Ie ·avec
autant de clarte l'un des mobiles principaux de la
politique neerlandaise en Indonesie. Cette decla-

We shall now continue the discussion on the
Indonesian question, with particular reference to
the joint draft resolution submitted jointly by
the representatives of China, Cllba, Norway and
the Ul1ited States [5/1219], dated 21 ]antlar)'.
Mr. PALM (Republic of Indonesia): In a
Press report of 18 January it was stated, and
I quote from an article in The New York Times
date-lined from The Hague:
"Dutch official spokesmen maintain that the
expenditure in Indonesia is not charged wholly
against the Netherlands but is m3iuly carried by
heirs of the former Netherlands Indies Government. Thus out of a figure of $436,297,874, given
in Batavia January 12 as the cost of military operations in Indonesia during 1948, only $44,000,000
is borne by the Netherlands de£ense budget.
Similar expenditures this year in that area by
the Netherlands will be about $29,000,000."

Never has there been such a revealing official
statement regarding oneaf the major· motivating
forces behind Netherlands policy in Indonesia.

,
i,
,

i

3
.This' statement says, in effect, that we, the Indonesian people, will be forced to pay for the 'war
·which is being waged against us, a war aimed
.at the total destruction of the Indonesian Republic and the re-imposition of Dutch domination on o.ur people. This statement reveals the
hard core of the Indonesian problem, namely,
the economic domination of our people. It l'educes to its real nature of hypocrisy and insincerity the unilateral statements of policy made
by the Netherlands and its high-sounding pledRes
to give freedom and sovereignty to the Indonesian people.

ration souligne en efIet que c'est nOnS, les Indoncsiens, qui allons etre contraints de financer la
guerreql1i est menee contre nous, guerre dont le
but est la destruction totale de la Republiql1e.d'In~
donesie et le retablissement de la domination
neerlandaisc. Cette declaratio;l revele le foud du
probleme indonesien; elle montre la domination
economique qui s'exerce sur notre peuple. Elle
ramene a leur nature veritable, qui est toute
d'hypocrisie et de faussete, les declarations 1.1l1i~
laterales faites par les Hollandais ainsi que 1eurs
pompeuses promesses annom;ant qu'ils sont prets
aaccorcler la liberte et l'independance au peuple
indonesien.

How can our people possibly meet the Netherlands authorities without the deepest suspicion,
in view of the two military attacks which have
been made, and in the face of facts such as t11e
one' jIlSt mentioned? 'It must be clear to everyone that my people cannot possibly ·overcome
these feelings of distrust and suspicion when
they try to find a basis for negOtiations with tl1e
Netherlands, so long as Indonesians know that,
ultimately, they themselves will have to pay about
one billion dollars for this war of aggression being waged against them, for which they are paying already in terms Qf blood and destruction.

Comment notre peup1e pellt-il negoder ave,c les
Hollalldais sans nourrir les plus profondes susla suite des deux agressions dont
picions
il a ete victime et en presence des faits de la
nature de celui que je viens de mentionner?
Tout le monde comprendra que, en essayant de
trollver tme base de negotiation avec les Hollandais, mon pe1.lple ne pourra surmonter ce senti~e.nt de mefiance, tant qu'il saltra que, en defillltlve, ce s..eront les Indonesiens eux-memes qui
devront payer le milliard de dollars environ que
coute cette guerre d'agression menee contre eux
et qu'ils payent deja sous forme d'efIusion de
~ang et de destructions materielIes.

This case is of such great importance for the
settlement of our dispute with the Netherlands
that it wiIl certainly be brought before the
SIXurity Council in due course.

Ce point presente pour le reglement de notre
conflit avec les Hollandais une telle importance
CIU'il viendra certainement un jour devant le
Conseil de seCllnte.

In considering the draft resolution before the
Security Council [5/1.219], I feel the need to
express the appreci~tion and gratitude of my
delegation for the s[)irit of good faith, impartiality and justice evidenced by the sponsors of
this draft resolution in the consultations and
negotiations undert<!.ke.n by these delegations in
their endeavours to find a basis for a solution of
the Indonesian problem which is acceptable to
the Security Council. We are deeply appreciative
of the efforts made by them to find a way out
of the impasse in which the Security Council
finds itself with regard to the Indonesian problem. Despite the high-sounding unilateral plans
and pledges of the Netherlands Government,
these ,delegations have succeeded in keeping the
essentials of the issue in mind.
The spirit of this draft resolution is a sharp
rejection of the Netherlands policy in "solving"
the Indonesian problem outside the jurisdiction
of the Security Council and without the par~
ticipationof the Republic of Indonesia and the
people it represents. It recognizes that the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia will be
parties to the dispute before the Security Council
lip to the moment when the Indonesian question
is solved in its entirety, which will be when
sovereignty is transferred to the United States
of Indonesia.

Apres avair etudie le projet de resolution presentc au Conseil de'securite [5/1219], je dois
exprimer la reconnaissance de ma delegation
pour 'l'esprit de bonne foi, d'impartialite et de
justice dont les auteurs de ce projet ont fait
prellve au cours des entreticns et des negociations
qu'ils ont poursuivis pour essayer de sortir de
l'impasse dans laguelle se trouve le Conseil de
securite en ce qui concerne le probleme indonesien. En dCpit des plans et des promesses unifaterales et pompenses dtl Gouvernement des
conserver
Pays-Bas, ces delegations ant reussi
presents a. l'csprit les elements essentiels du pro·
bletue.

My delegation notes, however, that the draft
resoluti<Jln in its present terms has not been able
to dissipate the doubts.. even those in the minds
of some of its sponsors, as to whether-and I
quote the statement of the representative of Cuba
[402nd meeting]__.-1'. • . a resolution drafted
under these terms will be a suffieieI).t and efficient
vehicle fOJ the solution of the Indonesian problem."

a

a

Ce projet ele resolution a ete redige dans un
esprit qni irnplique le rejet pur et simple de la
politique l1eerlandaise dont 1'objd est de "resol1dre" le· probleme indonesien en dehors de la
juridiction du Conseil de securite et sans tenir
compte de la RepubHque d'Indonesie et du peuple
qu'elle represente, I1reconnait les Pays-Bas et
la Republique d'Indonesie cQt1lme parties au diff.erend soumis au Conseil de securite jusqu'au
moment ou la question inclonesienne sera re'soh1e
dans son integralite, c'est-a.-dire lorsque ses droits
de souverainete auront ete transfel·es aux Etats_
Unis d'Indonesie.
Ma delegation remarque cependant que le pro·
jet de resolution, clans sa redaction actuelle, n'a
pu faire disparaHre, meme dans l'esprit de certains de ses auteurs, le doute qui existe sur la
question de savojr ~ et jecite la declanatio,ndu
representant de Cuba [402ente seance]
si ". , . une resolution n~digee en ccs termes
constitttera un moyen efficace et sa.tisfaisant de
resoudre la solution du probleme indonesien",

4
The doub:s present in thf' minds of the sponsors of this draft resolution exist to a greater
degree in the minds of my people. They have
learned from bitter experience that it is only with
the most explicit safeguards th<.t they can hope
for fair and honest treatment from the Dutch
when entering into bona fide negotiations with
them.

Les doutes qu'epro:.1Vent les auteurs de ce
pr::Jjet de resolution existent, avec pIllS de force
encore, dans I'esprit de mon peuple. Cl" peuple
a appris, la suite d'une experience amere, que
Cl" n'est que s'il s'entoure des garanties les plus
precises c;u'il peut esperer obtenir de3 Hollandais
un traitement jt:ste et honnete lorsque, de bonne
foi, i1 entamera des negociations avec eux.

In fact, even before considering the terms of
the draft rewlutioll, the first and forerr.ost question in their minds will be: Has the Netherlands
the ir:tention of coming to a negctiated settlement
at all, in place of one imposed by them? Nothing in the past history of our cealings with the
Netherlands has proven that it does not desire
an imposed settlement. The Council's first question will thel"efore be: How can the Netherlands
be made to negotia~e such a settlement? And for
that ,amI" reason, my people wU concur, as my
delegation cnncurs, with the statement made by
the ,epresentative of China when he stated
[40211d meetit.g]:

En fait, avant meme d'examiner les termes de
ce projet de resoltltiol1, l.a premiere question qui
lui viendra it l'esprit se:a la suivante: les Hollandais ont-ils vraiment l'inteIltion de rechercher
un reglement par voie de negociation et nO:1 pas
une solution qu'ils imposeraient eux-memes? Rien
dans l'histolre de nos relations avec les HolIandais ne vient prcuver que ces derniers ne desirent
pas imposer eux-memes un reglemen: de la questien. La premiere question que doil se poser le
ConseH est done la suiv,ante: peut-on amener les
negoder un tel regknent? C'est
Hollandais
pour cette raison que mon peuple l de ll1eme que
ma delegation, approu"e la declaration Iaite par
le representant de la Chine [402hne .>eancel:

a

a

a

"Si on veut aboutir un reglement qui soit
"If we are to have a negotiated settlement, we
must have the responsible high officials of the le resultat de negodations, il faut que les chefs
Republic of Indonesia restored to that freedom responsables de la Republique d'Indonesie retrollof movement and action which alone call ell<l.ble vent leur Uberte de motlvement d'actioo, condition
them to discharge their duties. Do th.:: Dukh indispensable pour leur permf'.ttre de remplir leurs
authorities mean that they wish to impose their obligations. Les autorites neerlandaises entendentown scheme of settlemel1t on the Indollesians? elles imposer aux Indonesiens lem propre plan de
Do they wish to get rid of the Re?ttblic of n~glement? Des:rent-elies se clebalTasser de fa
Indonesia as a political entityl If I were to Republique d'lndonesie en tant qu'entite poli~
deduce the <.nswer from the public statements of tic;ue? Si j'avais it tirer les conclusions des
Dutch statesmen, beginning with the recent state- dedarations faites en public par les dirigeants
ment 0'1: Her Maje:>ty, the Queen, r would say des Pays-Bas et, en premier lip:u, par Sa Majeste
'No.' 1£ I were to confine my attention to the la Reine, je dirai: non. Mais si je denis li:niter
acts of the Dutch authorities in Indonesia, I mon attention <lUX actes des autorites neerlan~
would answer 'Yes.' New, if the Dutch mean daises en Indonesie, je repondrais: oui. Si les
to have a negotiated settlement, it is ottr duty Hollandais desirent parvenir un reglement qui
to help as much as we can. Certainly, we must soit le n!sultat de ncgociations, no:.lS avons le
refrain from any act or word which might in- devoir de les aider dan;; toute la mesure du poscrease their difficulties for, in fact, they have sible. Nous devons necessaire"ent t1i1IlS abstenir
many difficulties. If, however, they mean to de toute action ou de toute parole qui risqt:erait
impo,e their own plans on Indonesia without re- d"'.IIgmenter leurs diffieultes} car, en effet, ils ont
gard to the wi~hes ()f the·Indor.esian people, we a :aire face a de nombreuses difficultes. Si, toumight as well stop considering, this resolution and tdois, ils entendent imposer leur propre plan a
instead consider other means of action which l'Indonesie sans tenir compte da des:r du peuple
woutd be more suitable for meeting suc:, a grave: indonesie!l, mieux va·.1t cesser cl'examiner Cl"
projet de resolut:oll et etl1dier des moyens d'action
cuntingtllcy."
plus efficaces afin de faire face une crise aussi
grave."

a

a

The sponsors of the draft resolution have been
{ranI, in pointing out that this draft resolution
is a compromise which has required from tbe
sponsors, and will demand from the two parties
to the dispute, "a large measure of co:npromise
and accommodation". My delegation fully real~
izes that the sponsors were forced to make such
a compromise in order to gain the required nuntber of votes so that the draft resolution might be
acceptecl by the Council. We on:y regret that by
doing' so, the adoption of the measures to solve
the Indonesian problem will, to a great extent,
be dependent on considerations which have nothing to do with the: merits or the exigencies of
the C3.se,

Les autellrs de Cl" projet de resolu!ion ont fait
preuve de franchise en soulignant que Cl" projet
cD:lstitae un compromis qui a exige de leur part
et qui eltigera des deux parties au differend
"beau coup de bonne volonte et d'esp~it de concil[a:1on". Ma delegation se rend pleinement compte
que les lluteurs du projet ont du preparer ce
compromis afin d'obtenir le nombre de voix
necessaire pour que le projet de resolution puisse
etre accepte pllr le ConseiL N otre seul regret est
que, de Cl" fait, l'adoption des mesures destinees
resoudre le probleme indonesien clependra, en
grande p2.Ttie, de considerations qui n'ol1t aucun
r<lpport <lvec les elements veritahles de l'af.aire.

By following this procedure I am afraid that
these exigencies have been more and Ino,e pushed
into the backgrounu, whil~ olher politic;!l and
economic considerations, alien tc the interests of
the Indonesian people, have consequently been

Je crains que cette fa<;on de proceder ne fasse
l'a.triere~plan les vrais
pa3ser de: plus en plus
f<lits de ca,IS'::, tandi s quc cl'autres considerations
d'ordre politique et economiq'le, etrangeres aux
inten~ts du peuple indonesien, prelldront une

a

a

5
allowed to dominate the pictUl"C. Howevel' un~
avoidable may have been this prClceclure of sacrificing these exigencies for .c{)n.~ideratjollS of ex~
pediency, in order to secure adoption by the
Secu:'ity Council, it is bound to create great
difficulties. The _Indor:esian problem has taxed
the patience of the Sec'lrlty Cotmcil for c. period
of eighteen months. Yet, despite this fact, the
Council has, unfOltunate1y, not been able to bring
abollt a decisive solution.

importance capita1e, Il a peut-etre etk indispen·
sable d'agir ains:, pour aSsurer le passage au
Consei! de securite de ce projet de resolution,
mais ce sera la source de graves difficultes. Le
Conseil ::le seeutite a deja du consacrer dix-huit
mois au probleme indoncsien et pourtant it n'a
malheureusement pas He .i meme de trouver
tllle solution decisive.

What is tile real reason for this situation? The
reason, we feel, is thnt the Security COU:lci! has
never felt itself in a position tCl adopt the f<lr~
reaching and decisive measures required and repeatedly requested by us. These measures coosistcc., first, b calling upon the Netherlands to
withdraw its :roops to positions held by it prior
to the first military action; and, secondly, the
arbitration of the di.<;ptte. \Vhen these measures
were not forthcoming, we requt'3ted that decisive
powers be granted to the Committee of Good
Offices so that it might seek a solution and
implement it. At the various times we made
these. requests, we warned the Security Council
that measures short of such decisive action would
not bring peace an~ that they would, in fact,
afford an opportumty to the Netherlands to
sabotage its agreement for transfer of sovereignty and to contim.l~ its attempts to impose a
unilateral settlement.

Que1le e~t la ve:'itable raison a l'ori.16ne de cette
situatior.? A notre avis, c'est que le Conseil de
securite ne s'est jam.:lis senti a meme d'.adopte:r
les meSlJres decisives indspensables que DOllS
avons demandees a maintes reprises, Ces meslJres
consistent en premier lieu a inviter les Pays-Bas
a retirer leurs troupes sm les positions qu'elles
occupaie1lt avant leurs premieres operations militaires; en second lieu, a procooer a un arbit:'age
dlt con Hit. Lorsr::ue ces mesures ne fureut pas
prises, nous clemand&mes que pl~ins ponvoirs
fussent accordes 3. la Commission de bons offices
pour 1ui permettre de cbercher une solution et de
I'appliquer. A diverses reprises nOllS .wons reitere
ces demandes; nous avons preVeOlt le Conseil
de securite que des 1TIesures ne presentant pas un
caractere decisif n'ameneraient pas la paix et
4ue, ell fait, dies fourniraient aux "Pays-Bas
1'occasion de saboter l'accord concernant le trans~
fert de la souvera:nete et de poursuivre leurs tentatives en vue d'imposer un reglement unilateral.

Pour tOlltes ces raisons, nOlls esperons fer:neWe therefore trust that the Council will now
consider seriously our apprehensions regarding ment que le Consei1 tiendra dtimen: compte des
the present proposal. the prestige of the Council 3pprehensions que nous eprouvons a l'egard de
and the solution of this dispute will, unfor- cette froPosition. Malheureusement, aucune
tunately, not be served by any measures how- mesure, quelque bien illt~ntionnee et quclque
ever well intentioned and however much more energiq'Ue qu'elle ?uisse paraitre par comparaison
sweeping they may appear to be than prior avec- les tentatives anterieures, ne servirait le
attempts, so long as they do not actually provide prestige du Conseil ni ne contribuerait a reg1er
the minimum basis for a solution. Tr.erefore, ce diffe~end si elle ne fOllrnissait 1)as une base
desp:te Ollr recognition of the difficulties with minimum pOUl" la solution de ce probleme. C'est
which the sponsors were faced in their efforts to pourquci, tout en me rendant compte des diffirealize their sincere intention to find a solution, cultes que 1es auteurs de ce texte or.t rencontrees
it is my duty to point out to the mem1Jers of the pour donuer une forme m."ltertel1e a leur sin~ere
Council the specific di:nculties which our people elesir de trouver une solution, j'ai le devoir de
wo.uld face with regarc to the present draft reso- VOIIS hire connaitre les difficu!tes certaines que
lutIOn. But, before doing so, I should like to ce projet de resolution risquerait cl'entrainer pour
mon peuple. Mais, avant de le faire, je voudrais
bring another point to the men:bers' attention,
attirer l'attention du Conseil sur ur.e nutre question encore.
The United States representative llas stated
that the present draft ~esolutior: is based "on the
full support and co-o?eration of both parties".
And, in the words of the reprerentative of China
[402nd meeting], this resolutie,n, "if passed by
the Security Council and if accepted, loyally by
both the Net\erlands and the Republic of lndonesi." would not only solve th:s very important
and :omplicated problem, but, in solving it would
also strengthen the usefnlIl~ss and the prestige
of the Secllrity Cound." Here we tOllch on one
of the fnndamental is:ues in the situation.

Le representant des Etats-Unis d'Ameriq:te a
declare que le present prQjet de resolution presuppose "l'appui sans reserve et la cooper<.tion
des deux parties". Quant au representant de la
Chine, ;1 a exprime l'avis [40nme scrHlceJ que,
cctte resolution, "si dIe est adoptee, par le CO:1seil
de securite et acceptee 10yalement par 1es PaysBas et la Republique d'Indoncsie, permettra de
resoudre ce problcme si complique et important
et renforcera I'utilite e.t le prestige du Comeit".
Nous tcuchons ici I'un des aspects les plns irr.portants de toute la situation.

The resolution is based on the assumption of
willingness on the part of the Netherlands to
comply with its terms. The fae: is that, thus far,
the Netherlar:cls has refused to comply \\,ith even
those decisions of the Council which are susceptlhIe of immediate perfonnance on its part. I
refer to the release of Republican officials and
the cease-fire demand [Sj1150, Sjl164, Sjl165].
These two directives form the Jasic groundwork

Ce projet de resolution est fonde sur l'idee que
les Hollandais se montreront prets a se conformer
a ses dispositions. Or, jusqu'a present les PaysEas ont refuse de donner effet meme a ceUes des
resolutions du Conseil qu'ils etaient parfaite:nent
~11 lllesure d'appliquer. Je pense llotamment a
la mise en liberte des dirigeants republicains et
a l'ordre de cesser le feu [Sj1150, Sj1164,
Sj1165]. Or, pour que le plan en-visage clans le

6
essential to the success of the entire plan envisaged :0 the resolution. Even if the Netherlands sho'Jld verbally "ccept the terms of the
resolution. experience has clearly demonstrated
that it will not, in .any event, implement its terms.
Consequently, even if the Netherlands acquiesces in the resolution, the Republic is being
asked to surrendtr certain concrete advantages,
which I shall detail later, and to retreat from its
present strong position, in return for promises of
a future political arrangement which cannot be
consummated and which will become illusory if
the Netherlands again evinces the slightest degree of bad faitl\. The plain fad is that the
Netherlands has, conc:1usively demonstrated that
its whole objective is, and has been, to avoid an
agreement and to evade a position in which it
would be compelled to come to such a negotiated
settlement. These constitttte the bases of acts of
defiance of the Security Council on the part of
the Netherlands. The Dutch defiance has gone
uncensored, despite the overwhelming evidence
which the report of the Committee of Good
Offices [5/11991 has produced. How, then, can
we expect the Netherlands to live up to commitments contained in the resolution?

The concern of my people in this regard is
justified. This concern will prove to be a major
source of difficulty in their acce.ptance of any
resolution of the Security Council. _1 feel, therefore, that unless the most f.'Cplicit, unambiguous
and clear-cut provisions and safeguards are
embodied in such a resolution, with regaTd to
both the substance and the time-table, it cannot
remove the basis of this deep-rooted concern.
I now come to the point which I mentioned
before-namely, the basic attitude and the major
consjd~rations of our people witl~ regard to any
resoltlt:on adopted by the Security Council.

projet de resolution puis se reussir, il fallt que
ces deux directives soient au pnblable observees,
L'experience a montre que mellle siles HolIandais
aceeptaient en paroles les termes de cefte reso'lt~tion, its ne les mettraient aucunement en'
vlgueur.
Mais, a supposer meme que les Hollandais
acceptent ce texte, il n'en reste pa~ moins qu'on
demande a la Republique de renoncer a certains
avantages tangibles sur lesquels jc reviendrai, et
d'abandonuer la position favorable qu'elfe occupe
en ce moment, en echange d'une simple ptoiUesse d'un arrangement politique futur, arrari-'
gement qni ne pourra etre atteint et qui devien'-drait parfaitement illusoire si les Pays-Bas fai-'
saient, uoe fois de plus, et meme dans uoe faible
mesure, preuve de mauvaise foL Le fait est
que les Hollandais ont montre de fa<;on tres nette:
C]u'ils ant toUjOllfS cherche a eviter un accord et
a eviter d'etre places dans une situation ou ils
seraient forces de regler le conflit par voie de
negociations, Ce Il'est en effet qU'ainsi qu'on peut
s'expliquer les actes de provocation- commis par
les Pays~Bas a l'egard du Conseil de securite~
Malgre les preuves accablantes contenueS dans le
rapport de la Commission de bOns offices
[S/1199], leurs agissements n'ont pas He coodamnes. Comment peut-on s'attendre, dans· ees
condit·ions, a ce que les Pays-B<l.s respectent lesengagements stiptl1es dallS le projet de resolution
actuellement soumis au Conseil ~
Les crainhis qite mon penple ressent it cet egard
sont done parfaitement justifiees, et c'est la la
source prineipale des difficultes qu'il eprouve a
accepter toute resolution du Conseil. C'est pomquoi il me semble que, pour apaiser ceUe inquietude, profondement enraeinte, il faut qu'une
teJle resolution contienne des dispositions et des
gatanties absolument c!.aires, explicites et neUes,
, tant en ce qui concerne le fond du probleme que
pour les delais' d'execution.
]'en viens maintenant a la question que j'ai
mentionnee prccedemment, c'est-a-dire a l'attitude de mon peuple a l'egard des resolutions du
Conseil et aux considerations qui l'inspirent en
; la matlere.

The attitude of our people with regard to any
Ce sont nos possibilites politiques et militair~s,
resolution adopted by the Security Council will . ainsi que l'echec inevitable de la strategie des
be determined, in the first place, by their assess- : Pays-Bas qui determineront l'attitLlde de m~n
ment of their military and political prospects and peuple a l'egard de toute resolution du Consel!.
therefore, also, the unavoidable military and . D'autre part, les Inddnesiens estiment que toute
political failure of the Dutch strategy. Morc'- ,resolution devrait avoir pour point de depart
over, in theil' opinion, any resolution will have ; une constatation explicite de I'agression neerla:l1t? be based. on a recognition of Dutch aggres- : daise. Aussi, la question du retrait immediat des
SIon. In thiS respect, the fact that the! Nether- troupes neerlandaises sera-t-tlle l'un des facteurs
lands will not have to withdraw its troops im- essentiels qui dHermineront l'attitttde de mori
m~diately will be a major consideration in the peuple a l'egard de toute resolution. Toute reso~
mmds of my people in determining their attitude lution qui n'exigerait pas ee retrait sans aucun
toward such a solution. In case the resolution retard OU dans un delai fort court risquerait de
should not call for immediate withdrawal or se heurter a des diffiCttltes insurmontables.
rapid withdrawal within a short time limit the
difficulties may well prove to be insl1rmount~b1e'.
Any factor, the importance of which cannot be
Un autre facteur dont il ne fant pas sousoverestimated in the minds of my po;:ople, is the estimer l'importance est que nous aurOllS utle fois
fa;:t that we shall once again have to negotiate de plus a negocier avec une partie de laquelle 011 ne
With a party from which, in our opinion good peut, a notre avis, attendre de la benne foL L'on
faith cannot be expected. It is qtlite unde~stand~ comprenclra facilemel1t que notre peuple dierche'
able that our people will want to gt1ard them- a se proteger contre toute possibili.te pour les
selves against any possibility of the Netherlands Hollandais de le duper une fois d~ plus. Auss~"
dOlIhle~crossing them once again. In view of this,; pour juger de-la valeur d'une resolutlon du Consel'l
any resolution adopted by the- Security Counci.l de securitej neus demanderons~nous si elle' ne

7
wlll be measured in terms of the possibilities of
a' new deadlock ,and, consequently, a new eco~
nomic, political and military offensive on the part
of the Netherlands.
It is well to remember that, under the terms
of the draft resoll1tion before us, the same
problems and issues which have become the cause
of renewed warfare will come up again and that,
therefore, our people will feel obliged to assess
their position in case such a new deadlock should
arise. In' such a situation, the United Nations
tKJdy in Indonesia, under the present terms of the
resolution, would call upon the Council in order
to obtain larger and more decisive powers. Apart
from the question of whether such a request
would be granted by the Council, our people
would then be in the position of being exposed
to pressure from the Netherlands, namely, to
blockade of communications, economic blockade,
and even military attack.
The situation would be even more untenable
Ior our people in view of the fact that, under
the present terms of the draft resolution, it
would be quite conceivable that Netherlands
troops would remain in Republican territory. In
fact, tmder the present terms, there is no gll3.ran~
tee whatsoever that our Government would be
able to maintain the status of its territory, eco~
nomically, financinlly and politically. In case of
a deadlock, therefore, we wOllld be completely at
the mercy of the Netherlands and would not be
in a position to counter its demands.
It should be remembered that our Government
experienced difficL:1ties in getting sufficient support for the Renville Agreement [5;649, appen~
dix XI]. Under the present circumstances,
where Ollr armed forces are) r,ot in a disadvantageous position, and in view of a failure of
Nethedam.b political stl'ate.gy, it will be even
more difficult to win the stlpport of the majority
of our people for a plan which: would not
basically change the possibilities and dangers re~
suiting, from the Rew1Jille Agreement.

risque p:ts d'amener a une nouvelle impasse, cc
qui entrainerait une nouvelle offensive ecollo~
mique, politique et militaire de la part des Hol~
landais.
Il ne faut pas perdre de vue que le projet de
resolution qui n0\15 est sotlmis va SOlllever les
memes problemes que ceux qui ant provoque
la reprise des hostilites. Il 5t;: Veut cloac que lOon
peuple se voie oblige de reconsiderer son atti~
tude si 1'on venait a se trouver une fob, de plus
dam; une impasse. Le projet de resolution prevoit
que, si une telle situation se presentait, I'organe
des Nations Unies operant en Indonesie deman~
derait au COllseil de ,~e('l1ritt' rl'etendre son mandat.
1(eme si le Conseil faisait droit a unc te11e de~
mande, notre peuple serait expose a la pression
des Hollandais, c'est-a~dire au blocus des voies
de communications, au blocus eccnomique et
meme aux: attaques par la force des armes.

Cette situation serait d'autant plus insupportable
au peuple indonesien que, :lUX termes de la presente resolution il se pourrail que des troupes
neerlandaises continuent a stationner en territoire
de la Republique. En fait, cette resolution, dans
sa reclactio, actuel1e, ne garantit nullement a la
Republiquc la possibilite de maintenir le statut
economique, politique et militaire de son terri~
toire, Aussi, si I'on arrivait a une impasse, la
Republique serait-elle compldement it la men:t
des Hollandais et n'aurait aucun moyen de resister
a leurs exigences.
11 convient de se ralJlJeler egalement que notre.
Gouvernement a eu beaucoup de peine a faire
accepter l'Accord du Renmlle [5/649, amrexe
XI]. Dam'les circonstantes actuelles, alors que
nos troup,:; se trouvent clans une situation qui
n'est pas de~avantaget1Se et que la strategie politique des Hollandais a abouti a un echec, it
serOl. encore plus difficile de faire accepter a notre
peuple un plan qui ne diminue en realite point les
aIeas et les dangers que presentait l'Accord du
RctlVille.
Etant dDlme cette pcsition du pe'.lple indone~
It is therefore necessary to make provision for
sufficient safeguard~ with reSjXct to the actual sien, il faut prtOvoir des garanties suffisantes pour
position of our people, and against possible dan· ecarter les dangers que presente le projet de resogers arising from the present terms of the draft , lution dans sa r&:lactiol1 actuelle. Te tiens a sou·
resolution. It should be emphasized that any ligner que tout projet de resolutiori sera juge non
draft resolution will not be judged, by the possi· pas en fonction des perspectives qu'il offre dans.
bilities and prospects-it apem far the future, but l'avenir, mais des consequences immediates qu'il
hy thf' immediate consequences with rej{ard to aura sur Ilotre situation presente. Sous ce rapour present position. In this respect, ,the impor~ port, on ne saumit som-estimel l'importance que
tancc our people will attach to the continuous notre peuple attaclwra au' maintien dans_ notre
presence, ill one way or another, of the Nether- pays, par un !l1oyen 0(1 par un autre, des troupes
lands Army. which is ready to attack, cannot be- neerlanclaises, qui sont toujOtlfS pretes a l'attaque.
underestimated, ,lJld it will make our people call Mon pettple demandera les garanties les _plus
completes a Cft egard.
fOl' the strongest safeguards in this situation.
Ulle autre question risque de donncr lictl a des
Another point Wl1ich will give rise to difficulties will be the fact that, liS a nSl1lt of the diffic:u!tes: dans sa ree'action actl\elle, le projet
present tenns of (he draft resolution, the United de resolution n'accorde pas de pouvoirs etendus a.
Nations body in Indonesia will not have decisive I'organe des Nations Unies 1":1 Indonesie. Il sera
pOwers. It will therefore be extremely difficult done tres diffieile a Cl" dernier cl'empecller l'ag~
for it to forestall the ueterioration of both the gra'lation de la situation economique et milimilitary and economi<.; CQllditk'llS. The possibility taire. eet organe, f:ertes, pourra s'adresser an
of recourse by this body to the Security Council, Conseil de securite si aucun accord n'intervient
in C<lse of a faihue to reach an agreement before avant le lS mars, mais il sera peut~ette deja
15 lIlarcll, may be too late to Qbviate such a trap tard pour empecher cette ;:tggravation. Il
deterioration of the situation. And even in such n'est pas du tOllt certain que, meme dans ce cas,
a case, it will still be an open qtlestion whether le COllseil consente a etendre les pOltvoirs de cet
thf' Sertlrity Council wiil be willing to grant such org<l.ne. Le projet de resolutic·n. dans sa. r.etlaction
decis:ve powers to that body. Under the present , actuelle, entrainera unt situation ecoIlouLi'lue et'

terms of the resolution, a very difficult economic financiere tres difficile. Des problemes yont se
propos de la situation financiere de la
and financial situation will arise, Questions will poser
also arise with regard to the financial position of Republique, tels lcs problernes de la monuaie, des
the Republic, such as ones in conncxion with imp6ts, du budget par exemp1e. Si la resolution
currency, taxation and budgetary problems. Fail- o'eo tenait pas Sllffisamment compte, l'accueil
ure sufficiently to anticipate these problems in qui l\1i serait reserve serait encore plus defa·
the resolution will tend to make the reception of vorable.
any draft resolution more unfavourable.
Il serait sage de ne pas affaiblir la position de
It will be extremely advisable not to weaken
the position of our Government from the very notre Gouvernement des le debut en lui impooutset by imposing upon it a Security Council sant une resolution du Conseil de securite re.digee
resolution which cannot reasonably be expected en tennes telsqu'on ne saUr:lit s'attendre a ce
to be" acceptable to our people. Our willingness ql1'e11e soit acceptable pour le peuple d'Indonesie.
to stand by the RC1ivilie principles [S/649, En respectant les principes du Rmr-iUe [5/649,
appendices XIII and VIII] has already created anne.t·l!s XIII et VIII], nous nous sommes deja.
attire de serieuses difficultes.
a serious difficulty for us.
Je viens de YOUS hire ,part de l'attitude fondaI have now given the Council a des.cription
of the basic attitudes and considerations our mentale de notre peuple et des considerations qui
people will manifest with reg,ard to any resolu- l'inspirent en ce qui concerne toute resolution qui
tion adopted by the Security Council. I also hope pourrait etre adoptee par le Conseil d~ secuI have made clear the necessity for the Council rite. J'cspere avoir convaincu le Cooseil qu'il
to take these considerations seriously into faut en tenir compte, car ce n'est qu'a cette
account, for only in such a manner can the condition qu'on poun'a, jeter les {baSes d'un
foundations be laid for a peaceful settlement in reglement pacifique en Indonesie.
Indonesia.
Cependant, il y a d'autres considerations encore
There are, however, certain other considerations which the Security Council, in its discus· que le COl1seil devra avoir a l'esprit au moment
sion- of the present draft resolutioll, will have d'examiner le projet de resolution dont it est
to take into account, because, these factors also saisi, car elles aussi peuvent avoir une influence
have an important bearing on the possibility for considerable sur La maniere dont serait appliquee
an effective implementation of a resolution la. resolution qu'il adoptera.
adopted by the COlmcil.
In many respects the present draft resolution,
A bien des egards, ce projet de resolution,
especially as now w:orded, has apparently been surtout dans sa redaction actuelle, semble s'insbased on the assumption that the Netherlands pirer de l'idee que les Hollandais ant deja reussi
has already succeeded in crushing the Republic ,a infliger a la Republique d'Indonesie une dHaite
of Indonesia militarily. It was on this basis that militaire decisive. C'est sur ceUe idee que se fonde
the procedure for tl1e withdrawal of troops was la procedure prevue pour le retrait des troupes;
established; it was also on this basis that several c'est egalement d'elle que s'inspire un certain
other meaSllres were outlined, But this assumption nombre d'autres mesures. Toutefois cette idee
has prqved to be fundamentally at variance with est en contradiction absol11e ","vec le>; faits. Le prethe facts.' The first report by the military ob- mier rapport etabli par les observateurs militaires
servers of the Committee of Good Offices de la Commission de bons offices [Sj121Z), en
[S/12121 already indicated the weakness of the mentionnant la situation dalls la region de
Netherlands military position when it mentioned Sourabaya, qui se trouve sous controle neerconditions in the Surabaya areas which have landais depuis le ler juillet 1947; indiquait'
been under Netherkl.llds control since 1 July deja la faiblesse de la position militaire des Hol1947. It1 has been con finned once again by the landsis. Le deuxieme rapport des observateurs
second report of the military observers [Sj1223j, militaires [5/1223], en date du 24 janvier 1949,
dated 24 Jannar), 1949. There it is stated:
n'a fait que confirmer ces renseignements. On y
lit en effet:
"As a result of the Netherlands Army occupa·
"Du fait de l'occupation neerlandaise, et de
tion and the consequent gllerrilla activities, law I'activite qu'elle a provoquee de la part des gueand order within the fanner Republican-con· rillas, il n'a pas ete possible de faire regner l'ordre
trolled territories have, in general, not been estau- public dans les territoires ou les republicains
lished. Until now, in fact, serious disorders have exenjaient auparavant leur autorite. En fait, il
been created."
s'est produit jusqu'a present de graves desordres."
In fact, the reports I receive from my GovernLes rapports que je re~ois de mon Gouyerne·
ment indicate that entire areas behind the Neth- ment indiquent que les elements republicains
erlands side of the former status quo line are at assnrent en ce moment l'administration de regions
the present moment under the administration of entieres situecs du cote neerlandais de l'ancienne
Republican forces. This is the reason why the ligne du .~tatu q1W, C'est d'ailleurs pour cette
military observers of the Committee of Good raison que les observateurs militaires de la
Offices were not allowed to report on the situa- Commission de bons offices ont ete empeches de
tion in Netherlands-occupied territories. Even faire rapport sur la situation dans les regions
Dutch political and military censors can no occnpees par les Pays~Bas. Les censeurs politiques
longer hide these facts. The Netherlands Indies et miJitaires neerlandais eux-memes n'arri-vent
Army has now felt compelled to state that: "The plus a dissimuler ces faits. L'armee des lndes
situation in West Java has deteriorated more neerlandaises s'est vue obligee de reconnaitre que
than it has progressed."
"la situation dans rouest de Java tend plutot a
empirer".

a

Dutch newspapers report serious disturbances
ii1 East Java. The situation is, in fact, such that
the position of the Netherlands, both in Java and
Sumatra, is becoming increasingly untenable,
with the certain prospect of military and financial
exhaustion and political failure.

'. D'autre part, les journaux neerlandais an110n· cent que des troubles graves se sont produits dans
,ia partie orientale de ceUe ile. A Java, comme a
Sumatra, la situation des Hollandais devient de
,plus en plus intenab1e et 1'on pent prevoir, sans
· crainte de se tromper, que leurs ressources rnilitaircs et .financieres vont s'epuiser et qu'i1s aboutiront a un echec politique.

. I hope that, in view of those reports and these
}'espere que, a la lumiere de ces rapports et de
facts, the Security Council will agree with me · res faits, le Conseil m'accordera que fun des
that one of the basic assumptions underlying arguments essentiels qui mi1itait en faVetlr de
the weakening of several parts of the original I'attennation de la portee de certaines parties de
text of the draft resolution [S/1219) has now · ce texte [S/1219) n'e5t plus vaLable. Ce ~erait,
become invalid. As a matter of fact, it would be '. en fait, meconnaitre la situation que de croire
a misjudgment of the sit11ation to base collsidera- que le retrait immediat des troupes neerlandaises
tion of the withdrawal of Netherlands troops on risquerait de creer un vide, ce qui, a son tour,
the assumption that immediate withdrawal would entrainerait des desordres. Les rapports des
inevitably create a vacuum which, in turn, would observateurs militaires, que je viells de citer, font
lead to disturbances. The reports of the military apparaitre la situation sous un jour tres diffe.observers which I have mentioned throw a differ- rent. Ils mor.trent en efIet que e'est preeisement
ent light on the subject. These reports have la presence de troupes neerIandaises qtli engendre
established tl1e fact that it is the presence of des troubles dans ces regions. Les troupes des
Netherlands troops in these areas which is the Pays-Bas ne constituent nullement un tacteur de
cause of the disturbances. Netherlands troops stabilisation; bien all contraire, eUes sont la cause
there are not a stabilizing factor; on the contrary, des troubles.
they are the cause of turbulence.
It is our opinion, therefore, that a rapid withVoila pourquoi nOllS estimons qu'un prompt·
drawal is called for. Moreover, it is obvious that retrait de ces troupes est indispensable. D'al1tre
an overwhelming majority of the Indonesian part, il est clair que l'ecrasante majorite des
civil servants are refusing to co-operate with the fonctionnaires indonesiens refuse de collaborer
Netherlands and that, in the case of a retirement avec les Hollandais et que, si les troupes des
of Netherlands troops, the texture of the Indo- Pays-Bas etaient retirt~es, l'administration indonesian civil administration would still have st1ffi~ nesienne aurait encore suffisamment de cohesion
cient cohesion to be able immediately to fill the pour comb1er sans retard le vide que laisserait
gaps left open by the withdrawal of Netherlands ['evacuation des troupes et de l'administtation
troops and administration. The replacement of neerlandaises. 11 serait be,mcoup plus facile de
the former Republican officers in these posts will, faire reoccuper ces postes par les anciens fonctherefore, be much easier to carry Otlt than it tionnaires republicains si les troupes des Payswould be if the retreat of the Netherlands troops Bas se retiraient sans retard. En revauche, si cette
were delayed. In case of a delay, the texture of hacuation devait tarder, la structure de l'admi~
the Indonesian administration would no longer be nistration indonesienne ne p05sederait plus sa
as cohesive as fonnedy;, also it would give the cohesion initia1e; cela permettrait aux HoJlandai!l
Netherlands every opportunity to plant the seeds de semer la discorde et de {aisser apres leur
of further disturbances by leaving political time- depart des "bombes a retardement" politiques.
bombs behind. It is therefore extremely desir- Cest pourquoi il est extrememcnt souhaitable qne
able that the withdrawal oJ troops be effected le retrait des troupes s'ef'fectue rapidement.
rapidly.
There is another impol'tant factor which the
Security Council cannot fail to take into serious
consideration in its discussion of the present
draft resolution, if it is to ensure the greatest
possible moral and material support for any decision it may decide to take. The Conference on
Indonesia of the nineteen countries assembled in
New Delhi bears witness to the strength of feeling among the participating Governments regarding Netherlands action in Indonesia. It marks
the earnest and urgent desire that this dispute
between the Nethcrlands Government and the
Government of the Republic of Indonesia,
whicll endangers the peace of South East Asia
and of the world, should be settled rapidly in
accordance with the principles of the Charter.

IJ y a un autre element important que le Conseil
ne saurait negliger ell examinant le present projet
de resolution s'il tiellt a ce que la decision qu'il
prendra rel;oive le plus grand appui moral et
materirl. La Conference sur l'Indonesie, qui
a reuni dix-neuf Etats a New-Delhi temoigne
de la vigueur des sentiments qu'inspirent aux
Gouvemements qui y prennent part les agissements des Pays-Bas en Indonesie. Ces Gouver~
nements desirent tres vivement que le differend
qui oppose le Gouverncment des Pays-Bas au
Gouvernement de la Repl1blique d'Indonesie et
qui constitne une menace pour la paix de ['Asie
sud-orientale et du monde entier soit regie aussi
rapidement que possible, ell conformite avec les
prineipes de la Charte.

Apart from their deep-felt sympathy for the
Indonesian cause, thes~ countries are closely con~
nected with the problem in Indonesia. The outcome of the Indonesian problem will greatly
affect their interests in so far as the question of
war or pence in Indonesia is baund to have repercussions in the neighbouring countries. For that
same renson, no measure can be taken, nor any

Ces pays epronvent line prefonde sympathie
pour la canse indonesienne, et la question indo~
nesienne les concerne directement. La solution
que recevra cette question affectera prof(mde~
ment leurs inten~~ts, cat le rrobleme de la guerre
ou de la paix en Indonesie ne peut manquer
d'avoir des repercussions dans les pays voisins.
Cest precisement pour cela qu'aucune mesure

10
recommendation made, which does not take into
account the concepts of justice and the desire for
the maintenance of peace prevailing in that large
area of the world.

ne doit etre prise, aucune recommandation formulee sans tenir compte du desir de justice et
de paix qui prevaut dans cette region du monde.

These countries have made clear how the
question of war or peace in Asia can best be
dealt with, and how peace in Asia can best be
secured. They have done so in a resolution con~aining recommendations to the Security Council
[S/1222J. That resolutio:l was framed in full
recognition of the authority of the Security
Council, and it was drafted in a desire to assist
the Council in th..: solution of the Indonesian
problem. This recommendation, then, contains
the considered opinIon of all of the nineteen
countries which have a pressing interest in a just
and speedy settlement of the Indonesian problem.
It outlines how this problem should be settled in
the best interests of all.

Ces pays ont indique clairement queUe etait
la meilleure fa~on de regler la question de la
guerre ott de la paix en Asie et d'assumer la
paix s;ur ce continent. lis I'ont fait dans tine
resolution [51-t222J qui contient (les recommandations a l'aclresse dUo Conseil de securite. Les
auteurs de ceUe resolution reconnaissent pleinemeat l'autorite du ConseiL En redigeant ce texte,
iIs se sont inspires du desir d'aider le Conseil a
regJer la question indonesienne. Cette resolution
ex.prime done l'opinion murement reflee:hie des
dix-neuf pays qui ant le plus vif interet a ce
que la question indonesienne soit reglee rapidement et de maniere equitable. Elle indique comment le probleme clevrait etre regIe dans l'interet
de tous.

The Sewrity Council will not fail to notice
the moderate character of the New Delhi resolution. The Council, I am sure, will agree with
me that this resolution must have ueen drafted
with full cognizance of the possibilities open to
the Security Cotmcil. The resolution indicates
the minimum which, in the opinion of the Confert~nc.e, would enable my Government to assure
the full co-operation of its people in the implementation of the terms of a resolution by the
Security Council. It is clear that this resolution
emanating from the New Delhi Conference provides the Security Council with substantial support, which should be taken into account, in
order to achi<::ve the greatest effectiveneas in the
implementation of a resolution adopted by the
SecIll'ity Council. The views presented by this
New Delhi resolution do not, as the Council will
see, entirely coincide with the Netherlands view.
point, especially with that given on 22 January
by . the Netherlands Foreign Minister, Mr.
Stikker. On that occasion, the Netherlands For~
eign Minister warned the world that acceptance
of the present draft rcsobtion would create
chaos in Indonesia and chaos in Holland. He
has deliberately tmned a blind eye to the chaos
created by Netherlands troops in Indonesia, as
the reports of the Committee of Good Offices
bear witness.

Le Conseil de securite aura certainement remarque le carae:tere moden~ de la resolution de
New-Delhi. It recormaitra, fen suis sur, que ce
texte a ete redige en pleine consciene:e des possibiIites qui sont offertes au Conseil. Cette resolution expose les conditions minima qui, au juge~
ment de la Conference, permettraient a mon
Gouvernement d'assurer la pleine collaboration
du peuple d'Indonesie a la mise en vigueur d'Ulle
resolution du Conseil. Il est clair que cette resolution de la Conference de New-Delhi comtitue
un appui substantiel offert au Conseil de secu
rite et ql1'il y a lieu de tenir compte de ce fait
si J'on veut que la resolution du Conseil soit
appliquee de la maniere ia plus effic.ace possible.
Comme le Conseil s'en rendra compte, les vues
exposees dans cette resolution ne correspondent
pas exactement a la these neerlalldaise, telle qu'elle
a ete exposee notamment le 22 janvier par
M. Stikker, Ministre des affaires etrangeres des
Pays-Bas. A cette occasion, le Ministre des affaires
etranghes des Pays-Bas a prevenll le Illonde que,
si le present projet de resolution et<tit accepte,
cela creerait le chaos en Indonesie et QUX PaysBas. Il a delibf:rement passe sous silence le chaos
que les troupes neerlandaises ont nee en Indonesie et dont parlent les rapports de la Commission
de bons offices.

This chaos will disappear only when Netherlands troops have been completely withdrawn.
The Netherlands Foreign Mi:lister on th"t occasion, also complained about "basic mistrust of
our proclaimed intentions, of our most formal
pledges" .

ee ebaos ne disparaitra qu'apd:s le retrait
complet des troupes neerianclaises. A cette meme
occasion, le ministre neerlar.dais s'est plaint "d'un
parti pris de metiance i l'egard des intentions
dec1al'l~es et des promesses les plus solenneUes des
Pays-Bas".

Is this mistrust unfounded? Confidence in the
Netherlands has been badly shaken by the reP9rts 0 f t~e Committee of Good Offices and by
the. expenence of the Senlrity Council itself,
whIch has recently repeated Iv been misinformed
by the Netherlands Governinent. In the Same
statement, the Netherlands Foreign Minister has
tried h.is hand at misinformation by stating tl1o.t
two-thln)s of the population of Indonesia Ims
opt~d for the Netherlands side. By so doing be
~eslres to .create the impression that the pop~l<t­
t10DS outslde the territory of tbe Republic of
Indonesia have sided with the Netherlands. But
this, I submit, is a deliberate prevarication. It is
no secret that the majority of the population in
Netherlands-occupied territory has not relin-

Cette mefiance est-elle done sans fondement?
Le credit des Hollanclais a ete fortement ebranle
par les rapports de la Commission de bons offices
et par l'experience du Conseil de s;ecurite luimelTle qui a, ces derniers temps, re<;u a plusieurs
reprises du Gouvernement neerlandais des renseignements inexacts. Dans la meme (let:laration,
le Ministre des affaires etrangeres des Pays-Bas
s'est essaye a la fal\sse information en pretendant
que les deltx tiers de la population d'Indonesie
ant opte pout" les Pays-Bas. Ce faisant, il cherchait
donner l'impression que les populations
qui vivent en dehors du territoire de la Republique
d'lndonesie ant pris parti pour les HoUandais.
Or, j'affirrne que cela constitue une imposture.
Ce n'est un secret pour personne que la majorite

R

a

11
quished its ideals as embodied in the Republic of
Indonesia.
Even Netherlands military and economic policies, aimed at keeping Indonesians apart, have
proved unavailing. In spite of rigorous. precautions taken by the Netherlands authorities, elections held in Netherlands-occupied territories have
returned candidates of pro-Republican sympathies. This was' also proved by the resignations
of the Governments of tlle two most important
States under Netherlands control when the
Netherlands started its military action, and by
condemnation o~ this action by the Parliaments
of these States.
The latest in the series of anti-Dutch actions
in Netherlands-controlled territory is reported by
the Dutch news agency, Anl!ta., in its issue of
24 January. An item date-lined Batavia states:

"TIle arrest of four' Indonesians in Pasundan
for subversive activities was announced here by
Major-General E. Engles, Territorial Army
Commander of the area. The four are Godokusono, one of the twenty signatories of the proRepublic manifesto, Sllratman, Sujoso, and
Mohammed Enoch, all members of the PasunJan
Parliament.
"At a Press conference, General Engles
stressed that the arrests were carried out for the
!;ole purpose of protecting the poplllation of
Pasundan. He said that the anny is only
endeavouring to create the conditions under
which a free people would be able to develop its
prosperity, whlch is now endangered by outside
influences which are impervious to reason."
I shall now discuss some concrete points of the;
present proposal.
Under the preser..t terms of the draft resolution, we would not be in a position to calculate
how much territory and what territory would
come under the control of our administration,
what tile economic potentialities and the financial
position of this territory would be, and, as a
result thereof, what would be the possibilities
of maintaining our army and our foreign relations. In this respect, the consequences of war
and our scorched-earth policy should <llso be taken
into account. No one can possibly foresee the
situation which would arise in c:ase no agreement were reaetled before 1 March. It is a situ~
ation which, as history has taught us, is very
likely to occur. It is, therefore, of the utmost
importance that, before 1 March, the Republic
should nave control at least over its territory as
determined by the R/!Jlville Agreement of 17
January 1948 [5/649, appendix Xl], and that
the Republic should obtain an adequate economic,
nnancial and administrative basis. The Republic
must have the opportunity of free import and
export during that period and the opportunity to
obtain loans with which to start the rehabilitation
of the destroyed areas under its control.

It would be extremely harmful, not only for the
economic but also for the political development

de la population, dans le territoire occupe par les
Hollandais, n'a pas renonce a ses ideaux, qUI
sont incarnes par la Republique d'Indonesie.
Meme la politique militaire et economique des
Pays-Bas, Qui vise i diviser les Indonesiens, a
echoue. Malgre les severes precautions prises par
les Hollandais, les ejections qui ont eu lieu dans
les territoires occupes par eux ont, en effet, abouti
a l'election des candidats dont les sympathies vont
aux Republicains. Vne autre preuve est le fait
que les Gouvernements des cleu.x: Etats 1es plus
importants sous controle neerlandais ont demis·
sionne lorsque les Hollandais ont entrepris leur
action militaire, et que les Parlements des Etats
en question ont conclamne ladite actlon.
La derniere en date des manifestations antine.erJandaises en territoire sous controle neerlandais, est rapportee par l'agence d'information
neer1andaise Aneta, dans son bulletin dll 24 janvier. Une information en provenance de Batavia
declare:
"Le general de clivision E. Engles, commandant du secteur militaire de Pasundan, aannonce
hier l'arrestation, clans cette localite, de quatre
Indonesiens, pOllr activites subversives. 11 s'agit
de Godokusono, I'un des vingt signataires du
manifeste prorepllblicain, cJu Dr. Suratnam, de
Sujozo et de Mobammed Enoch, taus membres
du Parlement de Pasunda.
"Au cours d'une conference de presse, le general Engles a souJigne Que ces arrestations ont ete
seu1e fin de prob~ger la population
effectuees
de Pasundan. L'armee, a-t-il dit, ne cherchait
qu'a creer les conditions qui pennettraient a un
peuple libre de developper sa prosperite, actuellement menacee par des influences exterieures
inaccessibles a la raison."
Je vais maintenant discuter de qllelques points
cO:H;rets de la propositlon dont nous sommes
salS1S.
Aux termes actllels du projet cle resolution,
nOlls ne serions pas en mesure de determiner quels
territoires et quelle superficie tot:t1e de. territoire
doivent passer sous le controle de notre administration, queUes seraient les ressoltrCCS economiques et la situation financiere desdits terri·
toires, ni, par consequent, comment nous pourrions
snbvenir l'entretien de notre armee et defrayer
le coilt de nos relations avec l'etranger. D:J.ns cet
ordre d'idees, i1 faudr:tit egnlement tenir compte
des consequences qu'ont eues la guerre et notre
politique de la terre bruIee. Personne ne peut
prevoir ce qui se passera si l'on n'aboutit pas
un accord <lvant le ter mars et si cet accord se
fait cncore longtemps attendre. Pourtant, l'histoire nous l'a appris, il y a beaucoup de chances
pour qu'il en soit ainsi. I! est, par cOll:.equent, de
la plus haute importance que la Republique
exerce, all plus tard 1<: ler mars, tout au moins
le controle du territoire que lui a reconnu l'Accord du Rrfnville du 17 janvier 1948 [S/649,
annexe Xl], et qu'elle puisse disposer d'une ba:;;e
economique, financiere et administrative satisfai&ante. La Republique doit avoir la possibilite
cl'importer et d'exporter librement pendant cettc
periode, et d'obtenir des prets qtli lui permettent
d'entreprendre la reconstruction des zo~es sous
son controle qui ant fte ravagees.
It se~ait extremement nnisible, non seulement
pour l'avenir economiql1e, mais aussi pour l'ave-

a

a

a

12
in these 'areas, if -tl1ese channels were not made
available to the Republic before the end of the
negotiations with the Netherlands. In our opinion, the draft I·esolution should provide for these
possibilities.

nir politique de ces zoneS, que la Republique ne
disposat pas de ces faeilites avant la fin des
pourpar1ers avec les Pays-Bas. A noIre avis, le
projet de resolutio,n dcvrait contenir des dispo_
sitions concernant ces 1J11estions.

Another point demands our attention. Guerrilla
actions are going on, not only in territories under
Republican control since the Reltville Agreement,
but also in territories recognized as Republican
under the Linggarl.ja.ti Agreement. I •

. Il est un autre point Clui appelle notre attention.
Les operations de guerillas se poursuivent aetuel1ell1enl, nOIl settlementdans les tcrritoires qui sont
sous contr6le republicain depnis l'Accord du
Rellvitle, mais encore dans les territoires qui sont
repub1icains en vertu de l'Accord de LinggadjatP.

Le gras de ces guerillas est constitue non par
The bulk of the~ forces is not comprised of
members of our regular anny but is composed des membres de notre armee reguliere, mais par
of the local population which has risen in arms la population locale qui a pris 1es. armes contre.
against the Netherlands. In this war, therefore, les Hollandais. Dam celte guerre, nons aurions'
We cannot but consider these people as part of dOlle mauvaise grace a ne pas considerer ces gens
the Republic in its fight against the Netherlands. ; comme faisant partie integrante de la Repub1ique
Any cease-fire demand or permanent settlement drlns sa lutte contre les Hollanclais. Tout ordre
should, therefore, take into account the fate of de cesser le feu ou tout reglelllcnt definitif qui
these people, safeg11arding them from being pourrait intervellir devrait, par consequent, tenir
liquidated by the Netherlands authorities as compte du Sort de ces hommes et tcur eviter d'Hre,
"terrorists" or "bandits", both now and at an)' soit maintenant, soit plus tard, liquides par les
later time. To let these people down would be Hollandais comme "terroristes" ou COl1lme "baninconceivable to us, and an arrangement for their . dits". It ne saurait nouS venir it I'iclee d'aban-·
protection shou(d be fotllld, either in the form donner ces gens et il importe de trou,ver un arranof a general and permanent amnesty or by other gement en ce qui les concerne, soit sous forme
means.
d'une amnistie generale et definitive, soit par
d'autres moyens.
Tbe stability of the final solution will, to a
very great extent, depend upon tJ,e free elections
to be held throughout Indonesia. It will be inconceivable, and therefore ttnacccptable to the
Indonesian peo[lle, that free elections should be
held in the presence of the Netherlands Anny
and its administration, since experience has taught
us to what extent the Netherlands 1m3 been successful in determining the outcome of SLtch elections. Furt11ennore, after our experiences with
the Renville Agreement, in which oUr people
gave Up all actually strong militnry position in East
and West Java to make a plebiscite possible, we
have become reluctant to consider any repetition
of such a procedure unless stlfficient safeguards
are provided.

La stabi1ite de la solution finale dependra, dans
Line tres large mesure, des elections 1ibres qui
doivent avail' lieu dans toute l'Indonesie. On ne
s-aurait concevoir et par consequent, le peuple
indonesien ne saurait accepter, que des elections libres aient lieu sous les yeux de l'armee
et de 1'administration neerlanclaises, car nOU5
savons par experience it. quel point les Hollandais ant su influencer le resu1tat de telles elections.
En outre, apres l'ex:perience que notlS avons faite
a la suite de l'Accord dl! Renvilte, en vertuduq\lel,
pour permettre i'organisation d'ur! plebiscite, notre
peup1e a abandonne des positions militaires reel1ement fortes dans l'Est et clans l'Ouest de Java,
nons ne tenons pas a ref.aire la meme experience, a moins de recevoir des gam.nties suffisantes,

Therefore, it is necessary that the resolution
to be adopted b), the Security Council should
provide for early elections. This WOllld facilitate
a favourable consideration of such a proposal.
An extended period preceding the elections
would make the acceptance of such a resolution
by our people less likely. Furthermore, no leapholes should bc left enabling the Netherlands to
postpone elections beyond the set time-limit.

Aussi importe-t-il que la resolution qu'adoptera le Conseil de seeurite prevoie des elections
~ breve echeancc. II serait a10rs plus facile d'ac·
cueillir favorabiement les propositions du Conseil.
Si ces elections devaicnt se faire attendre, il serait
&1.ns doute plus diffieile de faire accepter a notre
peuple ladite resolution. En outre, il ne faut pas
1aisser aux Hollandais 3ucune echappatoire qui
leur pumettrait de 'renvoyer les elections a une
date postcrieure a la date limite fixee.
En ce qui concetoc la coercition pendant les
eJections, il faut absolument que la resolution
stipule qlle ces elections devrcnt avair lieu hors
de la presence de I'armee neerlandaise; i1 importe
atlssi que l'administration neerlandaise ne subsiste
dans <tucune des zones qlle la Rcpublique d'Indonesie cOlltn3lait avant l'ouverture des llOstilites.

Vlith regard to coercion in the cot~rse of the
elections, it will be very necessary that the resOlution should make provision for thcse elections
to be held without the presence of the Netherlands Army, and abo that there should be no
Ne.thcrlands administration in any of the ar~as
which were under the control of the Indonesial1
Republic IIp to the outbreak of the war.
It is therefore fortunate that the countries
represented at the New Delhi Conference should
have formulated their views in a resolution which
• See Political EVtl11S in t'lI! Rt/!ub/i,; of ],l(l('ll(SW,
Netherlands Information Bureau, New York, page 34,

11 faut done se feliciter de cc que les pays
representcs a la Conference de New-Delhi aient
expose leut" point de vue clans une resoltttion que

, Voir Polil1tal Evellts ilt the Rtpublit of bldanesia.
publie par le Bureau d'information des Pays-Bas, New~
York, page 34.

13
is now before the Council and which contains
valuable elements as to the manner in which the
present draft resolution should be strengthened.
The N~w Delhi resolution has clearly been
formulated along the general lines and underlying principles of the draft resolution now under
discussion which, despite all its good intentions
ano its undeniable qualities in certain respects,
cannot be considered adequate. It is equally evident that these nineteen countries consider it
necessary to pursue the line of thought underlying the present draft resolution to the logical
end, in order to obviate the possibility that the
Indonesian problem should remain a continuous
threat to peace in that part of the world.

vous avez maintenant sous les yeux et qui contient
des indications precieuses sur la Olaniere dont il
convient de renforcer le projet de resolution
actuel. Il est evident que la resolution adoptee cl.
New-Delhi s'inspire des memes idees d'ensemble
et des mbnes principes generaux que le projet de
re~olution en cours de discussion, projet qui,
malgre les bonnes intentions qu'il reflete et les
reelles qualites qu'il represente a certains egards,
ne saurait cependant etre considere comme satisfaisant. II est non moins evident que les dix-neuf
pays en question estiment qu'il faut suivre jus.:.
qu'cl. son aboutissement logique la pensee clirectrice sur laquelle repose' le projet de resolution
actuel, si l'on yeut que le probleme indonesien
ne reste pas une menace continuelle pour la paix
dans cette partie du monde.

On these grounds, I earnestly urge the Council
to' 'make the fullest possible use of the ideas contained in the New Delhi resolution and to embody
them in the present draft resolution in. the form
of amendments to secure the attainment of the
following points:

Pour tputes ces raisons, je conjure le Conseil
de s'inspirer dans la plus large mesure possible
des idees CQntenues dans la resolution adoptee
a New~Delhi et de les concretiser, sous forme
d'amendements, dans le projet de resolution qUI
est cl. I'etude, de maniere a prevoir ce qui suit:

1. That the withdrawal of Netherlands troops
to 'the truce lines of 17 January 1948 and the
restoration of the territory under Republican
control on 18 December 1948 be completed not
la,ter than 15 March 1949, when. the interim Government should come into existence.

1. Que le retrait des troupes neerlandaises
sur·les lignes de treve du li janvier 1948 et le
1"etour aux republicains du territoire qui se trouvait sous leur controle atJ 18 decembre 1948 sera
termine au plus tard pour le 15 mars 1949, date
cl. laquelle le Gouvernement provisoire doevra
entrer en fonctions.

2. That Netherlands troops be immediately
withdrawn from the area of Jogjakarta-a well
defined administrative unit comprising the city of
Jogjakarta and adjoining areas-and progressively from the rest of the Republican territories,
under conditions prescribed by the United Nations Commission on Indonesia.

2, Que les troupes neerlanda!se~ seront retir~e~
immediatement du secteur de DJokpkarta - ul1lte
administrative nettement delinie, qlli comprend la
ville de Djokjakarta et les regions avoisinantes
_ et progressivement du reste du terr.itoire republicain, dans les conditions que prescpra ~ .Commission des Nations Unies pOtlr I'Indonesle,

3. That 'the Republic' of Indonesia be given
?n adequate economic basis.
'

3. Que des ressources economiqllcs convenables
seront accordees cl. la Repubtique d'Indonesie.

4. That the elections for a constituent assembly be completed not later than I October 1949
and that sovereignty over the whole of Indonesia
be completely transferred not later than 1 January 1950.

4. Que les elections a une assemblee consti~
tuante seront tenninees le ler octobrel949 au
plus tare et que le t~ansfert de la souverainete
sur l'ensemble de l'Indonesie sera comp\et,ernent
d'fectue le ler janvier 1950 all plus tard.

I shall not longer tax the patience of the membent of the Council. I have,tried to give in bare
outline the difficulties which the draft r~solution,
in its present form, would place in the way 'of
our people, and I have tried to formul.ate some
suggestions as to how these difficulties can be
remedied. I would, however, like to resenre the
right to deal with these and other points again
at Cl later stage.

je n'abuserai. pas pl~s longt:mps de la patienc:e
du Conseil. J'ai tente' d'esqUlsser les drfficultes
que le projet de resolution, S?IIS sa. fO;-Ole actu~lle,
creerait it notre peuple, et Je me sms efforce de
formuler certaines suggestions quant a la maniere
dont on pourrait remediet a ces.difficultes. Je tie~~
toutefois a me reserver le drOIt de reye;llr. ulte":'
neurement sur les points ci--dessus, am3! que
sur certains autres.

Mr HOOD (Austf3lia): At the direction of
the President, the Security Council is now conducting its discussion with particular reference
to the draft resolution [S/1219] standing, in the
name of four members of the Council. The
representatl\'e of Indonesia, who has just spoken,
has examined at some length the implications of
that draft resolution from the point of view of
the Republic of Indonesia. He ha~ point~d o.ut,
perfectly fairly and correctly! that 10 ;onsldenng
the feasibility of the resolutlon and Its acceptability by the Republic of Indonesia, the feelings
and the views prevalent among h~s people are ~t
least of a validity equal to the Vlews and sentiments of any other. party in the situation. That

M. HOOD (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais):
A la demande du President, le Conseil de,securite poursuit aetuellement sa di~cussion ;D ay~nt
en vue en particulier le proJet de resolutlOn
[Sj1219] presente par quat:e des, t;lembr:es. du;
Conseil. Le representant de lIndonesle, qU! vlent
de parler, a examine assez .longuem~nt le~ repercussions qu'aurait ce, proJ.et de, resohl,tL?n, du
point de vue de la :r;:.epubhque d Indon.esl~. Il a
tres justement et tres l~yale.ment ~ou1tg?-e que,
puisqu'il s'agit de saVOlr SI la resolutlOn est
viable et si la Republique d'Indonesie peut l'accepter, les sentiments et les vuesJes plus repandus
all sein de son peuple ant au mains autant de
valeur que les vues et les sentiments de toute

14
is a most va1'I(1 consideration of which the Council
will certainly not wish to lose sight.

nntre partie. C'est 1il une consideration tout a
fait valabJe, que le C0l1sei1 aura certainementa
creur de ne pas perdre de vue,

Proceeding from that point, :Mr, Palar was led
to tht conclusion-also rightly in my view-that
the same considerations which are in favour of
action by the Counci! in a direction ultimately
acceptable to the Republic, as well as to the othe,r
parties to the situation, would le~d the C?unc11
to give the most earnest and serious cons1deration to the resolution which emallated from the
recent Asian Conference at New Delhi. Now it
appears from Mr. Palar's analysis that the cor.clusions reached at the New Delhi Conference
almost meet the basic requirements which he outlined as bein~ such from the point of view of
the Republic. They arc not, of course, entirely
unilateral. If the Republic has certain requirements which must bemet before a settlement can
be considered acceptable to the people of the
Republic; then, equally, these requirements must,
obvers~ly, be to the advantage of both parties in
the dispute,
At the last [403rd] meeting of the Council,
the representatives of Egypt, India and the Philippines also devoted much attention to the resoltl~
tion of the Asian Conference, and I think, myself, that the Council can hardly over-estimate
the importance of the receipt of the communication from the Prime Minister of India enclosing
the text of'the resolution adopted at New Delhi.

Partant de lil, M. Palat a abouti la conclusion
suivantc, egalemcnt correcte it mon avis: les consi.
derations memes (jlli exigent dn Conseil des initia6ves qui puissent, cn derniere analyse, etrc
acceptees, t.1.llt par la Republique qtlC par les
autrcs parties au r1if{ercnd, incitcront le Conseil
a aLconler la plus grande attention it la resolution adoptee u h recente Conference de :New~
Delhi. Or, l'analyse faitc pnr 1\1. Palar demontre
que les conclusions auxquel1es a abouti la Conference de New·Delhi sont tl'es voisines des condi~
tions fondamentales qn'il a lui-llleme exposees
comme etant les conditions fondamentalcs du
point de vue de la Republique, El1e~ ne sont
pas, bien entendu, absolument uni1nterales. Si,
pour la Repuuli[]l1c, certaincs conditior.s doivent
Hre satisfaites tl,\'flnt qu'un reglement que1conque
ruisse paraitre acceptable i sa pop111i\tion, il faut,
inversement, que ce;; conditions scient egalement
a I'avantage des deux parties au difUrend.
A la derniere seance [403emc] du Conseil, les
representants de l'Egyptl':, de l'lnde et des Philip~
pilles anI, eux aus"i, accordc beaucollp d'attl':ntion
it la resolution adoptee par la Conference de
New-Delhi, et je suis moi-meme d'nvis que le
Conseil ne saurait surestimer l'importance de
l:l cotlllI1llnication etnanant du Premier Minislre
de l'lnde, et qui !lOtlS transmcttait le texte de
Iadite resoll1tion.

a

Que represente In resolution de New-Delhi du
point de vue du Conseil? Elk represente, non
seule1l1cnt l'expression solennelle de 1'opil~~oa
commune nux pays situfs dans la zone qu'interesse l'evolution du con flit indonesien, mais aussi
un effort fait, nvec heaucoup de competence, par
les Etats reunis a NclV-Delhi pour examiner la
situation et proposer tine solution aux difficultes
actuelles, en s'inspirant des prineipes de l'Orga~
nisation des Nations Unies,
The New Delhi document is not merely a
Le doCtlmcnt emoanant de New-Delhi ne se
political statement from the roint of view of the borne pas a etre, de la part des Gouverneme.nts
Governments represented, It is a statement and represelltes a cette conferl':nce, une dedaratlOn
an expression of a point of \'iew by those Gov- politique, En la faisant, ces Gouvernements ont
em?,en,ts in the light of their fully recogllized exprime l('ur point de vue, dans la pleine cons~
obltgatlons undel' the Charter of tIle United cience des obligations que leur impose la Charte
Nations, As far as I am aware, none of. the des Nations Unies et qu'ils ont acceptees sans
~tatements milde at the New Delhi Conference,
restriction, Ni les declarations faites a la Confenor. the resolution itself, is in any sense directed rer:ce de New-Delhi, ni la resolution elle-meme,
agalllst Netherlands interests in Indonesia, That ne sont, pour autant que je sache, diri~ee~ ;n
was not the starting point of the Asian Confer- quelque maniere que ce soit, contre 1es mten~ts
ence. It wa~ not an anti-Netherlands assembly, des Pays~Bas en Indonesie, Non, te! n'a pas ete
The sole object of the Conference held in; New le point de depart de cette Conference. Elle. n'a
De1hi-a~ I thi~k b;came perfectly apparent from pas ete une ,eunion antineerlandaise. Son ulllqlle
the,W3Ltn ,Wh1Ch It was directed from the very objet - et je crois que l'orientation qu'el!e ,n
beg.1l1~mg-was to assist or to suggest a way of prise des le debut l'a amplem<:nt prouve - etal~
ass1stmg a freely reached settlement in Indo- de contrill1,ler it tin reg1ement librement accep~e
nesia, in :lccordance with the United Nations en Indonesie, ou de proposer les moyens de ('ont1"1Cha~ter and to the ultimate advantage of both buer a ce reglement, en observant la Charte des
parties.
Nl:t1ons Unies et potlr le plus grand aY:J.lltage des
deux parties en presence,
Ther~fore! not only is it proper for the Council
Par consequent, il importl' 110n seulement que
to ta,ke mto tull account the New Delhi proposals, le C0l1sei1 tiennc le pillS grand compte des prop~­
but .1t sb,ould also ascertain 110W near an approxi- sitiolls eJaborees a New~De1hi, mnis encore qU'11
matIOn It Lan reach in its own conclusions to etablisse jnsqu'a quel point ses propres concl~~
those care!ully ~onsjdered conclusions of the sions peuvent se rapprocher des conclusions S~l­
New DelhI meetlllg, It is, indeed, inescapable gneusement pesees de ladite Conference. En falt,
for the Council to do so becanse the New Delhi le Conseil ne saur;lit agir autrement, car la
meeting, was in -full accord with the principle of Conference de New-Delhi s'est retlnic en confor~,
What does the }.few Delhi resolution represent
.from the point of view of the Council? It represents noJt merely a most impressive expression of
opinion among countries in the area whic:h feels
concern pecause of the development of the Indonesian dispute, bllt also a mast responsible
attempt on the part of those States a~sembled at
New Delhi to look at the situation and to suggest,
in the light of United Nations pri:lciples, a way
put of the present difficulties.

15
:'egional consultations and regional action, as is
envisr..ged in the Charter.

mite avec: le principe des consultations regionales
et de l'action rt~gionale qll'etablit la Chartc.

From this point of view, I should li<e to mention, Clt this stage, a few aspects which became
apparent by comparison o~ the present text of
the joint draft resolution now before the Council
and the text of the New Delhi resolution
I S/1222 J which has been submitted to tIle
Council for its thorough estimation and COn~
sideration.

A ce_ point de vue, je vOlldrais maintenad siRnaler certains points qui ressortent de la 'comparaison d'] texte actuel du pro)et de resolution
conjoint dont est scrisi le Conseil avec le texte
de la resolution de New-Delhi ~S/1222L qui a ete
soullli~ au CO:Iseil pour cxamen approi'cndi.

In the first place, may I say that much credit
is dm to the sponSOrs of this dratt resolution,
particularly to the United States of America, for
the initiative taken in pointing to a practicable
way out of the difficulty with which the Councll
is confronted? A most sincere and workmanlike
attempt has been mace in the elaboration of this
draft, but the point to watch is not merely
whether a draft is acceptable to a sufficient num~
ber of members of the Council to secure its adop~
tion-that, indeed, is a primary consideration and
one need not elaborate npon it-but the thing to
watch, in that connexion, is to make sure that a
set of proposa:s such as is contained in the
draft resolution is reElly practicable and realistic.

En premier lietl, qu'il me soit permis de dire
qu'it fnut rendre hommage aux auteurs de cc
prcljet de resoluti03, en particulier aux EtatsDnis d'Amerique, pDur l'initiative qu'ils ont prise
en indiquant au Conseil de securite U:l.C voie
pemlettant de sortir des difficultes qu'il renc:or.tre. L'elaboration c1e Ce projet de resolutiun
re~resente ur. effort extremement sincere et
competent. Mais it ne suffit pas de se demander
si :m projet est juge acceptable par un nombre
de memhrr-!l clll Cc.nseil suffisant paur que SOli
adoption soit assllree; c'est la, en effet, U:1e
conditiof', prirr.ordia:e et SUr laquelle il est inut,ile
d'insister; l'imporfant est de s'assurer (j12'une
serie de propositions, comme celles que contient
le projet de resolution, est reel1ement de caracteee pratique et tient compte des realite~.

How does the teJct: of the four-Power resolution look in the light of that consideration and
by comparison with the New Delhi te.'"<t? A
primary assumption in the joint resolution is the
contemplation ef the poss:bility of the resumption of negotiations in Indonesia. The parties
ar(' ~nj()if]ed to resume. negotiations, and the
Committee of Good Offices is to be direded, by
the enlargement of certain of. its powers, to assist
the parties in such negDti;:tions. It may be tha.t
that hope will prove to be justified. I think: that
Mr. Palar reiterated this morning more than one
argu:nent whic::'"I, unfortunately, would scggest
that the o:Jposite might be the case and that the
Council will prove :0 have been optimistic in
expecting a resl1mption of negotiations simply at
the request and with be assistance of the
Security Council and the Committee of Good
Offices.

Comment le texte du -projet de resolution des
quatre Puissances se presente-t-il sous ce rapport et comment se compo.re-t-il avec 1~ texte
adopte a New-Del:ti? La resolution commune
s'appuie sur l'idee qu'il cloit etre possible de
reprendre les negociations et charge la Commission de 'XlllS offices, dont elle etargit a c:ette- fin
certaines prerogatives, d'aic1er les parli~s a llegoc:ier. 11 se peut que cet espoir s'avere justif.e.
Si je ne me trompe, toute£ois, M. Palar a avanee
une (ois de. plus ce matin plus d'un argument
qui \aissernit malheurensement entrevoir que c'est
le contraire qt:i pOl1~rait ttre vrai et que le Conseil
a peut-etre ete trap optimiste en pensant que :es
negociations pourraient se ronvrir simplement
sur la requeteet ,ayec l'aide du Conseil de sewrite et de la ComJr.ission de bons offices._

In that respect the New Delhi text is a much
more cOffi';:lrehensible document and is much-more
easily grasped. The New Delhi proposals do not
rely essentially on a resumption of negotiations,
Clear functions and dear authority ,are laid upon
the: committee or commis;sion which will operate
ill lrldonesia, but they are not made dependent
upon actual negotiations between the parties any
more thar. is the work of the committee or com~
mission. In the text of the joint resolution we
find complicateJ directives 'laid tlpon the com.·
in~ssion -by. V(ay. of reporting b~ck to. :he Security
Council, ShOl11d negotIations at certain stag.cs and
at certain times prove unsuccessful. In such an
event the cominission is to report back to the
Security Council with recommendations for the
solu:ion of the difficulties existing at that poiI).t.

Ace: egard, le texte adopte a New-Delhi
COllStituc un document bien plus clair Pt piu!!
inlelligiDle. En eftet Ies proposit:ons adoptees
a New-Delhi ne tablent pas ~ssentiellement sur
une reprise des negociations. ElIes assignent au
comite ou a la commission qui doit operer en
Indonesiedes fonctions tres predses et l'inYcstissent d'une autode tres nette; cependant, tout
comme les tr;lV,aux du c:omite DU de la corr.mission,
ceUe autorite et, ces ionctions,ne sont pas subordonnees a l'ouverture 'de neg-ociations entre les
parties. Nous relevons,.pans le texte du projet de
resolution commun, de' directives compliquees
dcnnees a la commission qui doit notammentfaire
r<jpport au Conseil de seetlrite, ~i, a t<01 ou tel
miJrrIlOnl, au il tel 011 td stade, le~ negociations
n'avaient pas rel1ssi. Dans ce cas la commission
doit faire rapport au Conseil de securite, en for~
mlllant des recommand2tions en Vlle de resoudre
les difficultes qui se presentent a ce stadc partiwlier.

I shall h::we more to say about that in a nll)ment, but, for the sake of clarity I should like
to draw the attf'ntioll of the Coundl to the much

Je reviendrai l1i-dess"ls dans un instant, nais
pour plus de c1arte, je tiens a souligner au
Conseil les suggestions bien phiS simples et, je

16

more simple and, I maintain, much more r~al and
practic,able suggestions in that respect Whlch are
contained in the New Delhi te:xt 15/1222].

le soutiens, bien plus realistes et pratiques que
le texte adopte a New-Delhi [5/1222J contient
a cet egard.

Sub·paragmph 8 (a) .of the New Delhi text
states guite briefly and slmply:
. "That the Committee of Good Oflices, or any
other body appointed by the Security Council,
be given authority to sec~rc the application of tb.e
foregoing recommendatIOns under the superVIsion of the Security Council, to whom it shall
report as frequently as may be necessary."
I suggest that the Council would do well to
consider whether the text of the joint reso1tltion
could not be simplified to give it more of the
realistic intent of the New Delhi proposal which
r have just read.

L'alinea 8 u) du texte en question stipule en
efIet en toute b:'ievete et simplicite ce qui suit:

In that connexion I turn to paragraph 3 of
the, joint draft resolution [5/1219]. I must say
that a very careful and repEated reading of this
paragraph does not satisfy me that it is entirely
clear or entirely workable. We have:, first of all,
the recommendation for the resumption of negotiations, which I have already mentioned. But,
assuming that this is under way, what sort of
negotiations are there to be? First, of all, they
are to be on the basis of the principles of the
Linggadjati and Renville Agreements" ar.d, I
assume, the ,so-called Cochran proposals which
were submitted in September of last year, Then
we read, "... and in particular, on the basis that:
((I.) -The establishment of the interim federal
government . . . shall take place not later than
15 March 1949."

Dans cet ordre d'idees, ie me reporte maintenant
au paragraphe 3 du projet de resolution commun
[SJ1219]. Je dois dire qu'apres que j'aie lu CE
paragm:phe tres attenti.vement et a plusieurs
reprises, il ne m'apparait pas que ses dispositions
soient absolument c\aires et absolument realisables. 11 commence, comme j'ai deja eu 1'oc(asion de le dire, par recommander la. reprise des
pourparlers. Mais en admettant qu'ils s'engagent,
de que! genre devront-ils etrl':? Tout d'abord, ils
devront s'inspirer des principes (inonces dans les
Accords de Linggadjati et du Renvilfe. ainsi,
nwn sens, que des propositions dites propositions
Cochra:n. qui ant etesoumises aux parties au
mois de septembre de I'annee derniere. Nous
lisons ensuite: "...Et eri tenant compte notamment de ce que: a) La constitution du Gouvernement federal provisoire . . . devTa avoir lieu
avant le 15 mars 1949 au plus tard."

"Que la Commission de bons offices, ou tout
autrE organe Msigne par le COllseil de secl1rite.
soit habilite a assurer l'applioation des recommandations ci-dessus, sous la surveillanCE du
Conseil de s.ecurite, al1quel elle fera rapport aussi
souvent qu'il sera necessaire."
]'estime que le Conseil feraitbien d'examiner
s'il ne pourrait simplifier le texte du projet de
resolution commun, de maniere ce que ce texte
reflete unpeu plus ce senS des realites dont
fait preuve la proposition de New-Dellii dont je
viens de donner lecture,

a

a

Ce .paragraphe comporteensuite une clause
qui stipule que I~ Gouvernement federal provisoire "se verra conferer le pouvoir d'e:xercer la
gestion des affaires nationales de l'Indonesie".
Cela .suppose que, lorsqu'on aboutira a un accord
sur la date de la constitution d'un gouvernEment
provisoire, !'accord regnera ega!ement sur les
pouvoirs a accorder a ce gouvernement provisoire.
Cela n'aurait pas beaucoup de sens d~. n'etre
d'accord que sur la date de constitution d'un
gouvernement provisoire, &lns l'etre egalement
sur les fonctions a attribuer a ce gouvernement.
Mais je continue.
L'alinea 3 b) fixe la date a laquelle les elections
Sub-paragraph 3 (b) stipulates ,the date for
the completion of elections, and subwparagra'ph devront etre temlinees, tandis que l'alinea.3 c)
3 (c) stipUlates a date or, at any rate, a target fixe nne date ou, en tout cas, une date Iimite pour
date for thE transfer of sovereignty, This is the ktransfert de la souveminete, Or, voici le paspassage which callses me considerable difficulty: sage que j'ai bEaucoup de mal a comprendre:
"Provided that if no agreement is reached by one "Etant entendu que si aucun accord n'intervient
month prior to the respective dates referred to entre les parties un mois au moins avant les
in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above, the dates mentionnees respectivEment <lUX alineas 0),
Commission ... shaH immediately report to the b) et c) ci-dessus, la Commission .. , adressera
Security Council with its recommendations.. " immteliatement au Conseil de securite un rapport
accompagne de recommandations ..."
That is not a process which, to my mind is
A mon sens, ce n'est pas la une maniere de
in any sense clear. I should be glad if the oppor- proceder qui soit claire a quelque egard que ce
tunity were made available for the sponsors, or so it. Je serais heureux si I'on voulait fourrur
one of the sponsors, of the draft resolution to aux auteurs DU a l'un des auteurs du projet de
clarify the intention of this provision.
resolution I'occasion de preciser le but de celtt':
disposition.
The New Delhi text makES it clear that the
I1 ressort c1airement du texte de .la resolution
institution of the interim fedEral government is de New-Delhi que la constitution d'un gouvernethe basis and the entire starting point of the ment federal provisoire est la base et le point de
A qualifying 'phrase is induded which states
that the interim federal government, "is to be
granted the powers of intemal government in
Indonesia", That assumes that at the same time
as a presumed agreement is reached on the date
of the institution of an intErim government,
agreement must equally be presumed as to the
powers to be given to the interim government.
Mere agreement on the date for the es.tablishment of an interim government withot1t the attribution Of flmctions to tb.t government by agreement, is not:a very meaningful contention. However, I shall go further.

17

depart de tout reglement de la que~tion indonesienne. En un sens, tout depend de~ flouvoi.rs
et des fouctions que recevra le gouverneOlent
federal provisoire. A ce point de vue, la question
de la date des elections et du transfert de la souverainete ne pn~sente qu'un interet secondaire
alors que, a mon avis, ce qui a toujours ete wnsiden~ comme le point principal, c'est la repartition
des pouvoirs dans le aadre ell] gotlvernement
federal provisoire, c'est~a-dire l'etendl.le des pOl1voirs que conserveraient les autorites neerlandaises au cours de cette periode inrerimaire.
Under the terms of the joint draft resolution,
Aux termes du projet de resolution commun,
is the Committee of Good Offices merely to re- la Commission de bans offices devra~t·el1e se
port to the Security Council that it has or has not borner a informer le Conseil de securite qu'elle
secured agreement with regard to a date for est arrivee - 011 qu'elle n'est pas arrivee -- a
the establishment of the interim federal govern- faire accepter un accord Ii.xant la date de la cons~
ment? Must not the very fact that negotiations titut:on du gouvernement federal provisoire? Le
are to take place on the point of the date for the ~eul fait que les negociations doivent avoir lieu
establishment of the interim government imply pour fixer la date de la formation d'un gouverneequally-in fact, I think this is really indisputable meot provisoire ne signifie·t-il pas - et cela_me
~that some kind of agreement at least has been
semble evident - qt1e les parties se soot deja,
reached, or is envisaged, as to the powers of d'une maniere ou d'une autre, mises d'accord, ou
that interim government? In other words, the sont sur le point de se mettre d'accord, sur les
division of the duty laid upon the committee or . pouvoirs qui seront conferes a ce gouvernement
commission to report back to the Security Council· provisoire? En d'autres termes, il me semble
with its recommendations in relation to the three que c'est 1iviser d'une maniere artificielle et peu
stages, strikes me as being an artificial and ,un- , pratique la tache du comite ou de la commission
workable one.
que de lui demander d'adresser au Conseil de
securite, it chacun des trois stages, des rapports
accompagnes !le reconunanclations.
Je crois que les membres du Conseil de securite
I think members of the Security Council are:
aware, privately, that an earlier proposal had n'ignorent pas qu'une proposition anterieure a ete
been circulat~d and- had been fully discussed, distribllee et longucrr.ent discutee, aux termes de
whereby the Commission would report back to laquelle la Commission devait faire rapport au
the Council approximately by 1 March if agree- Conseil aux environs du ler mars, si un accord
ment had not been reached. But, agreement on n'etait pas encore intervenu. Un accord sur quoi?
what? Under that earlier proposal it was an Aux termes de cette propositioll, il s'agissait d'un
agreement for theestablish!T!ent of the interim accord sur la constitution d'un gouvernelnent
federal provisoire, avec tout ce que cela cOlnporte,
~ederal government and all that goes with it;
that is to say, the functions and 'powers of the c'est-i-dire sur les fonctions et les pouvoirs du
government and, I presume, also the incidental Gouvernement et aussi, je suppose, sur les ques~
sllbsequent dates or approximate dale.'i forelec- tions sccondaires de la date des elections et du
tions and the transfer of sovereignty. I should transfert des droits ae sotlverainete. I1 me semble
have thought that that was a far more compre- qu'il s'a'gissait l:i. d'une proposition hien plus
hensihle and intelligible suggestion and one likely complete, plus claire et mietlx adaptee aux faits
to be found more in accord with the facts of the que celle qui figure dans le te.xte aetuel. Cependant,
situation, than the proposal contained in the cnmme je I'at deja suggere, peut-etre paurra-t-on
present text. However, as I have suggested, per- danrier auxauteurs du projet l'occasion d'eclairhaps ,m opportlmity may be given to clarify the tir le sens des huts du paragraphe 3, et notammeaning and intention of that paragraph 3, and ment de sa derniere partie.
of the latter part of it in particular.
Je passe mai(ltenant a. deux autres que5tions
I now turn for a moment to two other important provisions which are covered, in my tres importantes qui, it mon avis, sont traitees de
opinion, clearly and adequately in the New Delhi, maniere fort claire et fort pertinente clans la
resolution but which are, unfortunately, neither resolution de New-Delhi, rTui.is non clans le projet
clearly nor adequately covered in the joint draft de resolution 'commun. Je veux parler des disporesolution. I am referring to the provisions re- sitions relatives, en premier lieu, a la situation
lating, first, to the economic situation which is economique 'qui prevaudra vraisemblablement
likely to prevail from now on in Republican areas; dorenavant dans les territoires republicains, et,
and secondlYI to the withdrawal of Netherlands en· deuxieme lieu, au retrait des forces er. de
forces and Netherlands administration where I'administration neer1andaises qui se trouvent dans
they ex.ist in the areas assigned: to the Republlc les territoires que l'accord de janvier 1948 a attrihues a la Republique.
'
under the agreement of January, 1948:
En ce qui concerne l'aspect economiquc de la
In connexion with tbe economic aspect, I
notice that an amendment to paragraph 4 (I) of question, je remarque qU'UI1 amendement au para~
the joint draft resolution has just been circulated graphe 4 f) du projet de resolution vient d'etre
distribue aUK membres du Conseil de secmite
to the Sccurity C01mcil (5/1230].
[S/1230].
Si je comprends bien, ht seule difference entre
If I understand correctly, the only difference
between this amendment and the original text cet amendement et le tcxte original [5/1219J
path leading to eventual settlement. In a sense,
everything turns 011 the powers and functions
which will be given to the interim federal govermnent. The d;lte of elections and the date of
tr.twifer of sovereignty are, in that sense, only
incidental to what I thought had always been
regarded as the main point of consideration at
issue, namely, the distribution of powers wlthin
the interim federal government, having i~ view
the extent of Netherlands sovereignty during the
interim period,

18
[5/1219] is the inclusion of a provision wbereby
". . . the recommendations of the Commission
may include provision for such economic measures as are required for the proper functioning
of the administration and for the economic wellbeing of the population of the areas..."

consiste en l'insertion d'une disposition seIon
laquelle:
La. Commission pourra inc1ure
dans ses recommandations des dispositions visant
a assurer, sur le plan economique, les mesures
requises pour le bon fonctionnement de l'admi.
nistration ainsi que le bien-ftre de la population
des regions interessees ..."
It • • •

Je suis pret a admettre qu'il s'agit h1. d'une
Now, I would admit that that is a considerable improvement of the original text, and it may amelioration importante apportee au texte pri.
be that that is the common denominator of the mitif et iI se peut que cette disposition traduise
feeling of the COllneil as to what is proper in this ce que le Conseil estime necessaire de faire a ce
respect. Nonetheiess, there is a latilude---even :J. sujet. 11 me semble cependant que ceUe propolooseness-in the wording of that provision sition traduise ce que le Conseil estime necessaire
wllich I feel cannot be satisfactory to the repre- de faire a ce sujet. 11 me semble cependant que
sentative of the Republic of Indonesia or to the cette proposition est redigee en termes trap impreRepublican authorities, when they arc restored cis et trap vagues pour que le representant de la
to their proper functioning. The coilsequen:ces of Republique d'Indonesie ou les autorites repu·
the handling by the Netherlands authoritie~ in hlicaines, lorsqu'il leur sera donne d'exercer a
.Indonesia of the economic relations of the Re~ . 110uveaU Jeurs fonctions, puissent s'en contenter.
publican areas with the rest of Indonesia and La mainmise des autorites neerlandaises sur les
with the outside world have been too serious for relations economiques des territoires de la Repu.
the Council to fail to make all precise a provision blique avec le reste de l'Indonesie et avec le
against their action as it possibly can at the monde exterieur, a eu des consequences trop
present time. If the opportunity is again pro- graves pour que le Conseil neglige d'introduire
videtl forthe Netherlands to squeeze the Republic dans sa resolution une disposition aussi precise
into a position of extreme economic difficulty, qu'illui est actuellement possible de le fo.ire, visimt
thereby detracting from its powers of negotiation a empecher un tel fait de se produire. Si cn letir
as .a partner of equal statns, it is to be feared donne a nouveau la latitude d'acculer la Repu.
that that opportunity will not be passed by.
blique a une position economique intenable et de
la mettre par La dans I'incapacite de negocier
avec eux sur un pied d'egalite, i1 est a cmindre
que les Pays-Bas ne laissent pas echapper uoe
tellc occasion.
Therefore, I would suggest that the Security
C'est pourquoi je proposerais que le Conseil de
Council should have another look at what the securite se reporte une fois encore au texte de la
New, Delhi text says in tJlis respect. The New resolution de New~Delhi. L'alinea 2 iv) recomDelhi text recommends quite shortly and quite mande en termes nets et simples que "toutes les
simply, in sub-paragraph 2 (iv), that "All re· restrictionsimposees par les autorites neerIan·
strietions imposed by the Netherlands authorities daises aux echanges commerciaux de la Repuon the trade of the Republic be immediately re- blique soient immediatement levees", De telles
moved". Such restrictions-at any rnte, those restrictions - tout au mains celles qui, quel que
which amounted, in their effect if not in their filt leur but, equivalaient en fait a un veritable
intention, to embargoes-'---were the reason for the embargo - expliquent I'etat de deficience econo·
parlous economic state into which the Republic mique dans lequel1a Republique s'est trouvee au
fell in the course of last yeat; that was a matter cours de l'annee ecoulee. Cette question a beauof observation and concern in the Security coup preoccupe et inquiete le ConseiI de securite
Council at the time. Tt would seem to me that, a l'epoque. 11 me semble que, si le Conseil est
if the Council is prepared to go so far as to des maintenant pret iJ. indure dans la resolution
include the phrase- which is riowsuggested in la disposition qui figure au paragraphe 4- f) du
sub-paragraph 4 (I) of the joint draft resolution, projet commun, il devrait examiner s'i1 ne' pourit might well consider whether it cannot go that rait pas aUer plus loin encore et recommander
much further and come out quite definitely and nettement et fermement la suppression de: toute:s
quite precisely as recommending the removal of les restrictions injustifiees - peut.Hre pourrait·on
~Jl undue restrictions-they may be called by les appeler "restrictions totales" ou "embargo"
some other name: perhaps "absolute restrictions" - que les auto rites neerlandaises imposent abusi·
or "embargoes"-unfairly imposed by the Neth- vement au commerce de la Republique.
erlands authorities on the trade of the Republic.
My third point is the question of withdrawal.
This need not be dwelt on from the point of
view of beir.g a matter of primary importance.
It is well known and obvious. It is only dis.
appointing that, in the process of elaborating the
text of the joint resolution and presumably securing the maximum area of agreement on it
the aspect of withdrawal has, to sa\' the least'
been put in the background. We hav~ to turn, i~
fact, to one of the final sub-paragraphs of the
whole draft resolution to find any reference at
all to withdrawal-and even there we do not f.nd
the word "withdrawal" in terms of what everybody knows it to mean, namely, the withdrawal

La troisieme question que je desire traiter est
celle du retrait des troupes. 11 n'est pas necessaire
d'insister sur son importance: elle me semble aussi
bien connue qu'evidente. Or, il est attristant de
constater que, par souci d'elaborer un texte qui
pourrait donner satisfaction au plus grand nombre, on ait eu tendance a laisser dans l'ombre pour ne pas dire plus - la question du retrait
des troupes. En fait, i1 faut aller jusqu'aux tout
derniers alineas du projet de resolution pour
trouver entin une allusion at! retrait des troupes;
et encore, le texte ne precise-t~i1 pas le veritable
setlS du mot "retrait" qui, dans I'esprit de tous,
signifie le retrait des forces neerlandaises qui

19

of Netherlands forces which have wrongly proceeded to the occupation of Republican areas.
The text of the: joint draft resolution has,
quite clearly, been very carefully drafted; it has
also been most cautiously drafted. It contains,
of course, no time-limit for the completion of
withdrawal-neither an earlv time~limit nor even
a late one. That is tlOderstandable; it m.ay be
that in order to achieve the passage of a resolution by the Security C<luncil-which it is obviotlsly the duty of the Council now to achievethe indl1sion of a date, even an approximate date
or i1 late date, is not feasible. We, however, have
to look at tbis, as Mr. Palar has very properly
pointed, 011t earlier this morning, also from the
point of view of the people of the occupied areas
of the Republic. Here is a resolution emanating
from tbe Security Council of the United Nations
and pllrporting to deal with a situation which
is, to those people and to those authorities, more
actual and closer at hand than it can ever be to
anybody sitting at this table.
What do they look for primarily in sLich a resolution? What do they expect from any action
taken by the Security Council? Primarily, I
should say-and I think this cannot be deniedthey would expect to find, and they would look
for, a clear indication of what the Security
Council thinks about the restomtion of their
authority in their own areas and the consequent
withdrawal of Netherlands authority and the
mark of that authority, the Netherlands forces,
I think it is an) excellent idea to have incorpo~
rated in the draft resolutiOn the item that the
progressive transfer of administration to the
Reoublic should be made on the recommendation
of 'the Commission on the spot. That is a most
valuable suggestion and its authors should be
gratified that it has found acceptance, as far as
I know, in most quarters,
But if, in fact, it turns out that the Security
Council can achieve no more exact provision in
this respect than is contained in the present text,
let there be some understanding, at least in the
Security Council and IJetwcen the parties concerned, just what the intention is-evcll if that
intention cannot be expressed in' the text. To
put it in the negative sense, it cannot be the
intention of the Security Council, having in mind
tht: reniainder of tlle programme which is outlined earlier in the draft resolution, that-for
example---eleetions sholt1d be completed in areas
which are under the occupation of Netherlands
forces, unless-which is unlikely-the retention
of such forces at certain points can be arranged
by agreement between the parties for the sake of
the preservation of law and order. For 111Y part,
I am ready to accept the argument which Mr.
Palar put forward this morning in favour of
the likelihood, provlded matters are not left until
it is too late, that the Republic itself can adequately discharge those functions of law and
order.
However, it is to me inconceivable that the
Security Council should envisage the second
stage of the very general programme outlined in
this resolution, namely, completion of elections
by a certain date, as being carried out and final~
ized under the shadow-so far as the Republican

ant DCcupe, sans droit, les tcrritoires de la Repu~
blique.
Le texte du projet de resoltttion a de tOI~te
evidence, ete .edige avec autant de s~in que de
prudenc:e. 11 ne fixe bien entendu aucttne date
limite, rapprochee ou menH~ eloignee, pour le
retrait total des forces neerlandaises, Cela est
comprehensible; peut-etl'e est-il pratiquemellt
impossilJle d'il1c1ure dans le projet tme date limite,
meme approximative ou lointaine, si 1'00 veut
qu'une resolution soit adoptee maintenant par le
Conseil de securite, qui ne saurait evidemment se
derober a ce devoir. Mais, cotnme- M. Palar l'a
justement fait remal'tjuer ce matin, nous devons
aussi ettloier la question en nous p1a~ant au point
de vue des habitants des tel'ritoires repllblicains
occupes par les Pays-Bas. CeUe resolution, emanaot du Conseil de securite de I'Organisation des
Nations Unies. cherche a rem~dier i line situation
dont la realite touche de beaucoup plus pres
les habitants de ces territoire5 et les autorites
republicaines que n'importe leque1 des membres
qui siegent .i cette table.
Qu'attendent 1es interesses d'une tdle resolution? Qu'esperent-ils d'une decision dn Conseil
de securite? Nul doute qu'en premier lieti, ils
ne cherchent et n'esperent trouver, dansla resolution du Conseil, une c1aire definition du point de
vue de cet organe sur le retablissement de leur
souverainete dans leurs propres territoires et par
consequent la suppression du controle des PaysBas et le retrait de ce qui constitue l'instrumeli.t
de ce contrOle, c'est-a-dire des forces militaires
neerlandaises. le crois que l'on a ttes bien_ fait
de prevoir dans te projet de resolution que le
transfertprogressif des pouvoirs aux autorites
tepublicaines se ftrait sur recommanootion de la
Commission operant sur pla.ce. I1 s'agit hl cl'une
proposition tres utile et ses auteurs sont certainement satisfaits de constater qu'elle est generalement 1:Jien accueillie, pour autant que je le sache.
Mais, au cas eu le Conseil de securite se
trouverait dans l'impossibilite d'adopter une pro.
position plus precise que celle qui figure dans t~
texte aetuel, il seraitsouhaitable que l'on s'en R
tende, aussi bien au seill du Conseil de- securite
qu'entre ies parties, pour definir cJairement la
position du Conseil, meme si cette position ne
peut etre explicitement fonnuIee dans un projet
de resolution'. En termes rtegatifs. il ne saurait
entrer dans les intentions du Cor.seil de securite,
etant donne les autres parties du programme
expose en tete du projet de resolution, de permettre, par exemple,que les elections aient lieu
en presence des forces d'occupation neerlandaises,
si ce n'e5t dans le cas, tres improbable, ou le
maintien de ces forces en certains points aurait
fait I'objet d'ull accord entre les parties, en vue
d'assurer le respect de l'ordre public. Personnellement, je suis tout pret a aceepter l'argument
im'oque par M. Palar a l'appui de sa these, selon
laquelle la Republique d'Indonesie sera vraisemblahlement en mesure cl'assurer elle-meme le
malntien de l'ordre, a condition que I'on agisse
avant qu'il ne soit trop tard.
Quoi qu'il en soit, il me semble inconcevable
q!le le Conseil de sec~rite en~isa~e de p~rmett~e
que, a une date donnee, les elections qut const(R
tuent le dcuxieme point du programme tres
general trace da!1s ce proje~ de resolution, ~e
deroulent, du maUlS en ce qll1 concerne les tern-

20
areas are concerned-of an occupation of the toires de la Republique, sous l'ceil des troupes
present military nature. Therefore, to conclude d'occupation neerlandaises, En conclusion, je le
that point, I say that, if a more precise arrange- repetc encore, all cas Oll il serait impossible d'apment cannot be incorporated into the text of the porter plus de precision sur ce point dans le projet
resolution, it wonld be at least tlseful and de- de resolution, il serait clu mains utile et souhaitaLle
sirable for those members of the Security Council que les membres du Conseil de securite, qui en ont
who feel able to do so, and who wish to do so, la possibilite et le desir, declarent qu'i1s inter·
to statc their understanding that the intention of pretent le paragraphe 4 f) comme signifiant
snb-paragraph 4 (f) is thai, in all relevant areas, que, non sel'.!ement l'administration, mais aussi
Netherlands forces, and not merely Netherlands les forces neerlandaises auront ete retirees de
administration, shall have been withdrawn by the taus les territoires interesses a l'epoque du scrutin.
time of the completion of the elections.
Tels sont les principaux points fluxquels le
. Those are the main points to which I think ~he
COl1neil should give its attention in comparmg; Comeil de secudte devrait prher tonte son atten~
t11e text of its own draft resolution ar,d that of tion, en comparant son propre projet de resolution
the resolution adopted in New Delhi. I think et la resolution cle New-Delhi. J'estime que le
the Council should, as I have said, give the Conseil devrait attacher la plus grande imporutmost possible weight to the fact that the New tance au fait que la resolution de New-Delhi est
Delhi resolution emanates trom a meeting con- h I'reuvre d'une conference qui a Stl s'inspirer des
ducted in the light of United Nations principles' principes de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
and possessing a full sense of responsibility re- prendre connaissance de ses responsabilites, en
garding what could happen in tIle area which ~ se rendant parfaitement compte de ce qui se
those countries represented if the situation in' passerait dans toute la zone geogmphique repn~­
Indonesia were not properly adjl1Sted on the basis srntee par ses membres si la question indonesienlle
of the principles of the Charter of the United n'etait pas reglee conformement aux principes
de la Charte des Nations Unies.
Nations.
En dernier lieu, puis-je soulever un autre point
Finally, may I turn to another point which is
not coneerned with the resolution itself, but on qui n'est pas lie au projet de resolution, m<lis
which I should like some information, as doubt- propos duquel je desirer.1.is recevoir certains
less other members of the Ccuncil have given renseignements si, comme il est prob<lble, Cl"
some attention to it. I noted in the papers and point a attire J'<lttention d'autres membres du
documents circulated at the last meeting of the Conseil? Les documents distribues ~ la derniere
Security Council that the Committee of Good seance m'apprennent, en effet, que la Commission
Offices had transmitted to the Council certain de bons offices a transmis au Conseil certaine
correspondence relating to communications with corrcspondance qui a trait d'une part aux tentaRepublican leaders, now under enforced confine M tives faites pour entrer en communication avee
ment in certain parts of the Republie, and to les dirigcants republicains detenus en certains
the suggestion, ·which the Council, I thought, had points du territoire de la Republiquc; et d'autrc
la proposition adoptee sans difficulte la
adopted without any question at an earlier meet~ part
ing last w~ek [401st meeting], concerning the semaine derniere par le Conseil [401 eme siance L
facilitation of n visit of repl'esentatives of the (jui vi~e les dispositions it prendre en vue d'une
Republic to Lake Success. If I may be aHowed, visite a Lake Success des representants de la
I merely wish to ask the representative of the Republique. Si le Conseil m'y autorise, je desire·
Netherlands if he has any information which rais demander au representant des Pays-Bas s'il
may be added to that which, apparently, is aH a quelque chose ajouter a11)( renseignements que
that is at the moment in the possession of the possede deja la Commission. D'apres ces docUComm~ttee. The Committee has been informed,
ments, la Commission a. ete informee que les
according to these docllments, that no decision Pays-Bas n'avalent pas encore pris de decision
has been reached by the Netherlands regarding pour permettre an;!: representants de la RepuM
facilities for representatives Of the Republic to blique de se rendre it Lake. Success. I1 s'agit ta,
reach Lake Success. This was, presumably, the selon toute vl'aisembl:mce, des renseignements dont
information of 25 January,
la Commission disposalt
la date du 2S janvier.
It may be that th~ Netherlands authorities are
Les Pays-Bas sont peut-etre maintenant en
now in a position to communicate such a deciM mesure de faire connaitre lenr decision. Meme
sion. Even so, it is no very lig)lt matter that s'il en est ainsi, i1 est aS5ez grave qu'ils aient
such a delay sbol1ld OCWf in the -.ntisfaction of laisse eCOl1ler un tel d61ai avant de donner satis M
what was tantamout to a request by ,\'e Security faction a une demande qu'ils auraient dit traiter
Council re:;arding such facilities. Th.:. (.;ouncil, comme si elle emanait dil'ectement du Conseil de
I have no uO'.Ibt, will be glad to hear an explana~ securite. Je suis certain quc le Conseil sera heu~
tion fmm the representative of the Netherlands. rel1X d'entendre le rcprescnt:mt des Pays-Bas cl.
Cl" sujet.
That is all I have to say at the moment. I
,le n'ai rien it. Qjouter potlr le moment. Si cela
reserve, if I may, the right to speak again with est possible, je rlesire me reserver le droit de
reference to any fttrther suggestions that may be reprendre la parole sur toutes les propositions qui
made for amendment of the joint draft resolu- pourraient etre faites en vtle d'amcnder l'actue1
tion now before the Council.
projet commun de resolution,
The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will
Le PRESIDENT (Iradlr<t ue l'allglais): Le CoHseil
now adjourn and will'resume the discussion of de securite va maintenant s'ajourner; i1 reprendra
the Indonesian question at 3 o'cleck this after- l'e.xamen de la question indonesienne a 15 heures,
noon,
The mceti~lg rose at 1 p.m.
La seance est levee d 13 heMes.

a

a

a

a
