S/PV.7460

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7460th meeting

Wednesday, 10 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2015/378)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-17399 (E)
*1517399*

S/PV.7460

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2015/378)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/378, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mulet.
Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this new opportunity to make a
statement before the Council. As you just stated, Sir,
the subject of the meeting this morning is the situation
in Darfur and the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/378) on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
which was transmitted to the members of the Council
on 26 May. My statement will focus on two main points.
First, I will make a few general observations on the
situation in Darfur and the activities of UNAMID; then,
I will weigh in on the process of drafting a withdrawal
strategy for UNAMID and related recommendations in
the report of the Secretary-General.
(spoke in English)
The report before the Council analyses a very
serious security situation, including the continued
need for substantial humanitarian assistance in Darfur
and the limited progress in the peace process. In
addition, it describes a deeply concerning increase in

2/7

10/06/2015

violent attacks by armed assailants against UNAMID
and humanitarian personnel. Most worrisome is the
devastating impact that the security situation has had
on innocent civilians and the obstacles that violence
has created for their protection and for humanitarian
operations.
The second phase of the Government’s military
offensive, called Operation Decisive Summer, has
resulted in high numbers of newly displaced people.
Humanitarian organizations estimate that at least
78,000 people have been newly displaced by conflict
in Darfur this year alone. In addition, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has received
reports of some 130,000 additional internally displaced
persons (IDPs), but has not yet been able to verify that.
Most of those unverified IDPs are said to be in the Jebel
Marra area, where the heaviest fighting has been taking
place and which is mostly inaccessible to humanitarian
partners. There is also significant concern about
reports of indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and other violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
In addition, the current year has seen intercommunal
conflicts leading to periodic outbreaks of violence.
Beyond the resource conflicts that ignited this violence,
the destabilizing impact of broader political tensions
and numerous paramilitary groups and militias, the
proliferation of small arms and the manner in which
local authorities have responded to insecurity have all
contributed to aggravating the situation. Crime is also a
major source of insecurity, with various armed persons
taking advantage of the relative absence of security
forces in most areas to attack civilians. This worsening
security environment in parts of Darfur continues to
have significant implications for the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and UNAMID.
Despite the difficult operating environment,
including movement restrictions and other obstructions
imposed by the belligerent parties, UNAMID remains
resolute in its commitment to deliver on its three
strategic priorities.
As part of the continued implementation of the
strategic review, the United Nations Secretariat
continues to work with the mission’s leadership,
the African Union and other partners to ensure that
peacekeepers in Darfur are able to carry out their
mandate effectively and efficiently. The adequate
responses by units when attacked and the proactive

15-17399

10/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

approach shown when protecting IDPs are indicators
of continuous improvements as a result of the requested
changes in attitude, robustness and training.
On the civilian side, the focus has remained on
the streamlining of personnel and the process of
transferring some of UNAMID’s mandated tasks to
the United Nations country team. An analysis has been
conducted to identify which of these tasks could be
carried out by UNAMID, which should be implemented
jointly with the United Nations country team, and those
in which the team could have a comparative advantage.
The operational plan for the implementation of this
process is being developed jointly by UNAMID and the
country team and will be based on specific benchmarks,
taking into account certain preconditions, including the
mobilization of adequate financial resources and the
necessary support from the Government of the Sudan.
With regard to UNAMID’s achievements, I will
limit my remarks to the protection of civilians, which
has received sustained attention and effort by the
mission over the last few months.
UNAMID has continued to effectively implement
its protection-of-civilians mandate through the
provision of physical protection, logistical and security
support to humanitarian operations, the promotion of a
protective environment, and local conflict mediation. In
this context, the mission has revised its protection-ofcivilians strategy, which is now being implemented by
its relevant components.
The most significant achievements over the
reporting period were related to the establishment
of protective areas within or in the vicinity of team
sites and instances in which peacekeepers repelled or
prevented attacks against civilians, conducted robust
patrols to affected villages and escorted humanitarian
missions during intercommunal clashes. Protection
committees were also formed with IDPs to coordinate
relevant protection activities in collaboration with
humanitarian personnel.
Let me turn now to the development of an exit
strategy for UNAMID. In February 2015, a joint
working group was established between the United
Nations, the African Union and the Government of the
Sudan to respond to the request of the Security Council
in its resolution 2173 (2014) for the development of an
exit strategy for UNAMID, as well as to address the
particular concerns raised by the Government of the
Sudan in this regard. As mentioned in the Secretary-

S/PV.7460

General’s report, following a field visit and two rounds
of discussions, the Working Group has not yet produced
a conclusion, and consultations will resume in the
coming weeks. However, during the meetings, the
African Union-United Nations team explored the idea
of a two-pronged approach with the Government.
First, UNAMID’s proposed exit strategy is based
on the achievement of the mission’s benchmarks,
as endorsed by the Council last year and premised
on a political solution to the conflict based on direct
talks between the parties, starting with a cessation of
hostilities.
The proposed exit strategy is also based on the
gradual and phased withdrawal of UNAMID’s force
from Western Darfur, where there have not been any
major activities by armed groups or intercommunal
fighting in the past two years. The gradual reduction
in UNAMID’s presence in Western Darfur would be
complemented by a progressive handover of its tasks
to the Government and the United Nations country
team, as the necessary conditions for a consolidation
of security in the State are created by the national
authorities. This approach would reflect the mission’s
efforts to concentrate on its three strategic priorities
while further demonstrating flexibility and efficiency
by reducing its size. As part of this, UNAMID would
also close three other team sites in Northern and
Southern Darfur that, in accordance with the findings
of the recently concluded military capability study,
are assessed to be in areas that do not necessitate the
mission’s presence.
(spoke in French)
Allow me in conclusion to make one last remark.
Resolving the conflict in Darfur now more than ever
requires joint efforts on the part of the Security Council,
the African Union and the international community
as a whole in order to make the belligerent parties
understand that there cannot be a military solution. The
suffering endured by the people of Darfur has lasted for
far too long and must cease immediately.
Despite the encouraging progress made in the
negotiations in 2014, the prospect for a lasting solution
to the crisis seems to be but wishful thinking in the
current context. The relaunching of direct negotiations
and national dialogue must remain the priority.
While reiterating our thanks to the Sudanese
authorities for their efforts to achieve better cooperation
with UNAMID, I should like to stress the fact that the

15-173993/7

S/PV.7460

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United Nations and the African Union have no objective
other than the well-being of the population, an end to the
violence and an negotiated end to the crisis, in order to
being a process of harmonious development in Darfur
and, following that, the entire country of the Sudan. We
know that the Government of the Republic of the Sudan
also shares this goal. That is why the preparation of an
exit strategy for UNAMID must be linked to the results
obtained vis-à-vis that goal and a specific improvement
in the situation on the ground.
When our efforts in this area have borne fruit
and the population has been freed from fear and
violence, that will be the time for us to disengage. In
the meantime, we must continue our cooperation on the
basis of mutual trust. That is why, in common accord
with the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, the Secretariat of the United Nations asks that
the mandate of UNAMID be extended for an additional
year, until June 2016.
The President: I thank Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Truth be
told, I had prepared a positive, optimistic statement;
that was the spirit that guided me when I was coming to
visit the Council. However, before I read my statement,
I have to say that I find myself forced to comment on
the first part of Mr. Mulet’s briefing, on the situation in
Darfur during the reported period.
He said that the situation was very dangerous; that
is an inaccurate description. The deterioration in the
situation and the number of individuals displaced as
a result of tribal violence was presented as a situation
that had arisen as a result of the violence. But there was
an armed group that crossed State borders into another
State. Rather than calling the attention of the Security
Council to this fact or referring to an attack on the very
sovereignty of a State, Mr. Mulet told us only about
the consequences of this incident, to which we had to
respond.
That is why the violence took place. I recognize
that there is tribal violence in Darfur. It has been
happening for a long time as a result of the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons around Darfur. It is a
long story, with the first cases of tribal violence taking
place, according to this report and Mr. Mulet’s remarks,
in 1952, while we were still under British colonial rule.
That tribal violence led to the displacement of persons at
4/7

10/06/2015

the time, but the Government intervened and contained
the situation.
However, we should not confuse tribal violence and
its impact with what we are referring to here today. We
should not depict it as an open conflict between rebel
groups and the Sudanese Government. This situation is
being contained, even if there remain a few pockets of
instability in some areas. It is well known that there are
active groups.
Mr. Mulet also referred to the Operation Decisive
Summer, which he characterized as destabilizing
security. This again is the wrong way of depicting the
situation. In December 2013 and January and February
2014, activity undertaken by the remnants of rebel
groups in Darfur, including seven offensives, meant
that we were simply forced to respond to the situation
through the Rapid Support Forces, as part of Operation
Decisive Summer, which we launched solely as a
response to the attacks of the armed groups. In other
words, the situation is being wrongly depicted here. We
acted to impose stability on Darfur. Operation Decisive
Summer did not destabilize the region — quite the
opposite.
And when Mr. Mulet refers to the obstacles
that have hampered the work of the Mission — the
Secretary-General states that during the reporting
period 595 visas were approved while only 7 visas had
been suspended — I wonder here, quite openly, what
sort of obstacles the Assistant Secretary-General is
referring to.
The African Union/United Nations Hybrid
operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is an African Union
operation and one we hold dear. We certainly do not
want to stem or hamper any of its actions. We wish
to cooperate with it and that is all I wanted to clarify
here and now, in order to ensure that the Council fully
understands what is actually taking place, the reasons
why we have deployed the Operation Decisive Summer.
It is an operation that should be praised because it has
contributed to stability in Darfur.
I return now to my statement, and of course I would
like to start, Mr. President, by congratulating you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. We are confident that your presidency of the
Council, Sir, will provide a different dimension to the
way in which the issue of Darfur is tackled, given that
you are fraternal country, linked to the Sudan through
a long history of relations. We would like to thank the

15-17399

10/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing. It is the
first part of the briefing that we disagree with, as I said
previously.
We thank Mr. Abiodun Oluremi Bashua, Deputy
Joint Special Representative for UNAMID. We
are honoured by his presence during the Council’s
deliberations, all the more so since these deliberations
coincide with consultations under way on the draft
resolution on the extension of the UNAMID mandate.
I turn to the Council at a time when the Sudan finds
itself on the eve of what stands to be a very promising
phase, one replete with hope. President Al-Bashir won
the elections in February. He garnered an unprecedented
number of votes and was re-elected for another term of
office, which is mentioned in paragraph 38 of the report
of the Secretary-General. The report also referred to
the elections that took place in Darfur, which unfolded
in a peaceful manner without any security-related
incidents.
I am sure that the Council followed the inaugural
address of President Al-Bashir before the National
Assembly in which he referred to an amnesty and called
upon all groups bearing arms to engage in the path
of reason and become involved in the comprehensive
national peace dialogue. Moved by the spirit, the new
Government of the Sudan expects more decisive action to
resume the national dialogue without excluding anyone.
We also hope that the Security Council — and the
international community more broadly speaking — will
assume their responsibilities with respect to those who
have rejected the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and, in keeping with the address made by the President
of the Republic, we intend to bolster our cooperation
with the United Nations and with all of its bodies and
agencies in order to complete the reconstruction and
stabilization process in Darfur.
What should be avoided is wrongful depictions
of the reality in the region, because that undermines
the spirit of cooperation, specifically with the United
Nations entities present in Darfur, with a view to
finalizing the process of rebuilding and reconstructing
the area, including resuming the mediation processes
and fostering reconciliation between the tribes to put
an end to the senseless tribal violence in Darfur and
ensure that efforts are focused on development and on
the rehabilitation of the area.
Turning now to UNAMID’s exit strategy, we expect
that the draft resolution that will extend the mandate of

S/PV.7460

the operation will include a number of clear paragraphs
on that issue. We would remind the Council that
paragraph 7 of resolution 2173 (2014) is quite clear and
direct in its request that the Secretary-General review
the operations of the Mission and its achievements to
implement the strategic priorities in cooperation with
the African Union and all stakeholders, including, of
course, the United Nations.
We are cooperating fully with the working group.
This is not a new request. The Council adopted this
strategy in resolution 2173 (2014), in which it renewed
the mandate and included a number of proposals on
exit strategies and ways to transfer responsibility
from UNAMID to the Sudan country team, as a great
deal of progress has been made in implementing the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The pockets of
remaining armed groups that are attempting from time
to time to carry out military activities, to hamper and
impede the remaining provisions of the Doha Document
and to put an end the exit strategy leads us to ask the
following question: Why are those groups continuing to
carry out such actions? Furthermore, other components
of those armed groups are preventing the overall return
of displaced persons in the five federal states of Darfur.
What the armed groups want is to have the refugees
remain in the camps so that they have a pretext to
continue to bear arms.
As we said in previous statements, in no way
have we referred to an immediate exit strategy for
UNAMID. We have not done so. Rather, we said that
we are currently implementing a gradual strategy in
cooperation with the African Union and the United
Nations that involves immediately reducing the military
component of UNAMID and other components in areas
where security has been restored and which are stable.
I am referring now to East Darfur and three areas in
Central Darfur.
Those drawdown operations are continuing gradually
in other regions, based on benchmarks that we have
all agreed to. That is why I would like to state in this
Chamber that our institutions stand ready to undertake
the operations necessary to restore security, and we
call on the United Nations to strengthen the capacity
of its country team to ensure that it is in a position to
take on the operations that have been transferred from
UNAMID, in accordance with resolution 2173 (2014).
In assessing the security situation in Darfur, we
should distinguish between the tribal conflicts that
have always occurred in the region and other conflicts.

15-173995/7

S/PV.7460

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

There are no more open armed conflicts between the
rebel groups and the Government, with the exception
of a few pockets of resistance carrying out very limited
sabotage operations. It is incorrect to speak of open
conflict with such groups except, as I just mentioned,
with the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM),
which crossed our borders on 26 April with the aim of
carrying out that kind of destructive activity. Our Rapid
Support Forces responded at the time, but apart from
that there have been no open conflicts with the other
armed groups. As for tribal violence, however, that has
always existed in Darfur, as I have said, and we have all
seen the efforts the Government of the Sudan has made
to contain that violence and deal with its underlying
causes. The Government has been able to use local
tribal chiefs to achieve a number of reconciliations
between tribes, and those efforts continue.
The issue of displaced persons should be addressed
within the framework of development efforts, and to
that end the Government of the Sudan needs support
through the lifting of unfair unilateral sanctions, and
calls on donors to continue their assistance efforts by
implementing the Doha Document. The tribal conflicts
result simply from social causes and development
issues, and the best way to deal with them would be
to lift the sanctions and forgive our debt, which would
help us to resolve the conflicts, which arise over issues
such as water rights and pasturage, which are prevalent
throughout Africa, including the Sahel region.

10/06/2015

him as if he was one of our own Sudanese soldiers. It
appears that when he fell from an observation tower,
his head hit a metal container. His injuries were very
bad, but he was evacuated by airlift thanks to military
intelligence and approval. Unfortunately, this occurred
at the same time as the operation in which the Rapid
Support Forces clashed with JEM as it crossed our
borders in the Nakhara area, which is not far from the
Mukhjar region.
Again, we offer our condolences and reiterate our
readiness to cooperate with the United Nations and
its entities in Darfur, including UNAMID. We want
to facilitate the work of that very African operation.
The Sudan is an African country and an integral part
of Africa, and no one here in the Council can say that
we are trying to hinder UNAMID’s operations or put
obstacles in its way. On the contrary, we greatly value the
security and safety of the Mission and all its members,
and, needless to say, we support the facilitation of its
efforts. That is why last week, when the Rapid Support
Forces recovered five seized vehicles and returned them
to UNAMID, we clearly demonstrated our willingness
to cooperate.

That is why we reject paragraphs 18 and 19 of the
report, concerning the incidents in the Kass region. The
report distorts the truth, and we have already spoken of
the incident, which was a twofold rather than a single
one. The first was on 23 April, when five members of a
raiding group seized a UNAMID vehicle near the Kass
water point; the second involved an operation pursuing
the group that had seized the vehicle, in which various
groups fired on the inhabitants of Zaghawa, even
though they had raised white flags, killing two innocent
civilians and injuring several more. The vehicle was
recovered by the Sudanese armed groups following a
clash with those who had seized it, and it was restored
to UNAMID.

At the same time, we should be implementing the
gradual and flexible exit strategy that was agreed to by
all sides. We would like to send the message to those
who have found themselves in the camps that they
should begin to prepare to return to their homes, take
up their former daily activities and lead normal lives
again. The mere launching of the exit strategy will send
a message to the rebel leaders who have rejected the
Doha Document to set aside their doubts and hesitation,
listen to the voice of reason and become involved again
in the process of peace and reconstruction, especially in
the light of the amnesty declaration and the assurances
given by the President of our Republic in his most recent
address to Parliament. We expect a technical decision
on the renewal of the Mission’s mandate, particularly
the paragraphs concerning the exit strategy from the
regions that we have agreed on within the framework of
the working group. Those include the states of Eastern
Darfur, as well as three regions of Um Kadada, Tulus
and Malha in Central Darfur.

We also have reservations about paragraph 28
of the report, which contains incorrect information
regarding the evacuation of an Ethiopian peacekeeper
who was injured in the Mukhjar area. We once again
offer our condolences to our brother Government of
Ethiopia and to the family of the deceased. We treated

I would again like to touch on the paragraphs in the
report that state that the Government of the Sudan has
used banned weapons in some areas. That information
has not been confirmed and should therefore not
be presented to the Council as such. It is not true. It
cannot refer to the Rapid Support Forces, which are

6/7

15-17399

10/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

flexible, lightly armed troops who do not need heavy
weaponry, as everyone knows, which is why we reject
those allegations. I reiterate that we are at a stage where
we can be far more open than we may have been in the
past, especially in the light of the amnesty assurances
our President has announced for the leaders of the
groups that are still armed. We are on the verge of a
phase in which we will need the Council’s assistance
and collaboration. We will spare no effort to cooperate
with the United Nations and its entities, and we ask

S/PV.7460

the Council to send the right message to those armed
groups that are still reluctant to become involved in the
political process, in order to encourage them to join in
the peace process.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

15-173997/7
