United Nations

S/PV.6545

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6545th meeting
Monday, 6 June 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Osorio
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Berger
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 12 May 2011 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2011/316)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-36334 (E)

*1136334*

S/PV.6545

Letter dated 12 May 2011 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994, addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2011/317)

2

11-36334

S/PV.6545

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Gérard Araud,
Permanent Representative of France, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of May
2011. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Araud
and his team for the great skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 12 May 2011 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2011/316)
Letter dated 12 May 2011 from the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994
and 31 December 1994, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2011/317)

11-36334

The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representatives of Croatia,
Rwanda — in an exceptional manner and after
consultations among all members of the Council —
and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the following to participate in
this meeting: Judge Patrick Robinson, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
Judge Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: S/2011/316, containing a
letter dated 12 May 2011 from the President of
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council; and S/2011/317,
containing a letter dated 12 May 2011 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson.
Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today in my capacity as
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and to do so under the Presidency of His
Excellency Mr. Nelson Messone, the Ambassador of
Gabon. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere appreciation to Portugal as the
Chair of the Security Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, as well as to the
Office of Legal Affairs, for their cooperation with the
Tribunal in respect of preparations for the
commencement of the Residual Mechanism and the
transfer of the residual functions of the Tribunal to the
Mechanism.
At the close of the reporting period, 16 persons
are in appeal proceedings, 14 persons are on trial, and
four are at the pre-trial stage. One accused — Goran
Hadžić — remains at large. To date, the Tribunal has

3

S/PV.6545

concluded proceedings against 126 of the 161 persons
indicted by the Prosecutor.
On 26 May, Ratko Mladić was arrested in Serbia,
having evaded justice for 16 years. He was indicted in
1995 by the Office of the Prosecutor for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes allegedly
committed from 1992 to 1995 during the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 31 May, he was
transferred to The Hague, where he will face trial. The
arrest of Mr. Mladić was a milestone in the Tribunal’s
history and brings us closer to the successful
completion of our mandate, with Goran Hadžić
remaining the sole fugitive.
As members of the Council know, the Tribunal
has spearheaded the fight against impunity through the
corpus of law it has developed in both the substantive
and the procedural areas of international humanitarian
law and international criminal law. With the trial of Mr.
Mladić, the Tribunal will be removing yet another
brick from the wall of impunity. Questions have been
asked as to the impact of the trial of Mr. Mladić on the
Tribunal’s completion strategy. That there will be an
impact is clear, but it is too early to say with certainty
what the precise impact will be.

staffing, the maintenance of the estimates in these three
trials is a remarkable achievement worth mentioning.
The detailed reasons for the delays in the other trials
are set out in the current report (S/2011/316, annex I).
During the reporting period, one judgement on
review was issued. Appeals from four trial judgements
are currently pending before the Appeals Chamber, and
the judges of the Appeals Chamber remained fully
engaged in appeals from the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, rendering two judgements and
hearing three cases in Arusha.
The Tribunal continues to take all measures
possible to expedite its trials, without sacrificing due
process. Over the years, the Tribunal has continually
kept its procedures under review and has introduced a
variety of reforms in order to improve its work. These
reforms are detailed in my report and include the use of
e-Court and e-Filing, amendments to the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, and case management
techniques.

During the reporting period, the Tribunal not only
faced unprecedented challenges, but also achieved
unprecedented advancement in the implementation of
its completion strategy. The Tribunal conducted
proceedings in nine trials concurrently by doubling-up
judges and staff so that they were working on more
than one case at a time. The Đorđević trial and the
Gotovina et al. trial were brought to a close. The
Perišić trial is anticipated to be completed this year.
Six trials are anticipated to conclude in 2012, and the
Karadžić trial should be completed in 2014.

We face a particular problem with staffing in the
Appeals Chamber, which is ultimately responsible —
as members of the Council know — for writing the law
of the Tribunal. For some time now, staff have been
diverted to the Trial Chambers in an effort to complete
the Tribunal’s trial proceedings. This was and is
entirely reasonable in light of the pressure to complete
all trials, but it has necessarily resulted in the Appeals
Chamber being extremely understaffed. The appeal
schedule presented in my report has been revised in the
light of a number of factors relevant to the pace of the
Tribunal’s appeal proceedings. Most significantly, the
staffing crisis — which persists at the Tribunal — has
led to revisions in the estimated times for the
completion of all appeal proceedings.

Following the criticism of the progress of the
Tribunal’s trials made by members of the Security
Council during my last visit to the United Nations in
December 2010 (see S/PV.6434), I wrote to the judges
and convened a plenary to discuss the matter. I stressed
the need for every measure to be taken to expedite the
work of the Tribunal and to ensure that there was no
slippage in the schedule. I am pleased to report that in
three cases — the Đorđević case, the Stanišić and
Simatović case, and the Stanišić and Župljanin case —
the estimates from the last report (S/2010/413) have
been maintained. In the context of the challenges
facing the Tribunal, in particular those related to

In response, a new and more empirical
methodology has been applied to appeal projections.
Although this approach has led to the revised estimates
in the current report, the long-term aim of the revisions
is to present the Security Council with timelines that it
is hoped will largely remain the same until the end of
the work of the Tribunal. In order to counterbalance
these revised estimates, the Appeals Chamber has been
employing and will continue to employ a variety of
efficiency measures to expedite its proceedings,
including the limitation of amendments to grounds of
appeal, the organization of judgement drafting, and the
prioritization of work.

4

11-36334

S/PV.6545

Having summarized the present status of our
cases, I would now like to discuss three areas in which
the Tribunal needs the support of its parent body, the
Security Council.

Tribunal approaches the completion of its work. But,
following those two resolutions, although there has
been improvement in some areas, more robust action is
required.

The first area in which we need the support of the
Security Council is the retention of our highly qualified
staff. The most serious challenge to the completion of
the work of the Tribunal is the perpetual departures of
our uniquely experienced staff for more secure
employment elsewhere. It would be irresponsible of
me, as the President of the Tribunal, not to raise this
issue with our parent body, the Security Council. I
must tell the Council frankly that the staffing problem
is so bad that it can now be described as chronic,
systemic and endemic. We are in a staffing crisis. The
stark reality is that, because the Tribunal is closing
down, staff members are leaving. In a five-week period
in April and May, eight members of the Chambers staff
alone tendered their resignations. In the space of three
days, three staff tendered their resignations. Those who
are left behind witness their colleagues leaving for
secure employment in other United Nations organs and
institutions.

I realize that the Security Council does not deal
directly with staffing issues, but it must be
acknowledged that the Council is composed of
influential Member States that are also members of the
General Assembly and its Fifth Committee. With that
in mind, I implore the Member States of the Council to
use that influence in order to support three specific
measures for the Tribunal.

To make matters worse, those who are left behind
have to pick up the extra work of those who have left
and must train replacement staff members, which only
increases their workload and exacerbates the problem.
Moreover, when staff members leave, it often takes
many weeks until a new staff member can be recruited
in order to fill the remaining gap.
The staffing crisis has required me to become
personally involved, in an unprecedented way, in
specific staffing decisions on a weekly basis. Judges
bring their Chambers’ staffing problems to my
attention. As a result, I have obtained an immense
knowledge that might equip me some day for a career
in human resources. But it may be questioned whether
this is my proper role at the Tribunal.
The Security Council responded to the pleas of
the Tribunal for assistance in stemming the alarming
rate of departures by passing resolution 1931 (2010) in
June 2010 and resolution 1954 (2010) in December
2010, which noted the importance of the Tribunal
being adequately staffed to complete its work
expeditiously and called upon the Secretariat and other
relevant United Nations bodies to continue to work
with the Registrar of the Tribunal in order to find
practicable solutions to address this issue as the

11-36334

The first measure is a limited payment to staff
members with more than five years of continuous
service who remain until the abolition of their posts.
Recognizing the economic benefit that a measure of
this kind would be to the institution, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
recommended a similar proposal in 2008. In the long
run, the retention of experienced staff is clearly the
most efficient and cost-effective approach for the
Tribunal, because the cost of replacing staff who leave
is greater than that associated with providing the
proposed retention incentive. This measure for the
Tribunal to retain staff in an example of where we are
actually spending to save.
The second measure is the endorsement of the
Tribunal’s stand that the Office of Human Resources
Management should reverse its position and approve
our recommended list of staff members who should be
converted to permanent contracts. The Tribunal could
then proceed with the issuance of permanent contracts
immediately, which would have a direct and dramatic
impact on our staff retention. It has been almost a year
since the Registrar submitted a list of personnel to be
converted to permanent contracts. To date, no decision
has been taken on the matter. In the meantime, staff
members who are on that list have left. The delay in
dealing with this matter may affect the rights of
individuals concerned. The Central Review Panel, to
which the requests have been referred, must issue a
decision as soon as possible.
Thirdly, the Tribunal has been fortunate to be able
to attract a number of highly qualified interns. It would
be a great benefit to our work if we were able to hire
such interns in circumstances where they have become
integral members of a trial or appeal team.
Unfortunately, under the current regulations, interns

5

S/PV.6545

cannot be hired within six months of the completion of
their internships. We would therefore ask Member
States to endorse the position that the Tribunal should
be granted a waiver so that it can tap this resource and
expand the pool of qualified and experienced
candidates. In making this request, I hasten to add that
there would be absolutely no financial consequences to
waiving the six-month rule, and former interns would
have to apply through the regular Inspira staff-selection
process.
I raised the details of these matters with Member
States last week, and so only mention them now very
briefly. The Security Council, the Tribunal’s parent
body, must heed the call for action. We need the
Council’s influence and support if we are to complete
the work with which it has tasked us. I must be blunt:
if something is not done to alleviate the staffing crisis,
the Tribunal will be forever reporting slippages in its
work schedule. The schedule will continue to have to
be revised, and international criminal justice will be
compromised.
The second area in which we need the support of
the Security Council involves the establishment of a
victims’ trust fund. In my previous reports to the
Council, I raised the need for the compensation of
victims and witnesses. More than 6,900 witnesses and
accompanying persons from all over the world have
been called to appear before the Tribunal. Without the
courage of those witnesses to step forward and give
evidence, there would be no trials, and impunity would
reign. These victims of the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia have a right to compensation under
international law for the crimes committed against
them. I have previously called upon the Security
Council to establish a trust fund for victims of crimes
falling within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and thus to
breathe life into the General Assembly’s Declaration of
Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and
Abuse of Power, which was adopted in November
1985.
The Tribunal has been taking initiatives to have
established some system for providing assistance and
support to victims. I stress that those initiatives will not
impose any obligations upon States to provide funding;
rather, they contemplate voluntary contributions. This
would go some way towards bringing the position of
the Tribunal — which, after all, is the first international
criminal judicial institution established by the United
Nations — somewhat closer to the International

6

Criminal Court, which has a trust fund for its victims.
The Tribunal cannot, through the rendering of its
judgments alone, bring peace and reconciliation to the
region. Other remedies should complement the
criminal trials if lasting peace is to be achieved, and
one such remedy should be adequate assistance to the
victims for their suffering. I therefore call upon the
Security Council to lend its support to those initiatives.
The third area in which we need the support of
the States members of the Council is the enforcement
of sentences. The Tribunal has signed enforcement-ofsentence agreements with 17 States, most of which
have been enforcing our sentences for years. We are
very grateful for that. However, some of those States
have become hesitant to enforce further sentences and
have called for more equal burden-sharing among
Member States. Other States have signalled that they
would enforce only a fixed number of sentences at any
one time and have declined the Tribunal’s requests to
receive additional convicted persons. Considering that
up to 40 additional sentences may have to be enforced
over the next few years, depending upon the outcome
of trials and appeals, it has become evident that the
Tribunal’s current enforcement capacity is rapidly
approaching its limit.
The enforcement of sentences is an integral part
of the criminal justice system administered by the
Tribunal and as envisaged by the Security Council. If
sentences pronounced by the Tribunal remain
unenforced, the Tribunal cannot be said to have
completed its mission. It is my duty to inform the
Council that, at present, there is a significant risk that
the Tribunal will not have the capacity required to
enforce all its future sentences. Despite the Tribunal’s
persistent efforts to secure additional enforcement
agreements, States have been reluctant to enter into
such agreements. The completion of the Tribunal’s
mandate requires that the enforcement of all sentences
be secured before the Tribunal closes. I therefore
appeal to the international community to urgently work
with the Tribunal in finding a viable solution to the
enforcement-capacity issue.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize the Tribunal’s
steadfast commitment to the expeditious conduct of its
proceedings in full compliance with due-process
standards. Everyone at the Tribunal is working as hard
as he or she can to complete the mandate entrusted to
us by the Security Council.

11-36334

S/PV.6545

The Tribunal is nearing the end of its mandate,
but we still require the support of our parent body in
the three areas that I have outlined here today: staff
retention, the establishment of a victims’ trust fund,
and the enforcement of our sentences.
We at the Tribunal have kept faith with the vision
of the Security Council, and now we need the Council
to reciprocate that faith and to give us the support that
we desperately need to complete the work that the
Council started.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Robinson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Khalida Rachid
Khan.
Judge Khan: It is a great honour for me to
address the members of the Security Council as the
new President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda.
I would like to begin by congratulating the
representative of Gabon, who is presiding over the
Security Council in June. I wish you, Sir, all the best
for a successful tour of duty.
I am pleased to present the members of the
Security Council with the fifteenth completion strategy
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (see S/2011/317, annex I). I would like to
express the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to the
Governments of the members of the Council and to the
Secretariat for their continued trust and support at all
levels over the last six months. I would also like to
congratulate Council member Portugal, which has
taken over as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
In the second half of this year, the Tribunal will
render judgments in five more cases with respect to 14
accused persons. For two cases where fair-trial
considerations required the provision of more time,
judgment will be delivered in the first quarter of 2012.
The Military II judgment involving four accused
persons was delivered on 17 May, and the Butare
judgment, involving six accused, will be delivered on
24 June. The Bizimungu judgment will be delivered by
August, and the Karemera, Ndahimana and
Nzabonimana judgments will be delivered in the fourth
quarter of this year. Therefore, almost all of our current
caseload will have been completed by the end of 2011.
Of course, there are a number of referral applications

11-36334

of cases to Rwanda under review. The trial decision in
the case of Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi is due to be rendered
at the end of this month, and the inevitable appeal is
projected to be finished in October.
The Prosecutor has made a new arrest. Bernard
Munyagishari was arrested in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo about two weeks ago. This new arrest
may not lead to trial activity if the referral applications
to Rwanda are accepted. However, if the Uwinkindi
application is denied and no other country is willing
and able to try Munyagishari, the trials of both will be
held at the ICTR, and, because we conduct these
applications and pretrial simultaneously, the trials
would most likely be finished by late 2012.
The Tribunal has also begun the hearings for
preservation of evidence under rule 71 bis in the case
of one fugitive, Félicien Kabuga, and two others will
begin in the fall. As an additional judicial workload,
we also anticipate at least three proceedings for
contempt of court beginning early next year.
In terms of appeals, a further five appeal
judgments are expected to be delivered in the second
half of 2011, and a total of 11 are expected by the end
of 2014.
Due to fair-trial considerations, our judicial
calendar can only provide estimates of expected
judgment delivery dates. However, our success at
meeting the targets set in the completion strategy
reports continues to improve, thanks to our trial
management initiatives. Those initiatives, which were
largely introduced after 2007, have shortened the time
required for pre-trial and trial, while upholding the
highest standards of fair-trial rights.
We can maintain this progress only if we remain
adequately staffed. Here I would like to thank our staff
for their continuing determined efforts to advance the
mandate of the Tribunal, often under difficult
circumstances.
Staff retention remains a critical issue. The
staffing situation is delicate, and any increase in
departures would endanger our ability to meet our
completion strategy targets. As an institution in the
final stages of its mandate, we have specific problems
that cannot be solved by applying standard human
resources policies. In this regard, we support President
Robinson’s proposal for a limited payment to staff

7

S/PV.6545

members with more than five years of continuous
service who remain until the abolition of their posts.
We also have a large number of staff on
temporary contracts. Those contracts will have to be
extended past the permitted 729-day period, and we
will need the support of the Secretariat to do that. We
appreciate that in its resolutions the Council continues
to note the importance of adequate staffing for the
Tribunals and calls on the Secretariat to work with the
Tribunal Registrars to find practical solutions to the
issue. I would also like to thank Council members and
the General Assembly for recognizing with a one-time
ex gratia payment the significant contribution that ad
litem judges have made to the work of the Tribunal.
Next, I turn to the issue of management positions
in the Tribunal Chambers. The permanent judges in
Arusha have already begun to leave. Some will resign
when their cases end, and others will be redeployed to
the Appeals Chamber. Under the present rules, in a
short while, once all the permanent judges have left,
we will not be able to fill the critical positions of
President and Vice-President of the Tribunal. We have
therefore requested, through the Secretary-General,
that the requirement that the President be a trial judge
resident in Arusha be removed, and that provision be
made for an ad litem judge to be elected Vice-President
and to act as President in the President’s absence.
State cooperation continues to be an important
factor in the Tribunal’s success. In the last few weeks,
Judge Byron rendered decisions on the transfer of four
convicts to Member States for enforcement of their
sentences. I would like to thank all the States that have
concluded agreements with the Tribunal on receiving
convicts for their cooperation.
We would also like to encourage Member States
to consider accepting referral applications from the
Tribunal. Nine fugitives still remain at large. We are
pleased that the most recent arrest, of Bernard
Munyagishari, was made about two weeks ago. The
Tribunal relies on the cooperation of Member States in
the tracking, arrest and transfer of fugitives. We look
forward to the early and speedy conclusion of the work
of the joint ICTR/Kenya task force in the tracking,
apprehension and transfer of the fugitive Félicien
Kabuga. The Prosecutor will provide the Council with
a more comprehensive briefing on this matter.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
increasingly problematic issue of relocating the

8

acquitted. Under any national jurisdiction, a person
acquitted of criminal allegations is set free and allowed
to fully reintegrate into society. This, unfortunately, is
not the case for those acquitted by the Tribunal. They
remain trapped in Arusha while they wait to be
relocated to a safe country. As acquitted persons, they
should be in a position to fully enjoy their rights,
including the right to life, which encompasses the right
to family, education and employment. Instead, they are
separated from their families and unable to pursue
further education or any form of employment.
Five out of eight of those acquitted have been
able to join their families in their country of choice, in
most cases following lengthy and difficult negotiations.
Regrettably, this has not been the case for three
acquitted persons who remain in safe houses in Arusha.
For one of them, André Ntagerura, it has been almost
five years since his acquittal was confirmed by the
Appeals Chamber.
The challenge of relocation is the unfortunate
result of the absence of a formal mechanism for
securing the support of Member States in accepting
such people in their territories. The ICTR considers the
resettlement of persons acquitted by an international
criminal tribunal to be a fundamental expression of the
rule of law and is seriously concerned about the
consequences of failing to fulfil this obligation.
This view was shared by the United Nations
refugee agency in a meeting of experts of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and of the ICTR organized in Arusha in
April. One of the conclusions of the joint expert
meeting recognized that the Security Council is where
the plight of the acquitted persons belongs and that the
Tribunal has no other choice but to call upon the
Council for its assistance in finding a sustainable
solution to this issue. The Security Council will shortly
receive a joint dossier on this matter prepared by the
UNHCR and the ICTR.
Moreover, the relocation of convicted persons
who have served their sentences also needs urgent
attention. These persons have even fewer avenues for
resettlement open to them. This issue is destined to
become growing problem in the years to come.
Lastly, I would like to provide an update on the
progress towards the Residual Mechanism, which was
established by this Council in resolution 1966 (2010),
six months ago. We are working hard, under tight

11-36334

S/PV.6545

deadlines, to ensure that the Residual Mechanism will
be a small and efficient institution. In close
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we are providing input to the
Office of Legal Affairs on the Mechanism’s draft rules
of procedure and evidence and developing a proposed
budget, staffing requirements and joint policies for
access to and security of the archives of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism. We are doing all of this while
relying on our existing staffing resources — which are
already stretched thin — and engaging in full-time
efforts to complete our core judicial work.
I want to thank the Council for the commitment
and the support it has shown the Tribunal over the last
17 years. I look forward to working closely with the
Council to ensure the success of the Tribunal in the
final stages of its mandate.
In the same way that the jurisprudence of the
Tribunals set a precedent for international criminal
justice, we hope that our efforts to meet the goals of
the completion strategy may also guide the closing of
future tribunals. As the Tribunal has gained experience,
delays have been reduced and effectiveness in
approaching the strategy has increased. The lessons
learned from the Tribunal’s efforts to implement a
completion strategy must be shared with other
institutions embarking upon such endeavours, so that
difficulties can be minimized and best practices
maintained and implemented.
The Tribunal has been engaged in work directly
related to the Rwandan genocide for more than 17
years. That genocide has greatly affected everyone at
the Tribunal, and seeking justice for the victims
continues to drive our commitment to the goal of
ensuring that never again will such atrocities occur. As
the Tribunal’s mandate draws to a close, we hope that
our work will lead the way in the continued fight
against impunity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Rachid Khan for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
Mr. Brammertz: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council on
the progress made by my Office towards the
completion of our mandate.

11-36334

Some recent developments have shown
significant advances in establishing accountability for
the crimes committed during the wars in the former
Yugoslavia. Foremost among these, of course, is the
arrest of Ratko Mladić, who for 16 years evaded
capture and transfer to The Hague. The arrest is
significant on many levels. For victims of the crimes
alleged against Ratko Mladić, it is a long overdue
opportunity for redress. For the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), it removes one of
the last obstacles to holding accountable those most
responsible for the wartime atrocities in the former
Yugoslavia. For international criminal justice, it is a
welcome confirmation that accountability for war
crimes is not a fleeting interest, but an enduring value.
Serbia now has an important opportunity to help
the public understand why Ratko Mladić has been
arrested and why justice demands that he stand trial.
We thank the Serbian authorities for making the arrest,
and we particularly acknowledge the role played by the
National Security Council, the action team established
to track the fugitives and operatives from the security
services.
In our written report (S/2011/316, annex II) we
were critical of Serbia’s efforts to locate the fugitives,
and we identified a number of operational
shortcomings for the Serbian authorities to address. We
urged them to translate their stated commitment to
arresting the fugitives into concrete action and visible
results. With the arrest of Ratko Mladić, Serbia has
taken a considerable step towards achieving that
objective. Serbia has met one of its key obligations to
the Tribunal and simultaneously acknowledged the rule
of law as a central building block for its future.
While the arrest of Ratko Mladić is an excellent
result, the fact remains that he was at large for 16
years. That raises troubling questions about how it was
possible for this individual to elude the substantial
resources of a State for so many years. We welcome
the Serbian Government’s statement that it will
investigate and prosecute the networks that supported
Ratko Mladić during his time in hiding. We also
welcome the Government’s expressed determination to
expose and punish any State official who assisted him.
We ask the Serbian Government to follow through on
those undertakings as a matter of priority.
We also ask the Serbian Government to continue
the operational improvements that led to Ratko

9

S/PV.6545

Mladić’s arrest. The recommendations set out in my
report for strengthening Serbia’s fugitive-tracking
efforts remain valid. We want the remaining ICTY
fugitive — Goran Hadžić — apprehended without
further delay.
When it comes to our ongoing trial and appeal
proceedings during this reporting period, Serbia has
promptly provided access to the documents and
archives we have requested. The Serbian National
Council for Cooperation with the Tribunal continued to
promote cooperation among the different Government
bodies handling requests from our office. Similarly, we
received prompt and adequate responses from Bosnia
and Herzegovina to our requests to access documents
and Government archives.
From Croatia in general, timely and adequate
responses were received concerning our requests for
witnesses and evidence. However, during the reporting
period, limited progress was made in locating the
missing military documents concerning Operation
Storm. Nevertheless, on 15 April the Trial Chamber
rendered its judgement in the Gotovina et al. case and
found that the crimes against Gotovina and Markač
were proven based on the evidence submitted at trial. It
is, however, unfortunate that in the aftermath of the
judgement, the highest State officials failed to
comment objectively on the outcome of the case.
From cooperation, I move to another core
development: the progress of our trials and appeals. In
this reporting period, we have finalized a large
component of our trial work. We have completed the
presentation of the Prosecution’s case-in-chief in all
but three cases. We must now add the Mladić case to
that list. As the focus of our attention turns towards the
appellate phase of proceedings, we are positioning
ourselves to deal effectively with the intense appellate
caseload on the horizon.
We are also making steady progress towards
implementing the Security Council’s resolution 1966
(2010 establishing the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are conscious
of the dates that have been set for the Residual
Mechanism to begin taking over the ICTY’s remaining
work, and we are assisting our Registry colleagues
with the necessary preparations. We are also working
together with our counterparts at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to ensure a coordinated

10

and efficient structure for the two prosecution offices
of the Mechanism.
As we approach the completion of our mandate,
staffing issues remain a significant concern. Staff
attrition is now a sharp reality, leaving our remaining
staff members to shoulder unrealistically heavy
burdens. Retaining our key staff will become a growing
problem for us in the next reporting period.
A further reflection that we are nearing the end of
our work is our intensifying focus on supporting
national war crimes prosecutions. It is a positive
development to see prosecution offices in the region
taking over responsibility for making sure that the
crimes committed during the war are punished.
However, cooperation among prosecutors in the region
must be a priority in order to resolve problems such as
parallel investigations. In July, we expect that an
agreement will be signed between Bosnia and Serbia to
improve the situation. We hope that increased
cooperation between Bosnia and Serbia will also lead
to more effective efforts to apprehend Radovan
Stanković, who remains at large nearly four years after
escaping from prison in Foča.
Improvements in regional cooperation will
depend on strong national war crimes strategies in each
country. We are deeply concerned by recent political
initiatives in Bosnia and Herzegovina that sought to
undermine the work of the State Prosecutor’s Office
and the State war crimes court.
In conclusion, over the past six months we have
made great strides towards the successful completion
of our mandate. The long-awaited arrest of Ratko
Mladić stands out as one of the most significant
developments, and we are committed to moving ahead
expeditiously with his trial. At the same time, we ask
the international community to ensure that we have the
resources needed to complete our work. We also call
upon Governments in the former Yugoslavia to support
our work and to use it as a platform for promoting
reconciliation in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Brammertz for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Jallow: During the period covered by the
report on the completion strategy of the International

11-36334

S/PV.6545

Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) (see
S/2011/317), my Office has continued to focus its
efforts on the completion of ongoing trials, the referral
of cases to Rwanda, evidence preservation
proceedings, the conduct of appeals, the intensification
of our tracking efforts, and the provision of assistance
to national authorities in respect of cases being
investigated or prosecuted by them.
During that period, we have received judgements
in respect of five accused persons and completed the
evidence phase in respect of four other accused
persons, while trial proceedings are at an advanced
stage in the two remaining cases. Subject to the
decision of the Trial Chambers on our referral
application of the detainee Jean Uwinkindi and the
disposal of the case of Bernard Munyagishari, the new
arrestee, and any arrests effected prior to 30 June 2011,
the trial workload of my Office in respect of current
detainees should thus conclude by the end of 2011.
The evidence preservation proceedings have also
been commenced in the case of Félicien Kabuga. Those
in respect of Protais Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana
will commence shortly, with all proceedings in respect
of those three cases scheduled also to conclude by
early next year.
The appeals workload has entered an intensive
phase as new judgements are delivered. In addition to
prosecuting the three Rule 11 bis cases — that is, the
referral cases — the Appeals Division, since my last
report (S/2010/574), has been actively prosecuting 12
cases involving a total of 18 separate appeals.
The Division has also been preparing the
groundwork for new appeals expected to be filed in
connection with three multiple accused cases, for
which judgements are likely to be delivered in the
course of the year. Those three cases alone may
generate up to 28 new prosecution and defence appeals
to be argued during the remainder of 2011 and in 2012.
In the months ahead, we plan to file additional
requests for the referral of the cases of the remaining
four fugitives and one new arrestee to national
jurisdictions for trial, to intensify efforts in tracking, to
prepare for the commencement of the remaining
evidence preservation proceedings, to conclude trial
preparations in respect of current detainees, and to
have case files ready for transfer to the Residual
Mechanism for consideration for referral or trial, as the
case may be.

11-36334

We will devote time and resources to updating the
case files in respect of the six other fugitives to ensure
their readiness for trial or transfer and their handover
to the Mechanism. That would considerably reduce the
workload of the Mechanism when it comes into
operation in the middle of next year.
In a further attempt to implement the referral
strategy of the ICTR and while continuing our focus on
Rwanda, I visited a number of European States in April
this year and held discussions with senior officials to
encourage their Governments to consider accepting
cases for trial from the ICTR. I wish to record my
appreciation for their warm reception, and look
forward to their positive consideration of our requests.
The strategy of referral of cases remains crucial
for a timely completion of the ICTR mandate, the
reduction of the scope and workload of the Residual
Mechanism, and the avoidance of impunity gaps by
encouraging extradition by other countries to Rwanda.
I am also hopeful that the only cases referred so far by
the Tribunal, which went to France, will receive greater
attention in the course of this year in the French courts.
Alongside the attempts at referral, we will
continue to give priority to the tracking and arrest of
the fugitives. I am happy to report in that respect that,
pursuant to the mandate of the Council of Ministers of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, held in Brazzaville, the Republic of the Congo,
I have recently had very fruitful discussions with its
Executive Secretary Ambassador Mulamula on
cooperation in the tracking and arrest of ICTR
fugitives, most of whom are located in the territory of
States members of that organization. Concerted efforts
by States members of the International Conference, in
collaboration with the ICTR, promise to bring to
account those fugitives who have not only evaded
justice for so long but have also been a source of
insecurity and instability in the Great Lakes region.
I am further pleased to report to the Council that
one of those fugitives, Bernard Munyagishari, a
leading member of the Interahamwe indicted for
genocide and related crimes, was arrested by security
officers of the Democratic Republic of Congo on
25 May, in cooperation with ICTR officers. We look
forward to his early transfer to the ICTR by the
authorities of the Democratic Republic. I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate and thank the

11

S/PV.6545

Government for the cooperation that has made this
arrest possible.

forward to the continuation of such support in the
critical transition to the Residual Mechanism.

This latest arrest reduces to nine the number of
fugitives that are now outstanding with respect to the
ICTR. I am confident that the continued cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will facilitate
the timely arrest of these fugitives, the majority of
whom are in that country.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Jallow for his briefing.

We welcome the reactivation in November 2010
of the joint ICTR/Kenya police task force, which has
been working on the Kabuga case file. I look forward
to the assistance of the Government of Kenya in the
tracking and arrest of this top-level fugitive and in
finally closing this file. We continue to experience
difficulties in the tracking of top-level fugitive Protais
Mpiranya, former Commander of the Presidential
Guard. I would urge greater cooperation and assistance
on that file from the Government of Zimbabwe.
Staff attrition due to early departures and
administrative regulations continues to pose a difficult
challenge. We are in discussions with the relevant
United Nations departments on this matter and hope for
a quick and satisfactory solution.
Pursuant to the decision of the Security Council
in resolution 1966 (2010), the ICTR branch of the
Residual Mechanism will become operational on 1 July
2012. Accordingly, we have focused on and will
continue to attend to ensuring a smooth transition to
and the effective commencement of our branch of the
Mechanism. A consultative process between the
Prosecutors of the ICTR and the ICTY has been
established for this purpose and an understanding
arrived at between the two Prosecutors regarding the
structure and the staffing and resource requirements of
the common Office of the Prosecutor in line with the
wish of the Council for the Mechanism to be a lean and
effective institution.
Despite the current challenges and those expected
in the process of winding down, we remain committed
to an efficient, effective and timely closure of the
Tribunal and are confident that that can be achieved, as
well as a smooth and timely transfer of residual
functions to the International Residual Mechanism.
I would like to thank the members of the Security
Council, States Members of the United Nations, and
the Secretariat for all their support, which has proved
valuable to the execution of our mandate. I look

12

Following consultation with all Council
members, and on an exceptional basis, I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month. You are the pride of Africa, Sir, and we are very
honoured indeed to have you as the President of the
Council for this month. Allow me also to present my
deep gratitude for the exceptional gesture made by the
members of the Council of giving me the privilege of
speaking before them.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Council for the opportunity to
contribute to the debate on this issue of crucial
importance to Rwanda. My delegation wishes to thank
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their reports on the completion strategies of their
respective Tribunals (see S/2011/316 and S/2011/317).
I take this opportunity to congratulate Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan for her election as President of
the ICTR and wish her every success in presiding over
that Tribunal, which was established by the Council to
render justice to humanity. I also pay tribute to Judge
Dennis Byron for the tremendous job he has done over
the last four years, during which many trials were
concluded, and wish him to continue on his path as
ICTR Vice-President.
We recognize and commend the Government of
Serbia for the recent arrest of ICTY fugitive Ratko
Mladić. We also recognize and commend in particular
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, together with the ICTR tracking unit, for the
arrest of ICTR fugitive Bernard Munyagishari. Rwanda
continues to urge all other Governments to fulfil their
obligations to cooperate with the two Tribunals in
arresting the remaining international fugitives,
especially Félicien Kabuga and Protais Mpiranya, and
to facilitate their prosecution.

11-36334

S/PV.6545

The Government of the Republic of Rwanda has
consistently extended its cooperation and support to
enable the ICTR to effectively execute the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council. Rwanda
continues to facilitate unfettered access to witnesses
for both the defence and the prosecution and is
assisting in the movement of witnesses to and from the
Tribunal’s seat in Arusha, Tanzania. Rwanda also
continues to ensure the security of witnesses through
the Rwanda Witness Protection Service that was
established with the support of the Office of the ICTR
Prosecutor.
My
Government
continues
to
support
investigations initiated by both the prosecution and the
defence without prejudice to either, and we continue to
provide the necessary documents for the conduct of the
trials. Rwanda continues to operate a detention facility
that meets the standards set by the Tribunal and which
currently houses convicts who were transferred from
the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
The Government of Rwanda has stated on
different occasions its position on the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as
established under resolution 1966 (2010). Our
preference was the full closure of the International
Tribunals and the transfer of the remaining cases to
national jurisdictions, especially those of the concerned
countries, through implementation of the completion
strategy for the Tribunals as called for in Council
resolutions
1503
(2003)
and
1534
(2004).
Nevertheless, I reiterate the pledge of our Government
to fully cooperate with the International Residual
Mechanism.
While the Government of Rwanda will support
the work of the Residual Mechanism, just as it has
supported the ICTR over the years, we also expect the
judges and staff of the Residual Mechanism to
cooperate with the Government of Rwanda and to
honour its enumerated legal obligations and other
agreements.
We recognize that provisions in the ICTR rules of
procedure and evidence grant the President of the
Tribunal the prerogative to transfer genocide convicts
to prisons in a number of countries that have
agreements with the United Nations for the
enforcement of ICTR sentences. We remind the
Security Council that rule 103 of the rules of procedure
also requires the ICTR to notify the Government of

11-36334

Rwanda prior to a decision on the place of
imprisonment. In the past, the Tribunal has not
honoured this explicit written requirement to notify us
before undertaking any such transfer of convicts. We
learned about those transfers well after they had been
effected and the convicts resettled in countries distant
from the scene of the crimes.
The Rwanda delegation seizes this opportunity to
urge in the most forceful and professional manner that
every effort be taken to ensure that all of the remaining
trials of ICTR indictees be completed before the fouryear period given to the Residual Mechanism to
discharge its mandate has elapsed. In our view, it
would be inappropriate for the international community
to entertain costly and unjustified requests to extend
operation of a residual court beyond 30 June 2016 with
the intention of delivering justice for genocide crimes
committed in Rwanda in 1994.
We also insistently urge the Security Council to
obtain from the Prosecutor and the President of the
ICTR an official report on the status of the
prosecutions of the two cases that were transferred to
France for trial in November 2007. We note that, under
rule 11 bis of its rules of procedure, the Tribunal has
the right and the duty to revoke those referrals to the
French courts, if they continue to delay prosecution of
Father Wenceslas Munyeshyaka and Laurent
Bucyibaruta.
The Government of Rwanda reiterates its request
that the archives and records of the ICTR be
transferred to Rwanda upon the completion of the
Tribunal’s mandate. Rwanda desires to host the
archives to ensure their accessibility to genocide
survivors, the families of those who were killed,
researchers and the broader international community.
In addition, many original documents that originated
from Rwanda remain the property of the lending
institutions and individuals. The archives of the
Tribunal should be transferred to Rwanda because, for
us, those records constitute an integral part of our
history, are vital to the preservation of the memory of
the genocide and will play a critical role in educating
future generations to guard against genocide denial and
revisionism. Locating the archives in Rwanda as part
of a larger information and genocide research centre
would be an appropriate tribute to the victims of the
1994 genocide of the Tutsi in Rwanda. The archives
and research centre, to be co-managed by the United
Nations, would also serve as a regional resource for

13

S/PV.6545

achieving the mission of the United Nations system to
promote peace and to ensure the prevention of
genocide.
Allow me now to address an issue of the utmost
concern to my Government, namely, the ongoing
scourge of genocide denial by some in the academic
and legal professions, including ICTR defence lawyers.
Some of these defence attorneys are leading an
international campaign to misrepresent, misinterpret
and openly deny that, in 1994, there was a genocide
perpetrated against the Tutsi in Rwanda — a genocide
recognized by the Council in its establishment of the
ICTR and reaffirmed in 2006 by the Appeals Chamber
of the same Tribunal as a notorious fact of common
knowledge, of which the Trial Chambers must take
judicial notice.
Such attempts to revise history and deny the
legally acknowledged genocide perpetrated against the
Tutsi are, in our view, not only morally reprehensible
but also a violation of the ethics and rules of
professional conduct for attorneys. We note with keen
interest the provision in article 29 of the statute of the
Residual Mechanism requiring defence counsel to
“respect the laws and regulations” of the countries to
which they are admitted to perform official duties
while representing their clients who have been indicted
by United Nations Tribunals or by the Residual
Mechanism. It is our expectation that the rules being
promulgated for the residual court will include
provisions similar to those in the ICTR rules of
procedure outlining the obligations of defence counsel
and the sanctions to be imposed when they engage in
impermissible conduct.
The Government of Rwanda will of course
continue to ensure that, without prejudice or favour,
any individual who engages in revisionism or denial of
the 1994 genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi be
brought to justice in accordance with the Rwandan
Constitution and other legal instruments.
Allow me here to repeat once again that,
notwithstanding the commendable job that the staff of
the Tribunals and the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs have done, there remain some critical,
unresolved residual issues that are not addressed by the
statute for the Residual Mechanism or by the
accompanying transitional arrangements. We recognize
that the ad hoc Tribunals are transitional justice worksin-progress — indeed, work that has been in progress

14

for 17 years, in the case of the ICTR. But this
transition must end at some appointed time. The
Residual Mechanism appears to prolong the transition,
rather than provide an avenue for the international
community to hand over the long-term duty for
prosecuting genocide suspects to permanent courts in
national jurisdictions. Rwanda is willing to assist the
Council to find acceptable solutions to the difficult
residual functions that are not yet resolved.
I assure the Council that we are ready, willing
and able to receive cases referred for trial in Rwanda;
to receive convicts to serve their prison terms in
Rwanda; to provide resettlement and a transition to
national community life for acquitted persons and
convicts who have finished serving their sentences; and
to collaborate with the Tribunal in establishing
information and documentation centres to make the
records and archives of the ICTR widely available to
the public.
In conclusion, thank you again, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to contribute to this dialogue and to
reiterate my Government’s continued commitment to
supporting the work of the ICTR and the new Residual
Mechanism.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
to thank Judges Patrick L. Robinson and Khalida
Rachid Khan, the respective Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as the
Prosecutors of the Tribunals, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow, for both detailed reports and extensive
briefings today. We wish to congratulate Judge Rachid
Khan on assuming her important position and to thank
Judge Byron for his years of tireless work and efforts
in pursuing justice for victims and their families. For
so many years now, the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the Tribunals have shown their dedication to justice
and the fight against impunity, for which we commend
them. I also wish to underline the contribution of all
the staff of the Tribunals and to thank them for their
tireless work.
For almost 18 years now, the Tribunals have been
led by the idea of justice for all those who suffered
and, although slow, their course has been steady and
unyielding. Justice is the only consolation for those

11-36334

S/PV.6545

who lost their loved ones, or even their entire families.
In that context, we welcome the fact that Ratko Mladić
and Bernard Munyagishari will finally face justice and
be seen for what they truly are. We also hope that
Goran Hadžić, Félicien Kabuga and the eight other
fugitives will also face justice sooner rather than later.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
has
extended
unconditional support to the Tribunals throughout the
years, especially to the work of the ICTY. The crimes
that were committed deeply affected our respective
regions, and, as a significant contribution to
reconciliation and a better future, the Tribunals’ work
is of great importance. My country remains committed
and dedicated to providing continued support for both
Tribunals until the full completion of their mandates
and transition to the Residual Mechanism.
That dedication is further reflected in the record
of continued positive cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the ICTY. As stated, authorities of my
country, at both the State and entity levels, have
responded promptly and adequately to all the requests
for documents and access to Government archives.
Assistance in facilitating the appearance of witnesses
before the Tribunal is consistent, together with assisted
witness protection matters. Urgent requests are handled
satisfactorily. The cooperation has been particularly
constructive with regard to the rule 11bis cases
transferred by the Office of the Prosecutor to the War
Crimes Chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As stated in the report, all cases
transferred pursuant to rule 11bis have been completed.
Furthermore, we fully agree that cooperation
between the countries in the region is highly important,
and all efforts are aimed at improving and enhancing
cooperation through numerous bilateral agreements
that will address possible deficiencies.
Considering the reports before us, we note all the
steps the Tribunals have taken to meet their completion
strategies. It is a demanding task, especially having in
mind the numerous unforeseen obstacles they face that
are beyond their reach and out of their control. Those
obstacles seem especially characteristic of the work of
the ICTY, with several of the accused exercising their
right to defend themselves and the difficulties and
delays arising from such trials. We also commend both
Tribunals for undertaking preparations for the timely
transition to the Residual Mechanism, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010), and find this also a very

11-36334

important aspect in preserving their legacies. We
encourage the Tribunals to continue their work in an
expedited and efficient manner, without affecting due
process and the interest of justice.
Final successful completion of the Tribunals’
mandates will close out a chapter that will be
considered historic, just as their contribution to
international jurisprudence is groundbreaking and the
international justice system has been irreversibly
changed with their establishment. Their contribution to
the advancement of the rule of law, peace and
reconciliation is undoubted, as there would be no
meaningful peace without justice and no common
future until the past is put to rest.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by thanking the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunals for their biannual reports.
This Council debate takes place, of course, at an
historic moment, as Ratko Mladić — one of those
allegedly responsible for the Srebrenica genocide —
has just made his initial appearance before the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. On
25 May, Mr. Alain Juppé, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, said of that arrest:
“My thoughts go first to the families of the
victims. This arrest brings to a close 16 years of
impunity. It will finally make it possible for
justice to be done and will contribute the
reconciliation of the Western Balkans, which
France continuously calls for.”
The Security Council also expressed its
satisfaction in its statement to the press of 27 May. In
that statement, we highlighted the commitment of
President Tadić regarding the arrest of the fugitive
Goran Hadžić.
We would also like to highlight the statements
made by the Prosecutor about cooperation of the States
of the region. The European Union and France closely
follow the Prosecutor’s reports on the issue of
cooperation, which is a key element for accession to
the European Union.
When it comes to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, I welcome the new President of
the Tribunal, Judge Khan, and wish her the greatest
success in her work and in the exercise of her mandate.
Together with Prosecutor Jallow, she has provided a

15

S/PV.6545

detailed picture of the Tribunal’s current situation. Of
course, the arrest of Bernard Munyagishari in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important
event. The Security Council noted this in its remarks to
the press also on 27 May.
But nine accused remain at large, including three
high-ranking fugitives: Félicien Kabuga, Augustin
Bizimana and Protais Mpiranya. We hope there will be
swift progress in the case of Protais Mpiranya, whose
name is continuously mentioned, including in the
context of the current violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe. We note that the
Prosecutor is awaiting information from Kenya
regarding the case of Félicien Kabuga, and it is our
hope, as it is his, that the Kenyan authorities will be
able to demonstrate their diligence by promptly
arresting Félicien Kabuga.
I would also like to thank Prosecutor Hassan
Jallow, who visited France last April, with regard to the
two cases transferred to France in 20 November 2007,
to which the French judicial authorities attach the
highest importance.
In resolution 1966 (2010), adopted in December,
the Security Council established a timeline for the
completion of the work of the two Tribunals and the
establishment of the Residual Mechanism to conclude
the proceedings. We would like to thank both the
representatives of the Tribunals and the Office for
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat for the efforts made to
follow this timeline.
But the Security Council, which established the
timeline, is also responsible for enabling the Tribunals
to carry out their mandate successfully. It must find
pragmatic solutions, in particular to the problems of
staff retention that were mentioned here today. That is
one of the objectives established by the Chair of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, the representative of Portugal,
and we will support him in his efforts.
Recent arrests have made it possible to send an
important message to all of those who today still try to
come to power - or stay in power - by ordering and
planning attacks against civilians, to all those who,
when faced with an international criminal justice arrest
warrant for war crimes, crimes against humanity or the
crime of genocide, think that they can count on
weariness or inaction on the part of the Council. They
are mistaken. The Council has demonstrated through

16

the years and again recently its determination to fight
impunity, and an arrest warrant has no expiration date.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to take this opportunity to
thank the French presidency for leading the Council’s
work successfully in May, and we wish you every
success, Mr. President, in leading the Council this
month. We also thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the Tribunals for presenting their reports.
Today’s briefings by the leadership of the
Tribunals is particularly important, as it is the first
since the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010), which set
specific dates for the launch of the Residual
Mechanism for the Tribunals and the deadlines for the
functioning of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
In considering the reports of the Tribunals in
terms of the demands laid out in that resolution, first
and foremost we would note the progress made in their
work over the last half a year. Several major
proceedings were completed. The process of preparing
to transfer cases to the Residual Mechanism is moving
ahead. We note the arrest by Serb authorities of Ratko
Mladić and his transfer to The Hague. We also
welcome the arrest in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of Bernard Munyagishari, an individual sought
by the ITCR. We understand that, in accordance with
current plans, his case will be referred to the relevant
national court.
On the whole, we believe that the cooperation
with the Tribunals of all States in the respective
regions during the reporting period to be positive. With
respect to the pace of the Tribunals’ closing, we note
the efforts of the ICTR, whose work remains on
schedule for completion in accordance with the
aforementioned resolution. Unfortunately, we are again
unable to give a positive assessment to the work of the
ICTY in that area. Its report (S/2011/316, annex I)
contains newly updated timelines for the consideration
of cases, which is a source of serious concern. For
instance, the consideration of the Karadžić case has
been extended. Increasingly odious is the case of
Šešelj, who has already spent almost nine years in
detention awaiting a decision in the first instance.
There are plans to extend the timeline in his case, too.
These delays fail to meet any conceivable
standard of civilized international justice. The

11-36334

S/PV.6545

reconsideration of the Haradinaj case is only now
beginning one year after the opening of the retrial.
Although these cases remain within the timeline set out
in resolution 1966 (2010), these trends cannot but
alarm us. One example is the unacceptable situation
with regard to the appeals proceedings in the Prlić,
Šešelj and Tolimir cases, in which, as a result of the
latest extension of the timelines for proceedings in both
instances, the conclusion of appeals is planned for
2015, which is beyond the date set in resolution 1966
(2010) for the ICTY’s closure.
We recall that the basis for the compromise that
led to the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010) was the
schedule for the completion of cases presented last
year by the ICTY itself. We insist that the key
parameters of the compromise be strictly respected. We
also do not consider the arrest of Ratko Mladić to be
grounds for a possible extension of the ICTY’s work.
Trial activities of this case in the first instance can and
must meet the deadline of 31 December 2014. The
appeals in that case must be heard by the Residual
Mechanism.
We understand that the complications in the
proceedings are to a certain extent due to the problem
of the departure of staff from both Tribunals. For our
part, we are ready to assist in resolving that problem.
We also recognize the existence of a problem arising
from a lack of space in the penitentiary systems of the
States that have concluded relevant agreements with
the ICTY for individuals convicted to serve their
sentences in prison. This problem must also be given
close attention.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (Rwanda) for their
exhaustive briefings.
We welcome the efforts of the heads of both
international Tribunals to fulfil the completion
strategies for their work as soon as possible without
undermining the requirements of due process. We also
welcome the preparations to ensure the transition to the
Residual Mechanism, in accordance with resolution
1966 (2010). We reaffirm the importance of the
Tribunals’ reports (S/2011/316 and S/2011/317) with
respect to the transfer of a number of cases to national
courts, which could facilitate the Tribunals’ work and

11-36334

help to strengthen the capacities of national legal
systems and to disseminate the culture of
accountability for those responsible for war crimes and
genocide.
We also understand that some difficulties are not
under the control of the heads of the two Tribunals and
will have a negative impact on the completion of trials
on schedule. One particular problem is the departure of
professionals to pursue more stable positions. We call
on all parties concerned to cooperate with a view to
finding an appropriate solution allowing the conclusion
of the final phase of trials as soon as possible, in
implementation of resolutions 1954 (2010) and 1955
(2010).
We welcome the cooperation of most States, in
particular those of the former Yugoslavia and the
neighbours of Rwanda, with both Tribunals. We call on
those States to strengthen their cooperation in order to
ensure that the Tribunals can carry out their functions.
These States play a very important role in locating,
arresting and transferring fugitives to the Tribunals, as
well as in providing information and evidence in order
to shed light on the cases and ensure that justice is
done, and in facilitating greater access to witnesses and
improved witness protection.
We welcome the arrest of Ratko Mladić on
26 May in Serbia and his transfer to The Hague so that
he may be brought before the ICTY. We also welcome
the arrest of Bernard Munyagishari in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Justice will certainly be done,
albeit late. We welcome the efforts of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, chaired by
Portugal, and the constructive role played by the Office
of Legal Affairs in contributing to the success of the
Tribunals’ work and its transition to the Residual
Mechanism.
We recall the importance of the international
Tribunals in putting an end to the culture of impunity
and ensuring accountability for criminals and the rule
of law at the international and national levels. We must
ensure the success of the Tribunals in achieving their
goals in order to render justice to the victims, which
will deter criminals and protect civilians in the future,
not only in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, but
throughout the world.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the

17

S/PV.6545

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
introducing their reports (S/2011/316 and S/2011/317).
I also take this opportunity to thank Judge Byron for
his work as President of the ICTR and to congratulate
Judge Khalida Rachid Khan on her election as
President of the ICTR.
Germany welcomes the arrest of Ratko Mladić on
26 May and his swift transfer to the Tribunal in The
Hague. We congratulate the Serbian authorities on this
success. It will bring Serbia closer to its European
perspective. It also demonstrates once more that there
will be no impunity for the perpetrators of the gravest
crimes against international humanitarian law.
By adopting resolution 1966 (2010), the Council
decided, on 22 December 2010, to establish the
Residual Mechanism for the ICTY and the ICTR to
finish their remaining tasks. This was a landmark
decision that, on the one hand, will allow the
prosecution of the remaining fugitives and, on the other
hand, encourage both Tribunals to ensure the
completion of their work by 2014, while respecting due
process standards. That will fulfil the mandate of the
Tribunals and also safeguard their legacy. The
jurisprudence and the successful completion of the
work of the Tribunals have and will set a precedent for
international criminal justice.
The Council also requested both Tribunals to take
all possible measures to complete all their remaining
work no later than 31 December 2014, and decided that
the Mechanism would continue their jurisdiction,
rights, obligations and essential functions. It is in that
context that we urge the Tribunals to take all measures
to complete their work expeditiously. Germany is
aware of the fact that additional resources might be
needed following the arrest of Mladić. We are also
aware of the ongoing problems of staff retention for
both Tribunals. Germany is ready to find pragmatic
solutions to those challenges so that the Tribunals will
be able to keep their timetables and so that no further
delays occur.
The arrest of the remaining 10 fugitives,
including Goran Hadžić and Félicien Kabuga, remains
a top priority for the completion of the Tribunals’
work. Cooperation from States is crucial to that
endeavour. We call on all States to fully cooperate with
the Tribunals.
With regard to the ICTY, we call on Serbia to
intensify its efforts to arrest the last remaining fugitive,

18

Goran Hadžić. We also welcome President Tadić’s
commitment to the continuing search for him. That
should remain a key priority for the Serbian
Government. We will continue to follow those efforts
closely.
Turning to the ICTR, Germany welcomes the
recent arrest of Bernard Munyagishari in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but nevertheless
regrets that nine fugitives are still at large. We call on
all States in the region, especially Zimbabwe, to render
all the necessary assistance to the ICTR in order to
locate and arrest those fugitives. The arrest of Félicien
Kabuga should be a priority also for the Kenyan
authorities.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda for their very useful reports (see S/2011/316
and S/2011/317) and for their briefings here today. I
should like especially to convey greetings to Judge
Byron, along with our thanks for his work. I also
warmly congratulate Judge Khalida Rachid Khan, to
whom we wish every success as she assumes the
functions of the presidency of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
I wish to make four comments.
First, I welcome the recent arrests of Ratko
Mladić and Bernard Munyagishari. The arrest of
Mladić — indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for
genocide and crimes against humanities — is a
significant outcome of the cooperation of Serbia with
the ICTY and a positive step towards reconciliation in
the region, as well as towards the European
institutional perspective of Serbia and the other Balkan
States, as the Council promptly recognized.
We also welcome Serbia’s declared intention to
continue the search for Goran Hadžić, the remaining
person indicted by the ICTY who is still at large, on the
same day that Bernard Munyagishari was arrested. He
is accused of crimes against humanity during the 1994
conflict in Rwanda. He was captured after 17 years,
through cooperation between the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. He should
be brought before the ICTR, as should all those who
are still fugitives.

11-36334

S/PV.6545

Cooperation with the Tribunals is indeed most
crucial to conclude their work. We note other
developments in that regard reported by the
Prosecutors, and their efforts, in cooperation with
national authorities, to detain those still at large, who
must be brought to trial, as well as to provide access to
documents identified as necessary for their
investigation. We welcome the efforts undertaken in
the region by national authorities, as reported, and
encourage all further possible efforts by those
authorities to respond to the Prosecutors’ and
Tribunals’ requests.
Secondly, I wish to commend the efforts put
forward by the Tribunals in keeping as much as
possible with the schedule of case work. In our view, it
is important that the Tribunals are able to avoid
significant slippage in their work in order to conclude
the cases within the timeframe established, while
making sure that the highest international standards of
due process are preserved. On the other side, it is vital
that all administrative obstacles hampering the
Tribunals’ work — namely, in the field of human
resources — are rapidly and effectively removed.
Portugal underlines the assessments of the Presidents
of the Tribunals and will endeavour — in the Council,
in the Informal Working Group and in the General
Assembly — to support the appropriate measures, as
identified, to facilitate their work, stressing the need
for allowing the necessary measures to overcome
difficulties,
particularly
in
human
resources
management. The problem of staff attrition is a serious
one, with a direct repercussion on the successful and
timely transition to the Residual Mechanism. All
efforts, including through flexible, pragmatic and
administrative arrangements, should be made to
facilitate the retention of the personnel needed to
conclude in due time the cases assigned to them.
My third point is to highlight other important
matters presented by the Presidents in their reports
concerning the enforcement of sentences — that is,
identifying and encouraging further countries willing
to host convicted persons to serve their sentences and
the particular situation of the three acquitted persons
still remaining at a safe house in Arusha while efforts
are under way to find host countries to receive them.
Moreover, the question of victims — in particular, how
to find a proper way to assist and support them through
a possible trust fund — is yet another important matter
brought to our attention by President Robinson. These

11-36334

are issues that we will be discussing in the framework
of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, which I have the honour to chair.
Fourthly, I wish to highlight and commend the
efforts of the Tribunals and their staff, together with
the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA), in the activities
conducive to the establishment of the Residual
Mechanism. Both the Tribunals and OLA have
important tasks to carry out under the framework
established by resolution 1966 (2010) in order to
ensure a smooth transition to the Residual Mechanism
in approximately one year. These are also matters that
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will follow up very closely in the months to come. I am
confident of the support of all the other members of the
Working Group to pursue those objectives in the most
efficient way possible.
Fighting impunity and pursuing justice for
victims are crucial to preventing further crimes from
occurring and to helping foster reconciliation between
people in the regions concerned. The task is not only
the responsibility of international tribunals; it is also
the responsibility of national authorities. They play a
fundamental role in ensuring that impunity is not
tolerated, in particular through their resolve to address
these crimes at the national level. Outreach and
capacity building efforts are also crucial in that regard
for an enduring justice legacy. We welcome the work
undertaken by the Tribunals in that vein and encourage
further engagement with national authorities to
increase cooperation in that framework.
A good part of the debate on this agenda item in
recent years in the Security Council has centred in the
completion strategies of the Tribunals. This particular
focus, as relevant as it is to closing part of an important
cycle of international justice, should not make us forget
the important role of the Tribunals for international
peace and security as a whole. I would therefore like to
conclude by paying my country’s homage to the
outstanding contribution made by the Tribunals and
their staffs, represented here by both their Presidents
and Prosecutors, to the international criminal justice
system and the prevention of crimes, setting an
example and paving the way for the establishment of
other tribunals, in particular the International Criminal
Court.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your

19

S/PV.6545

assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I should like to thank Presidents Robinson and
Khan, and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, for their
briefings. I wish also to take this opportunity to
congratulate Judge Khan in particular on her election
as President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), and to thank her predecessor, Judge
Byron, for the contributions he made over the years to
the work of the ICTR.
I should like to make the following points.
First, with respect to the progress made in the
work of the two Tribunals, last year the Council
adopted resolution 1966 (2010), by which it decided to
establish the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. Its ICTR branch and its
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) branch will begin to function in
July 2012 and July 2013, respectively. In its resolution
1966 (2010), the Council also requested the two
Tribunals to complete all remaining work before the
end of 2014 at the latest.
In that connection, we urge the two Tribunals to
take effective measures to complete their work as soon
as possible, as requested by the Security Council in its
resolution, and to ensure a stable transition to the
Residual Mechanism.
We note that both Tribunals are facing difficulties
in the retention of staff, which has had a negative
impact on the Tribunals’ work. We hope that they will
work cooperatively with the relevant organs of the
United Nations and other parties concerned to address
this problem as soon as possible.
Secondly, cooperation among countries is
essential to the successful fulfilment of the judicial
functions of the two Tribunals. The arrest and transfer
of fugitives, the acquisition and provision of evidence
and the enforcement of sentences all require
cooperation among countries, especially with respect
to the countries of the region.
We have taken note of the recent progress made
by the Tribunals in the arrest and transfer of fugitives
and welcome the cooperation provided by Serbia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in that
connection to the ICTY and the ICTR, respectively. We
also welcome the cooperation provided by the
countries of the former Yugoslavia, including Croatia

20

and Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the ICTY, and the
cooperation provided by Kenya to the ICTR.
The Presidents of both Tribunals also highlighted
the difficulties they face in the enforcement of
sentences and the resettlement of acquitted persons. We
call on countries that are in a position to do so to show
political will and assist the two Tribunals in solving
this problem.
Thirdly, the transfer of cases and fugitives, to the
extent possible, to countries that are able and willing to
handle them is an important step in the implementation
of the completion strategy of the two Tribunals. We
note that the Prosecutor of the ICTR has already
provided a request to the relevant trial chamber on the
transfer of the relevant cases to Rwanda. We welcome
this progress and hope to see a positive outcome. In
that respect, we also support full cooperation with the
Tribunal by the countries concerned.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by reiterating the United Kingdom’s continuing
support for the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
combating impunity and bringing justice for victims in
the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. I commend all
the judges and staff of the Tribunals for their important
contributions. I convey also my thanks to Presidents
Robinson and Khan and Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow for their briefings this morning, and offer my
congratulations to Judge Khan on her recent
appointment as President of the ICTR. I should like
also to express my Government’s thanks to her
predecessor, Judge Byron, for his valuable contribution
to the Tribunal during his term as President.
Dealing first with the ICTY, I would like to
congratulate and commend the Serb authorities for the
arrest and transfer of Ratko Mladić. I encourage them
not to lose momentum and to seek the apprehension of
Goran Hadžić in the same way. Mladić’s transfer is
evidence of the Serb Government’s commitment to
cooperation with the ICTY and another important
milestone for the Tribunal itself.
This development underlines the need for the
ICTY to organize its work more efficiently and conduct
trials fairly and expeditiously. The United Kingdom is
particularly concerned about judgements taking up to a
year and a half to be delivered after the conclusion of
closing arguments. I hope that the Tribunal and the

11-36334

S/PV.6545

President will take all possible steps to ensure the
effective management and timely completion of all
trials and appeals.
The United Kingdom welcomes the assessment
made by Prosecutor Brammertz that Croatia continues
to respond to his requests and provide access to
witnesses and evidence as required. However, there
remain inconsistencies raised in connection with the
findings of the Croatian Government’s task force on
Operation Storm which need to be followed up, despite
these having been raised by the Prosecutor in his last
report.
However, I am encouraged that Croatia has said
that it will continue its administrative investigation
into the missing military documents concerning
Operation Storm and hope that its continued efforts
will soon bring about a successful resolution to this
matter.
I should like to support the request made by
President Robinson to all suitable nations to consider
entering into sentence-enforcement agreements with
the Tribunal, as the United Kingdom has done, in order
to assist the Tribunal in delivering justice.
Moving now to the ICTR, I welcome the recent
news that one of the remaining fugitives, Bernard
Munyagishari, has been arrested in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Congratulations should be
passed to the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and I would encourage it to work with
the ICTR and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to transfer custody of the fugitive without
delay.
The mandate of the ICTR cannot be completed
until all the remaining fugitives have been arrested and
delivered into the custody of either the ICTR or the
Residual Mechanism. In that regard, I call on all States
Members of the United Nations to provide the ICTR
with full cooperation and ensure that the remaining
fugitives are brought to justice. As Prosecutor Jallow
has emphasized, both Kenya and Zimbabwe need to
take significant steps to cooperate with the ICTR in the
tracking of Félicien Kabuga and Protais Mpiranya, so
that they can be brought to justice.
In its report (S/2011/317), the ICTR has
highlighted the fact that there will be slippage into
2012 of some first-instance trials, with appeals to be

11-36334

completed in 2014. The United Kingdom is concerned
that, at this very late stage in the Tribunal’s completion
strategy, there should be no further delays. I would
encourage all parts of both Tribunals to continue to
look for innovative approaches and to share best
practices wherever possible, with a view to avoiding
further delays in completion. In that context, it is
commendable to note the Prosecution’s creative
response to immediate access to materials through the
electronic disclosure suite.
The United Kingdom recognizes the difficulties
faced by both Tribunals as a result of staff losses.
Staffing matters, as President Robinson said, are not
directly within the competence of the Security Council,
but nevertheless I do want to take this opportunity to
express our support for action by the Secretariat and
the responsible organs of the United Nations, within
existing resources, in order to find practical solutions
to address these problems. The Tribunals need to
continue to be adequately staffed so that they can
complete their work.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the responsibility of guiding our work
and to wish you every success during your presidency.
My delegation stands ready to provide you with the
fullest possible cooperation. I wish also to thank and
congratulate France for its effective presidency of the
Council last month.
(spoke in Spanish)
I wish to thank Judge Patrick Robinson and Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan for their briefings and for the
important work they have done, as well as for the very
frank and serious manner in which they explained the
situation of the Tribunals over which they preside. I
would also like to thank Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their contributions to this debate.
My delegation believes that the two Tribunals
have done commendable work in carrying out the
Council’s decisions on the completion strategies for the
Tribunals’ responsibilities. It is now up to us, the
members of the Council, to take the action necessary
for the process to continue in a satisfactory fashion.
I would like to highlight one aspect. In the same
way that in the past the Council has expressed the need
for the Tribunals to undertake a set of measures to
speed up their work and rationalize their resources, at

21

S/PV.6545

this stage the Tribunals also have a legitimate
expectation that the Council will adopt decisions that
facilitate their task. We hope sincerely that we can rise
to those expectations.
The legacy that the activities of the Tribunals for
Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia will leave for the
advancement of the development of international law is
unprecedented. The Council can be rightly proud that
its historic decisions in 1993 and 1994 establishing
these Tribunals prepared the way for developments
leading to the establishment of an effective system of
international criminal law and of the International
Criminal Court.
Practically speaking, the issue of the staff of the
Tribunals and their retention is without doubt the most
serious problem facing both judicial bodies. President
Robinson in particular made it clear that the situation
in that regard had become critical and could lead at any
time to a complete standstill in the workings of the
Tribunal and impede its compliance with the
completion strategy.
While we are aware that a definitive resolution to
this problem goes beyond the scope of the Council’s
functions, we nevertheless sympathize with the
requests that both Presidents have made in that the
efforts currently being made could be strengthened if
we members were vocal in our support and sent a clear
and unequivocal message about the crucial importance
of resolving this matter. If not, it will be difficult if not
impossible to ensure the proper execution of the
completion strategies. In the final analysis, that
represents compliance with the relevant decisions of
the Council. We Member States should ourselves be
very clear about the potential negative repercussions of
all sorts that could result if the staffing problems
affecting both Tribunals are not resolved as quickly as
possible, so that the General Assembly, through the
Fifth Committee, can benefit from a similar
understanding when it comes to making an informed
decision.
We believe that the Council could reiterate even
more vehemently its past calls for the relevant parts of
the Secretariat to step up the efforts they have been
making in that regard. Those efforts are laudable and
deserve our full gratitude, but we believe that it is very
important to impress upon all the pertinent bodies the
notion that this is not an ordinary administrative
problem affecting some entity or other. This is about

22

two very prestigious institutions that are about to
complete their work in a systematic and orderly way,
have a high record for efficiency, were established by
the Council under very specific conditions and have
performed an invaluable service for the cause of
international justice and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
I would like to highlight a particularly interesting
aspect mentioned by President Robinson in his report,
namely, the possibility of establishing a mechanism or
system for providing assistance and support to victims,
similar to the one in place for the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, we sympathize, as a
matter of principle, with President Robinson’s
argument that the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia cannot attempt to bring peace
and reconciliation to the region simply through issuing
judicial decisions and handing down sentences. There
must also be other reparation measures to complement
sentences, one of which could be the mechanism that
has been mentioned for providing assistance and
support to victims. Moreover, what the Council is
being asked to do in this regard is to provide support,
which would not imply financial obligations for States,
as it would be based on voluntary contributions. My
delegation calls on the members of the Council to
consider Judge Robinson’s request positively.
With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the most pressing problem has to
do with the conditions for carrying out the functions of
the President and Vice-President, as described by Judge
Byron in his letter to the Secretary-General
(S/2011/317). Here, once again, a subsidiary body of
the Council is calling on us to adopt urgent measures to
facilitate its continued operations and the conduct of
existing programmes to carry out the completion
strategy. I trust that we will be able to respond to these
difficulties with the urgency they deserve.
Just a few days ago, through the President, the
members of the Council expressed our satisfaction at
the arrest of Ratko Mladić. In doing so, we reiterated
our commitment to ensuring that there is no impunity
for perpetrators of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda are the main vehicles
through which the Council has exercised its will. Now,
as the activities of both judicial bodies are being
wound down, it is essential that we take the necessary

11-36334

S/PV.6545

decisions to ensure the orderly and effective conclusion
of their mandates.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to thank
Judge Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and Judge Patrick Robinson, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), for their reports (see S/2011/316 and
S/2011/317) and for their leadership of those two
judicial institutions, which have been so important in
the fight against impunity. I am also grateful to
Mr. Hassan Jallow and Mr. Serge Brammertz, the
Prosecutors of the ICTR and ICTY, respectively, for all
their efforts. I would also like to offer a word of
appreciation to the former President of the ICTR, Lord
Dennis Byron, who has presided over the Tribunal
since 2007. I am aware that Judge Byron will be
relinquishing his position in charge of the Tribunal to
take up new challenges. We wish him well in his new
endeavours. At the same time, we welcome Judge Khan
and wish her all the best at this crucial time in the life
of the Tribunal.
While the reports raise many of the same issues
that have been presented to the Council in previous
reports, notably the impact of staffing challenges on
the Tribunals’ capacity to meet their completion
strategy, these particular reports come at an important
time in the life of both Tribunals. On 22 December
2010, the Council adopted resolution 1966 (2010),
which
established
the
International
Residual
Mechanism for the Tribunals. The reports prepared
since the adoption of that resolution have to be
considered against that backdrop.
In that regard, as of 1 July 2012 and 1 July 2013,
respectively, the jurisdiction rights, obligations and
essential functions of the ICTR and ICTY will be
transferred to the Mechanism. There is thus added
urgency for both Tribunals to take all possible
measures to expedite their remaining work, in order to
ensure a smooth transition to the Mechanism, as stated
in both reports on the Tribunals. If they are to meet the
Completion Strategy, innovative judicial administrative
steps will have to be taken. An important measure,
which we hope the Tribunals will rely on more, is the
referral of cases to domestic courts, in accordance with
the respective statutes established in the Tribunals. We
continue to believe that, to the extent possible, cases
should be handled by domestic courts. This is both to
enhance domestic capacity to promote the evolving

11-36334

principle of complementarity, and to ensure that, to the
extent possible, justice is meted out close to the people
affected by the atrocities. Thus, we call upon the
Tribunals to make full and generous use of the Statutes’
provisions relating to referrals. In this context, we are
pleased that the ICTR Prosecutor intends to make
greater use of referrals to domestic courts in future,
and we welcome the domestic trials referred to by the
ICTY, which are at various stages of progress. We are
aware, of course, of the challenges faced by the
Tribunals in finding suitable domestic courts.
My
delegation
also
welcomes
the
recommendations adopted by the ICTY in June 2010
on speeding up trials that it is hearing, particularly the
recommendation that the trial chambers require parties
to present motions on admission of evidence as
efficiently as possible.
While we continue to stress the importance of the
Tribunals taking all possible measures to carry out
their functions as quickly as possible, we stress that
this should not prejudice the rights of the accused or
fair trial standards.
The responsibility to do all that is necessary to
ensure early completion of the Tribunals’ work rests
not only with the Tribunals but it is equally the
responsibility of the international community — on
whose behalf the Tribunals act — to provide necessary
resources to enable the attainment of this goal. We thus
assure the Tribunals that this delegation will do all that
it can within the Council and the General Assembly to
ensure that the necessary support is forthcoming.
We also take this opportunity to stress the
importance of cooperation between the Tribunals in
accordance with their respective Statutes, in particular
article 28 of the ICTR Statute and article 29 of the
ICTY Statute, and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We stress especially the obligation to
cooperate with the Tribunals in effecting the arrest of
those wanted by the Tribunals. In that connection,
South Africa commends the Governments of Serbia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo for their
arrests of Ratko Mladić and Bernard Munyagishari on
26 and 27 May, respectively.
We have noted the concern of the ICTR regarding
the need to relocate persons acquitted by the Tribunal.
But South African is also concerned about the human
rights implications of retaining acquitted persons in
safe houses and the slow pace of identifying adequate

23

S/PV.6545

places for relocation. We remain of the view that
location matters must be addressed, on a case-by-case
basis, with States willing and able to receive relocated
persons in their territories. The ability of a State to put
the necessary measures in place for effective relocation
is a conclusive factor in this regard. We encourage the
ICTR to continue in the context of article 26 of the
Statute — which we believe is analogous — to engage
Member States in the region and elsewhere with a view
to identifying suitable places.
Finally, as the Tribunals move towards
completing their work in accordance with the
completion strategy, it is important that they also begin
preparations for a smooth transition to the Residual
Mechanism. We are thus pleased to note that the
Tribunal organs have begun to interact with a view to
ensuring a smooth transition.
Once again, South Africa thanks the Presidents of
the ICTY and ICTR and the respective Prosecutors of
the Tribunals.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
greatly thank Presidents Robinson and Kahn and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
today. I congratulate Judge Kahn on her new
appointment and thank Judge Byron for his valuable
service.
The Council has opened this debate on a day
when Ratko Mladić is in The Hague. His capture, arrest
and transfer to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is a milestone on the
path to justice and reconciliation. We commend the
Government of Serbia for apprehending Mr. Mladić,
and we welcome President Tadić’s statement about his
country’s commitment to apprehending the final ICTY
fugitive, Goran Hadžić. Mladić’s capture means that he
will now have to answer to victims for his alleged
crimes, including the genocide at Srebrenica, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in 1995. It puts perpetrators of mass
atrocities on notice that they will be held accountable
for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We expect all United Nations Member States to take
the steps necessary to bring to justice those indicted by
the Tribunals.
We welcome the steady progress made by the
ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) in increasing efficiency. We urge both
Tribunals to strive to complete their work at the earliest
possible date. We are mindful of the importance of

24

doing so without sacrificing the high standards of a fair
trial. We urge the Presidents, and the Judges who act as
managers of the courtrooms, to take every measure to
ensure that trials and appeals are both expeditious and
fair. These Tribunals and their predecessors have had
genuine historic impact.
The establishment last December of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals demonstrated that war crimes fugitives
cannot escape justice. The Residual Mechanism will
allow for the completion of those functions that will
necessarily outlast the Tribunals themselves. Transfers
of cases to national jurisdictions have been made
possible because States have further developed their
judicial and investigative capacities. Programmes such
as the joint European and ICTY training project for
national prosecutors and young professionals are
welcome efforts to help build such long-term capacity.
Again, we applaud the Tribunals’ work thus far,
and we urge them to make the most efficient use of
available resources. We also encourage the Tribunals to
continue to work with the United Nations Secretariat
and other relevant United Nations bodies to develop
practical and effective methods, including retention
measures, to address the staffing shortages and attrition
problems highlighted in the Prosecutors’ and
Presidents’ reports.
The United States calls on States of the former
Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the ICTY. That is
both a legal obligation and a key to Euro-Atlantic
integration. We welcome the Government of Croatia’s
continued strong record of cooperation with the ICTY
and its commitment to continue to search for any
additional information requested by the Prosecutor.
Croatia provided crucial witnesses and documents in
the important case against Ante Gotovina and others
that proved critical to the Tribunal’s deliberations. We
appreciate Croatia’s reaffirmation of its commitment to
support the ICTY through the conclusion of its
processes.
Let me now turn to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. The United States welcomes the
judgment in May in the case of the former chief of staff
of the Rwandan army, the former head of the military
police and the two former commanders of the
reconnaissance battalion. This was the second case
concluded by the ICTR that involved the responsibility
of former senior military officers. It represents an

11-36334

S/PV.6545

important step for the Rwandan people towards justice
and accountability.
The United States also welcomes the recent
apprehension of the fugitive Bernard Munyagishari in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge all
States to cooperate fully with the ICTR in their efforts
to locate and apprehend fugitives. We commend those
countries that are cooperating with the ICTR to bring
the remaining nine fugitives to justice. We encourage
continued progress so that these fugitives can be
swiftly arrested.
On behalf of the United States, let me thank the
Office of Legal Affairs for its dedication and service to
the Tribunals. Let me also again thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors, Registrars and their staffs for all that they
do to promote justice under international law for the
victims of war crimes and mass atrocities.
We will never be able to bring back those who
were murdered in Rwanda or in the former Yugoslavia.
But Ratko Mladić will now have to answer to his
victims and the world in a court of law. From
Nuremburg until today, my Government has long
viewed justice for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide as both a moral imperative and an
essential element of stability and peace. We reaffirm
those convictions again today.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
informative briefings and reports (see S/2011/316 and
S/2011/317). Brazil commends their efforts towards
fulfilling the remaining judicial functions of those
institutions in a timely manner. We also believe that the
recent arrest of Ratko Mladić brings fresh air to the
prospect of judicial accountability, which is
encouraging to the victims of atrocities in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia.
I would like briefly to address two issues present
in both reports: the completion strategy and the
measures adopted so far, and staff retention. The
reports of both Tribunals inform us of the challenges
that those institutions have faced over the years and
about important achievements in the administration of
justice. We are glad to note that the use of technology
in a document-intensive context has allowed for a more
efficient use of resources and personnel. All initiatives
to expedite the proceedings, while fully respecting the

11-36334

rights of the accused, should be praised. The fulfilment
of the completion strategies deserves the Security
Council’s attention and should receive the full support
of the international community as a whole.
Brazil is concerned by the issue of staff retention,
as described in the reports. We agree that the Council
should be attentive to the day-to-day routine of the
Tribunals. The impact of the lack of adequate
personnel on the work of the Tribunals should be dealt
with as a priority matter by the relevant United Nations
bodies.
One of the main challenges of relying on ad hoc
rather than permanent Tribunals becomes clear at a
moment like this, when the institution has fulfilled
most of its core functions, but important tasks — such
as the trials of fugitives, supervision of the execution
of sentences, witness protection and the preservation of
documentation — remain. Thus, it is even more
important that adequate attention be given to the
remaining tasks of the international Tribunals.
Brazil has actively participated in the
establishment of the Residual Mechanism. We believe
that such a Mechanism adds an element of certainty in
the administration of justice that needs to be
emphasized.
We agree that the Tribunals alone cannot bring
peace and reconciliation to the region through judicial
decisions. It takes time for true peace and
reconciliation to lay their roots. The journey to peace
and reconciliation does not necessarily need to wait for
the results of the work of Tribunals such as the ICTR
and the ICTY, but will never be complete without it.
Brazil reiterates its understanding that the Tribunals
had and will have an important impact on peace and
reconciliation in the Balkans and the Great Lakes
region by promoting the rule of law and judicial
accountability and by helping those countries to
achieve a more equal and just future.
In that context, bringing the Tribunals closer to
the communities most seriously affected by
international crimes is crucial to ensuring the legacy of
such institutions. That is particularly relevant in the
lives of younger generations. Brazil strongly believes
that students, teachers and civil society as a whole
must promote the relevance of judicial accountability
as a necessary element of lasting peace.

25

S/PV.6545

Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking Judge Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Khan, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), for their presentations and assessment of the
Tribunals. We also appreciate the briefings given by
the two Prosecutors.
India welcomes the progress made by the two
Tribunals in expediting their work. We appreciate the
measures adopted to implement the completion
strategies. The Tribunals have set up new benchmarks
and adopted innovative procedures to expedite their
day-to-day work, including e-Court and e-Filing,
amendments to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
and case management techniques. The adoption and
implementation of e-Court and e-Filing procedures
could serve as a useful model in the national courts to
which some of the cases have been transferred.
We are happy to note that the ICTY has
transferred all low- and mid-level accused from its trial
docket to national courts, in accordance with resolution
1503 (2003), and that the Prosecutor is continuously
monitoring the progress of the referred proceedings in
national courts in the region. We also commend the
efforts of the Prosecutor to handle such cases through
effective partnerships with national prosecutors and
courts in the region, including training initiatives
aimed at strengthening the capacity of national
systems.
It is critical that the Tribunals finish their work
on time. We have listened very carefully to the
concerns raised by the Presidents of the two Tribunals
in relation to their ability to keep pace with their work,
while adhering to the expected timelines until the close
of business.
The judges have pointed out that the Tribunals’
trials and appeals continue to be affected by staffing
shortages and the loss of highly efficient staff
members. We share the concerns expressed by the
judges, especially on the need to retain adequate and
experienced staff. Careful consideration should be
given to the suggestions made by the Tribunals on how
to address that challenge. This is a practical issue and
requires the consideration of pragmatic and innovative
solutions, and we stand ready to work with the other
members of the Council to resolve it. Judge Robinson
also raised the issue of the enforcement of sentences,

26

which is an important matter that needs further
consideration.
We welcome the cooperation extended to the
Tribunals by all States concerned, which is vital to
ensuring the completion of the mandates of the
Tribunals and to the implementation of the completion
strategies. The arrest of Ratko Mladić is an important
example of effective cooperation, and we appreciate
Serbia’s sustained efforts in that regard. We hope that
the remaining fugitives will be located soon and
surrendered to the Tribunals.
We also note with satisfaction the progress made
by the ICTY Residual Mechanism Steering Committee
in the implementation of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals established pursuant
to resolution 1966 (2010). A multitude of factors is
involved in that process, and we hope that the Steering
Committee, in coordination with the ICTR, the Office
of Legal Affairs, the Archives and Records
Management Section and the Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, will
accomplish those tasks smoothly and successfully. Any
functional, operational or institutional issue in the
completion strategy may be addressed by the Council
as and when it arises.
In conclusion, we believe that the two Tribunals
have implemented their mandates admirably. We
consider that the support of the Security Council is
crucial at this critical juncture in the life of the
Tribunals. At the same time, we urge both Tribunals to
take all necessary steps to keep the trial and appeals
schedules on track. That will pave the way for the
successful trials of the remaining accused and a smooth
transition to an effective Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I join others in
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their very useful briefings on the
work of the Tribunals.
Nigeria welcomes the further progress made by
the ICTY and the ICTR in implementing their
completion strategies during the past six months. We
note with satisfaction the measures taken by the
Tribunals to expedite the conduct of their proceedings,
including reforms, while ensuring compliance with due
process standards. We believe that more tangible steps
towards enhancing the current staffing levels in both

11-36334

S/PV.6545

the ICTY and the ICTR will help to reinforce those
improvements. We recognize that resolutions 1954
(2010) and 1955 (2010) call upon the Secretariat and
other relevant United Nations bodies to continue to
work with the Registrars of the Tribunals to find
practical solutions to address the issue. We therefore
urge that intensified efforts be undertaken to find more
pragmatic measures to address this issue more
decisively. That becomes more critical as both
Tribunals approach the completion of their work.
Nigeria underscores the importance of sustained
and close cooperation between Member States and the
Tribunals in enabling them to achieve their set goals.
Those goals include the arrest of fugitives, the
preparation of referrals to national jurisdictions, the
relocation of acquitted persons and assistance to
national prosecution authorities.
It is encouraging that both Tribunals have
continued to assist in strengthening the capacity of
States to try alleged violators of international
humanitarian law in their own courts. Those efforts are
helpful in building the legacy of the Tribunals and the
institutions of international humanitarian law.
The Tribunals’ continued efforts at tracking the
remaining fugitives deserve our strong support. We
applaud the outstanding efforts of the Serbian
authorities in arresting Ratko Mladić and hope that it
will help to bring reconciliation to the Western Balkans
region. We also commend the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for arresting
Bernard Munyagishari. We call on all relevant States to
intensify efforts towards ensuring that the remaining
fugitives are apprehended and brought to justice. There
is also a need to intensify cooperation with the
Tribunals with respect to the referral of cases to
national jurisdictions and the resettlement of persons
acquitted by the Tribunals.
The Tribunals have made commendable progress
in raising awareness of their work through their
outreach programmes. More of these activities will be
needed as they gradually move towards the completion
of their work. We call for sustained donor support for
these activities, more particularly in funding the
reference centres of information.
It is edifying to note the measures being taken by
the Tribunals to implement resolution 1966 (2010). In
our view, every effort should be geared towards
ensuring a smooth transition to the Residual

11-36334

Mechanism. We therefore support the establishment of
a joint action plan by the Tribunals and their
Prosecutors in order to coordinate the activities and the
many stakeholders that have been involved in the
setting up of the Mechanism. We also commend the
progress on the drafting of the rules of procedure and
evidence of the Residual Mechanism and on the access
and security policy for the records of the Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism.
Allow me to put on the record our deep
appreciation for the diligent and valuable efforts of the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the ICTY and ICTR in
support of the global fight against impunity amidst
very challenging circumstances.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
My delegation joins others in congratulating and
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
Tribunals for their respective briefings. I would also
like to take this opportunity to welcome the excellent
work done since January by the delegation of Portugal
in leading the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
Gabon welcomes the progress made in
implementing the completion strategy and commends
the firm determination that the Judges, Prosecutors and
staff have shown to bring about the rapid completion of
their work. We are convinced that all of these efforts
will enable a smooth transition towards the Residual
Mechanism as provided for by the Council in
resolution 1966 (2010).
Our debate is taking place at a time when
important developments in the fight against impunity
have just taken place. The arrests on 25 and 26 May of
Bernard Munyagishari and Ratko Mladić, respectively,
have great symbolic value and show the determination
of Governments to cooperate in the fight against
impunity in their respective States. My delegation
would like to express its satisfaction and
congratulations to these Governments, in particular that
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
These arrests also remind us that justice requires
patience and sacrifice. We must seize the momentum
thus created, and Gabon encourages the international
community and concerned States to strengthen their
cooperation with a view to achieving the arrest of the

27

S/PV.6545

other fugitives. This cooperation should also contribute
to the implementation of the completion strategy.
Without efficient judicial and penal institutions,
such as the International Criminal Tribunals, it would
be very difficult to fight effectively against impunity or
to strengthen international criminal justice. The
standards-setting actions of the Security Council in this
area are universal in scope and should be strengthened
in time. Gabon encourages stronger political will and
actions to strengthen the work of the Tribunals in their
actions to complete their work within the trials’
schedules. The Judges and Prosecutors have told us
about the difficulties that could compromise the pursuit
of their mandates. We hope that the measures
recommended will be taken into consideration.
The Tribunals must be given appropriate financial
and human resources until the transfer of responsibility
to the Residual Mechanism. The provisions contained
in General Assembly resolution 65/253 are a step in the
right direction.
In conclusion, as we highlighted during the last
debate on this issue (see S/PV.6434), it is important to
strengthen the capacity of national judicial systems.
The training of staff in national judicial institutions, in
particular judges and support staff, should be a
fundamental aspect of the global mechanism for
implementing this strategy.
Finally, Gabon would like to thank the Office of
Legal Affairs for the work it has done in supporting the
various Tribunals.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Pursuant to rule 37 of the Council’s rules of
procedure, I now give the floor to the representative of
Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): At the outset, allow me to
express the satisfaction of the Republic of Serbia with
the Security Council’s recent press statement
(SC/10265), and particularly with the congratulations
my country received for the recent arrest of Ratko
Mladić and the acknowledgment that the arrest was a
clear demonstration of the Government of Serbia’s
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to
thank all of the Council members who commended
Serbia in their statements today.

28

I would also like to extend our thanks to the
President and the Prosecutor of the ICTY, Judge
Patrick Robinson and Mr. Serge Brammertz, for their
ongoing efforts related to the Republic of Serbia’s
cooperation with the Tribunal. These efforts have been
additionally intensified by the activities related to the
conclusion of the Tribunal’s mandate and the
preparations for the successful commencement of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
At the same time, I would also like to welcome
the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge Dennis Byron
before and Judge Khalida Rachid Khan now, and
Justice Hassan B. Jallow, who, in parallel with the
President and the Prosecutor of the ICTY, play an
important role in closing one of the important chapters
in the history of international justice and, at the same
time, contribute to the establishment of the new body
that will continue the legacies of the two Tribunals.
Concerning Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY, I
will briefly comment on the current report of the
Prosecutor (S/2011/316, annex II).
Serbia shares the Prosecutor’s assessment
regarding all areas of cooperation except, obviously,
for the part on the fugitives. As recent developments
have shown, that part of the Prosecutor’s report has
been rendered largely obsolete, and I am pleased that
the Prosecutor, in his recent statements, including
before the Council today, has recognized that fact.
In any case, Serbia is pleased to say that the
arrest of Ratko Mladić came as a result of the
continuous and intensive efforts of all those
participating in the investigations and searches for the
fugitives. The arrest of the last remaining fugitive,
Goran Hadžić, will continue to be a priority for Serbia
in the coming period. No impunity will be allowed and
no issue in relation to cooperation with the Tribunal
will remain unresolved.
Serbia has arrested and transferred to the Tribunal
45 out of 46 persons that were believed to be in Serbia.
All documents requested from Serbia have been
promptly delivered for the purpose of the ongoing
trials and appeal procedures. Access to witnesses and
State archives has been granted to the Office of the
Prosecutor and to the defence teams without a single
exception. For all these reasons, Serbia believes that it

11-36334

S/PV.6545

has now undoubtedly achieved full cooperation with
the ICTY.
Nevertheless, Serbia will continue to maintain its
cooperative relationship with the Tribunal in all
aspects, and will continue with its proactive approach
to the stabilization process in the region, hoping that,
as the Security Council has also stated, the recent
actions of Serbia will bring the Western Balkans even
closer to reconciliation. In this way, Serbia will
continue to actively contribute to the achievement of
international justice and, at the same time, to the
strengthening of the European perspective of all States
established in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
Serbia remains strongly interested in the
implementation of the Tribunal’s completion strategy
and has already expressed its interest in participating,
to the greatest extent possible, in the deliberations on
issues related to the archives and in the commencement
of the Residual Mechanism. Serbia therefore retains its
position submitted to the Security Council in October
2008 and March 2009, and reiterates its readiness to
actively participate in all future discussions on these
issues. My country is confident that the full level of
cooperation with the ICTY it has achieved will
continue in the upcoming period and that it will secure
a smooth transition to future cooperation with the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
Taking all of this into consideration, the Republic
of Serbia wishes to address once again the grave issues
of organ trafficking and persons unaccounted for after
the Kosovo conflict in 1999. My country is firmly
resolved to insist that the truth be established regarding
all the missing persons and victims of the armed
conflicts in the Balkans during the 1990s. The rejection
of impunity has to apply equally to all such cases, and
Serbia, which is fulfilling its obligations in this regard,
has every right to insist that others do the same.
In this regard, I would like to reiterate our request
that the Security Council establish an independent
mechanism to conduct an overall investigation of organ
crimes. Only such a mechanism established by the
Security Council would have the power to conduct an
impartial and full investigation of these crimes and the
prosecution of all those found responsible for them.
That is precisely why all other crimes committed
during the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia have been
and are being investigated by mechanisms established

11-36334

by the Security Council. To do differently with these
most atrocious of crimes would truly be a monumental
injustice, and we hope and believe that the Council will
not allow it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to wish you a successful month. We are certain
that, under your able leadership, the Security Council
will discharge its great responsibilities successfully.
I would also like to express our appreciation to
Presidents Robinson and Byron and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their detailed reports on the
work of the Tribunals (S/2011/316 and S/2011/317)
and the progress achieved in and the challenges facing
the implementation of the completion strategy.
(spoke in English)
Furthermore, we welcome Judge Khalida Rashid
Khan as the newly elected President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and express our full confidence in her ability to
successfully master the tremendous task in front of her.
Croatia recognizes the efforts made by the
Tribunals to implement the previously elaborated
strategy for the finalization of their work and the
transition to the Residual Mechanism. Croatia actively
participated in the creation of the Mechanism and
looks forward to its future work aimed at helping
safeguard the Tribunals’ legacy and successfully
fulfilling their residual functions, in particular
regarding the processing of remaining fugitives,
archives management, witness protection and the
serving of sentences.
At the same time, we are aware of the many
challenges facing the Tribunals, and we firmly believe
that their widely recognized legitimate objectives
should not be pursued at the expense of the mandate
under which they were established and that they should
not compromise full respect for due process standards.
The Tribunals’ mandate cannot be considered
accomplished until all remaining fugitives accused of
the gravest crimes are brought to justice.
In this context, Croatia welcomes the fact that,
after 16 years, Serbia located, arrested and transferred

29

S/PV.6545

to The Hague Ratko Mladić, indicted for the worst
atrocities committed since the Second World War. We
also remember here the victims of the war crimes
committed against the civilian population in Croatia, in
particular in Škabrnja, Zadar, Šibenik, Kijevo, Vrlika,
Sinj and other towns attacked by the Yugoslav People’s
Army (JNA) under orders of Ratko Mladić while he
was commander of the Ninth Corps of the JNA based
in Knin, Croatia; as well as his orders to launch
indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects, knowing
that such attacks would cause excessive loss of life or
injury to civilians, in particular his attempt of flooding
a large populated area by destroying the Peruča Dam.
Justice needs to be served in these cases as well.
In this sense, we would regret it if Ratko Mladić were
not prosecuted in The Hague for the crimes committed
in Croatia. The arrest of Ratko Mladić, however, raises
the hope that Goran Hadžić, the last remaining fugitive
indicted by the ICTY for grave atrocities in Croatia,
will also soon be rendered accountable before the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Croatia remains strongly committed to its
cooperation with the Tribunal. This unequivocal
cooperation was clearly confirmed by the Prosecutor’s
latest assessment, according to which
“Croatia continues to respond in a timely and
adequate manner to requests by the Office of the
Prosecutor’s for assistance and provides access to
witnesses and evidence as required” (S/2011/316,
annex II, para. 56).

Over the reporting period, Croatian officials at
the highest level remained engaged in direct and open
dialogue with the Tribunal and the Prosecutor, who
visited Zagreb on 4 May and met with the Prime
Minister, the Minister of Justice, the State Prosecutor
and members of the Task Force. Furthermore, Croatian
judges and prosecutors participated in peer-to-peer
meetings and training sessions aimed at transferring the
Tribunal’s institutional knowledge and specialized
skills to Croatian colleagues and at enhancing national
capacities and strengthening national institutions. In
addition, Croatia welcomes the Tribunal’s efforts
focused on increasing national capabilities to handle
complex war crime trials by providing trial transcripts
produced in local languages to the countries of the
region.
In that context, let me also mention the fifth
regional conference of State prosecutors, which was
hosted by the State Prosecutor of Croatia — with the
participation of ICTY Prosecutor Brammertz,
prosecutors from Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro and the war crimes Prosecutor of
Serbia — and held on 26 and 27 May in Brijuni,
Croatia. The main goal of the conference was to further
discuss cooperation in war crimes cases between
prosecution offices from the region, the cooperation
between the Office of the Prosecutor and national
prosecutions and concrete cooperation projects to
facilitate the exchange of information related to war
crimes cases.

The special task force established by the Croatian
Prime Minister continues to actively pursue its
investigations. During the reporting period, the task
force produced three reports on current operations and
a separate report summarizing all its activities and
findings to date. Let me add that the task force’s
professionalism and competence were also duly noted
and recognized by the Prosecutor in his previous
report.

Let me reiterate that Croatia continues to fully
cooperate with the ICTY. Croatia is convinced that the
cooperation of Member States, especially those from
South-East Europe, remains crucial for the successful
accomplishment of the ICTY’s mandate and for
meeting its completion strategy goals. War crimes are
not subject to statutes of limitations, which is why
regional cooperation and establishing the impartiality
of national courts in all the countries in the region,
even after the ICTY lifetime, is so important.

With regard to the missing documents that are
still “unaccounted for” (S/2011/316, annex II, para.
57), let me point out that, in its summarizing report, the
Task Force provided its professional assessment about
the fate of the missing documents and that Croatia
went on with its investigation in this matter and is
strongly committed to continuing to undertake all
reasonable and feasible measures at its disposal.

Determined to implement the strategy for the
investigation and prosecution of war crimes committed
from 1991 to 1995, Croatia has introduced measures to
reinforce and expand the positive impact of the four
existing specialized war crimes courts. With a view to
speeding up domestic trials, it has furthermore enabled
the evidence collected by the bodies of the ICTY to be
used by domestic courts.

30

11-36334

S/PV.6545

Furthermore, in the context of the recently
rendered first instance judgement in the Gotovina et al.
case, allow me briefly to make a few additional
remarks.
First, in addition to Croatia’s ongoing firm
determination to continue its full cooperation with the
ICTY and the Prosecutor’s Office, which I have
already mentioned, let me also stress Croatia’s
strongest determination to fully respect any verdict
rendered by the ICTY.
Secondly, Croatia particularly noticed the fact
that the Gotovina et al. judgement explicitly stated that
“Croatia’s choice to resort to Operation Storm was not
on trial” and, consequently, that homeland war is not
criminalized.
Thirdly, since the Council represents a political
body par excellence, we do not have any intention of
discussing legal aspects of the Gotovina et al.
judgement. That discussion will continue in The Hague
between the relevant parties. At the same time, I have
to underline that we respectfully but strongly disagree
with some of its historical and political qualifications.
Yet, let me also stress here that both President
Josipović and Prime Minister Kosor clearly stated,
immediately after the first instance sentence was
rendered, that Croatia is a democratic State based on
the rule of law, where judicial institutions are respected
and their verdicts adhered to.
Full cooperation with the ICTY and respect for
international justice is a lasting commitment, not only
in the context of our Euro-Atlantic integration process
but as a determination of Croatia’s core values and its
present and future role in the international community
as a United Nations, NATO and, soon, European Union
member. In that sense, let me reassure you, Mr.
President, that Croatia will ensure that the parameters
for legitimate military action, derived from the ICTY
judgement and which present new jurisprudence in
international law, are fully considered and respected
while making decisions at the national level, as well as
in bodies of collective defence and security.
Fourthly, Croatia strongly supports the Tribunal’s
main purpose and primary functions, which are,
according to relevant Security Council resolutions, the
establishment of lasting peace and reconciliation. The
constructive and objective reactions of all relevant
political actors in Croatia after the judgement in the
Gotovina et al. case was rendered clearly testify to our

11-36334

determination in that regard. Our sympathy lies with
the victims, regardless of their nationality or religion.
Our allegiance is with the truth and the consequent
punishment of all war crimes, regardless of the
nationality or religion of their perpetrators. Our hope is
that peace based on justice is possible and will be
advanced by our joint endeavours.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Judge Robinson to respond to the comments
made during the statements by members, if he so
wishes.
Judge Robinson: I do not wish to respond, but I
was remiss in not congratulating Judge Khan on her
election to the presidency. I would like to take the
opportunity to do that now.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Judge Khan to respond to the comments made
by representatives in their statements, if she so wishes.
Judge Khan: I do not have any comments to
make on the observations made by representatives.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Prosecutor Brammertz to respond to comments
made by representatives in their statements, if he so
wishes.
Mr. Brammertz (spoke in French): I do not have
any comments to make.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Prosecutor Jallow to respond to the comments
made by representatives in their statements, if he so
wishes.
Mr. Jallow: I thank the members of the Council
for their supportive comments and suggestions.
I have some brief remarks to make in relation to
an issue raised by the Ambassador of the Republic of
Rwanda, which relates to the two cases that have been
referred to France by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Those are the only cases that the ICTR has so far
succeeded in referring to a national jurisdiction. I
simply wish to assure him that there are very effective
arrangements in place for monitoring the progress of
those two cases in France. My Office has retained the
services of two private law firms in France, whose
responsibility it is to undertake that task on our behalf.
They send regular reports to my Office, which we in

31

S/PV.6545

turn transmit to the Trial or the Referral Chamber for
their attention. The cases, after some preliminary work,
have been carried out by the French authorities
following the referral and are both now before an
investigating judge. The monitoring arrangements will
continue to provide us with the information as to their
status.
Allow me, if I may, to add, as the representative
of France indicated, that I was on mission in France
two months ago. One of the issues we discussed was
related to those two trials. I have received assurances
from various French authorities of their continued
commitment to managing those cases and ensuring that

they are dealt with expeditiously within the legal
system. So we do have effective arrangements in place
for monitoring and reporting on the status of the trials.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
I take this opportunity, on behalf of the Council,
to thank Judge Robinson, Judge Rachid Khan,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their
briefings to the Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

32

11-36334
