Resolutions adopted on the reports ol the Fourth Committee

13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session.

3302 (XXIX). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3120 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-Ge!1':ral
on offers by Member States of study an~ tra.mm_g
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governin.g Terntories, 76 prepared under General Assembly resolution
845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the need to provide increased educational and training facilities at au levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Aware, in particular, of the urgent needs ~f t_he
transitional Governments of the colonial Terntones
concerned in southern Africa for qualified administrative, . technical and professional personnel to assume
responsibility for the administration and devel?pment
of their countries, and, in that regard, welcommg the
acceptance by Portugal of its obligations under. the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and its recognition of the right of the peoples concerned
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and with the provisions of all related resolutions
of the United Nations,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships to
inform the Secretary-General of the details of the
offers made and the sct.olarships granted under this
programme and, whenever possible, to provide travel
funds to prospective students;
5. Requests those administering Powers which have
not yet done so to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their
administration, particularly in southern Africa, of i!1formation relating to offers of study and training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary
facilities to enable students to avail themselve& of such
offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2318th plenary meetinr13 December 1974

3301 (XXIX). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Soutliern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular cesolution 3119 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1973/74,15
Taking note with satisfaction of the further increase
in contributions to the Programme and the corresponding increase in assistance for the education and
training of persons from the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the progress of the Territories
under Portuguese administration towards independence,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions to the Programme
in order to ensure its continuation and expansion;
3. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and
expanding the Pcogramme;
4. Decides that assistance under the Programme
should be continued as a transitional measure, at the
request of the Governments concerned, for the inhabitants of Guinea-Bissau and those of the Territories
covered by the Programme which may attain independence;
5. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under the regular budget of
the United Nations for the financial year 1975, for an
amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity of the Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary
contributions;
6. Requests the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, to arrange for an evaluation of the achievements of the Programme and of the ways and means
for its further development;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the activity
and progress of the Programme.
2 318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
T5 A/9845.

rn A/9877.

•

us

•

•
