,19 novembre 1946

979

Quarante-neuvieme seance pMnfllre

I call upon Mr. Rzymowski, representative of
Poland.

J e donne la parole a M. Rzymowski, representant de la Pologne.

Mr. RZYMOWSKI (Poland) (translated from
French): On behalf of the Polish delegation, I
wish to state that my country withdraws its
candidature for one of the vacant seats on the
Economic and Social Council and that Poland
will vote for Yugoslavia.

M. RZYMOWSKI~ (Pologne): Au nom de la
delegation polonaise, je declare que man pays
renonce it sa candidature au poste vacant du
Conseil economique et social, et que la Pologne
votera en faveur de la Yougoslavie..

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
It is impossible for the President to foresee what
a speaker is going to say, but what the Polish
representative has just said is contrary to the
rules. There can be no nomination of candidates and no withdrawal in favour of a specified
country.
If the second ballot gives no definite results,
I propose that the Assembly postpone the third
ballot till this afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT: 11 est impossible au President
de prevoir ce qu'un orateur va dire, lnais les
paroles que vient de prononcer le representant
de la Pologne sont contraires aux dispositions du
reglement. Il n'y a poin~ lieu a presentation de
candidats, et 1'011. ne peut se retirer en favem
de tel ou tel pays.
Si le deuxieme tour de scrutin ne doit pas
donner de n~sultats definitifs, j e propose a l' AssembIee de remettre le troisieme tour eventuel a
cet apres-midi.
Je prie MM. les scrutateurs de bien vouloir
reprendre leur place. ~ous allons proceder au
vote.
(Le vote a lieu au scrutin secret, la tribune.)

I would ask the tellers kindly to take their
places again. We shall proceed to a vote.
(The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn by secret ballot.)

a

Le PRESIDENT: Le scrutin est clos. J'invite
The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenc h) :
The roll-call is completed. I call upon the tellers . MM. les scrutateurs 'a en operer le depouillement.
to count the votes.
(The tellers proceeded to count the votes.)
(Les SCl'utateurs procedent au depouillement
du scrutin.)
Le PRESIDENT: Void le resultat du scrutin:

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of Members voting. . . . .. 53
Number of blank or invalid papers 0
Number of votes cast . .. . . . . . . .. 53
The two-thirds majority required for election
is therefore thirty-six.
The number of votes obtained is as follows:

Nombre de votants . , . . . . . . . .. 53
Bulletins blancs ou nuls . . . . . . . .
0
Suffrag~ exprimes
53
La majorite requise des deux tiers est donc de
trente-six.
Ont obtenu:

Number of votes

Nombre de !Joix

Liban ... .. .... .. .... . ... ... 41
Lebanon
41
Turquie '" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 32
Turkey
,
'" 32
Pays-Bas
SO
30
Netherlands
Yougoslavie
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
..
27
Yugoslavia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 27
RSS de Bielorussie
22
Byelorussian SSR
22
Pologne
6
Poland. . . . . .. . . . . . . .. .. .. .•. 6
Decision: Le Liban est elu membre du ConDecision: Lebanon was elected a member of
the Economic and Social Council for a period seil economique et social pour une periode de
of three years beginning 1 .January 1947.
. trois ans commenfant le 1er janvier 1947.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
As two seats remain to be filled we shall take
a third ballot this afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT; Deux sieges restant a pourvoir, nous procederons cet apres-midi it un troisieme tour de scrutin.

The meeting rose at 2:30 p.m.

La seance est levee a 14 h. 30.

FORTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING

QUARANTE-NEUVIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Held on Tuesday, 19 November 1946, at 4 p.m.

Tenue le mardi 19 novemhre 1946,

a16 heures.

TABLE DES MATIERES

CONTENTS

Page

Pages

111. Election of six members of the Economic
and Social Council (continuation) .... 980
112. Election of three members of the Committee on Contributions: reference of
.981
the item to the Fifth Committee

111. Ejection de six membres du Conseil economique et social (suite)
980
112. Election de trois membres du Comite des
contributions. Renvoi a. la Cinquieme
981
Commission

Forty-ninth Plenary Meeting

980

113. Membership of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: report of the Fifth Committee:
982
resolution
114-. Utilization by UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) of the property
rights of the League of Nations in the
International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation: report of the Fifth Committee: resolution...................... 983
115. Travelling expenses of members of Commissions of the Economic and Social
Council: report of the Fifth Committee:
resolution
984
116. National Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies: report of the Third Commit984
tee: resolution
117. Application of Articles 11 and 12 of the
Statute of the International Court of
Justice: report of the Sixth Committee:
985
resolution
118. Transfer to the United Nations of powers
exercised by the League of Nations under
the International Agreements, Conventions and Protocols on Narcotic Drugs:
report of the Third Committee: resolu986
tion
119. Question of the re-examination by the
Security Council of certain applications
for admission to membership in the
United Nations: report of the First
992
Committee: resolution
120. Rules governing the admission of new
Members to the United Nations: report
of the First Committee: resolution
, 994

President: Mr. P.-R. SPAAK (Belgium).
111. Election of six members of the
Economic and Social Council (continuation)

19 November 1946

113. Constitution de la Commission consultative pour les questions administratives et
budgetaires. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission. Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 982
114. Utilisation par l'UNESCO (Organisation des Nations Unies pour la science,
l' education et la culture) des droits de
propricte de la Societe des Nations sur
l'Institut international de cooperation
intellectuelle. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission. Resolution
. . . .. 983
115. Frais de deplacement des membres des
Commissions du Conseil economique et
social. Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission. Resolution
. . . . .. 984
116. Societes nationales de la Croix-Rouge
et du Croissant-Rouge. Rapport de la
Troisieme Commission. Resolution . . . .. 984
117. Application des Articles 11 et 12 du Statut de la Cour internationale de Justice.
Rapport de la Sixieme Commission.
985
Resolution
118. Transfert aux Nations Unies des pouvoirs
exerces par la Societe des Nations en
vertu des Accords, Conventions et protocoles internationaux sur les stupCfiants.
Rapport de la Troisieme Commission.
986
Resolution
119. Question d'un nouvel examen par le Conseil de securite de certaines demandes
d'admission a l'Organisation des Nations
U nies. Rapport de la premiere Connnis.
sion. Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 992
120. Regles pour l'admission de nouveaux
membres a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Rapport de la premiere Commission. Resolution ..... ,.............. 994

President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Be1gique).
111. Election de six membres du Conseil
economique et social (suite)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Nous alions reprendre mainteWe will now resume the yoting for the election of nant la question de l'election de six membres du
six members of the Economic and Social Council. Conseil economique et social.
Up to the present, four members out of the
.Actuellement, quatre membres sur six sont
six have been elected: United States of America, elus: les Etats-Unis d'Amerique, le Venezuela,
Venezuela, New Zealand and Lebanon. We still la Nouvelle-Zelande et le Liban. Il reste a elire
have two members to elect.
deux membres.
The four· countries which obtained the largest
Lesquatre"pays qui ont obtenu le plus grand
number of votes in the last ballot were Turkey, nombre de voix au dernier scrutin sont la Turthe Netherlands, Yugoslavia and the Byelorussian quie, les Pays-Bas, la Yougoslavie et la RepuSoviet Socialist Republic. These are the only blique socialiste sovietique de Bielorussie. ees
countries, therefore, for which it is possible to pays sont done les seuls pour lesquels i1 est
vote in this third ballot. Any voting papers possible de voter au troisieme tour de scrutin.
showing more than two names will be declared Tout bulletin qui comporterait plus de deux
invalid.
noms serait nul.
I ask Mr. Perez Cisneros and Mr. Papanek to
J'invite MM. Perez Cisneros et Papanek a·
act as tellers.
exercer les fonctions de scrutateurs.

(The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn by secret ballot. )

(Le vote a lieu au scrutin secret, ala tribune.)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The roll-call is completed. I call upon the tellers
to count the votes.

Le PRESIDENT: Le scrutin est clos. J'invite
MM. les scrutateurs a operer le depouillement.

(The tellers proceeded to count the votes.)

(Les scrutateurs procMent au depouillement
du scrutin.)

981

19 novembre 1946

Quarante-neuvieme seance p"~nierG

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of Members voting. . . .. 52
Number of blank or invalid papers
0
Number of votes cast. . . . . . . . .. 52

Le PRESIDENT: Void le resultat du scrutin:

The two-thirds majority required for election
is therefore thirty-five.

La majorite requise des deux tiers est done de
trente-cinq.

The number of votes obtained is as follows:

,
Nombre de votants
Bulletins blancs ou nuls . . . . . . . .
Suffrages exprimes . . . . . . . . . ..

52
0
52

ant obtenu:

Number of votes

Nombre de voix

Netherlands. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. 29
Turkey. . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. ... 28
Byelorussian SSR .. . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Yugoslavia .... . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 22
None of the candidates having received the
necessary two-thirds majority, we shall have to
proceed to a fourth ballot.
(The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn by secret ballot.)

Pays-Bas
29
Turquie
28
RSS de Bielorussie . . . . . . . . . . .. 25
22
Yougoslavie
Aucun pays n'ayant obtenu la majorite des
deux tiers, il y a lieu de proceder a un quatrieme
tour de scrutin.
(Le vote a lieu au scrutin secret) a la tribune.)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The roll-call is completed. I call upon the tellers
to count the votes.
(The tellers proceeded to count the votes.)

Le PRESIDENT: Le scrutin est clos. J'invite
MM. les scrutateurs a opereI' le depouillement.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of Members voting. . . .. 52
Number of blank or invalid papers
0
Number of votes cast. . . .. . . . .. 52
The two-thirds majority required for election
is therefore thirty-five.
The number of votes obtained is as follows:

Le PRi.SIDENT: Void le resuhat du scrutin:

(Les scrutateurs procedent au depouillement
du scrutin. )

Nombre de votants . . . . . . . . . .. 52
Bulletins blancs ou nuls . . . . . . . .
0
Suffrages exprimes
, 52
La majorite requise des deux tiers est done de
trente-cinq.
Ont obtenu:

Number of votes

Nombre de voix

Turkey....
29
Byelorussian SSR .. . . . . . . . . . .. 28
Netherlands
28
Yugoslavia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 19
No candidate has obtained the necessary twothirds majority.
In consequence, I should like to know whether
the Assembly would not consider it advisabk to
postpone to a later date the fifth ballot which
must be held, so that the delegations may be in
a position to discuss the matter betw~en themselves and try to find a solution. If we continue
as we have been doing up to the present we may
spend the whole afternoon in voting and achieve
no result. I propose, therefore - and this is not
any violation of the statute or of our rules of
procedure - that we should adjourn the fifth
ballot, and any others that may be necessary, to
a later plenary meeting of the Assembly.
Decision: The President's' proposal was
adopted.

Turquie
29
RSS de Bielorussie
"
28
Pays-Bas
28
Yougo~avie "
19
. Aucun pays n'a obtenu la majorite des deux
tiers.
En consequence, je demande a l' Assemblee si
cIle ne considere pas bien avise de remettre aplus tard le cinquieme tour de scrutin auquel il
y a lieu de proceder, pour permettre eventuellement aux delegations de s'entretenir entre elles
et de tacher de trouver une solution. Si nous
continuons comme ncius l'avons fait jusqu'ici,
nous risquons de voter toute l'apres-midi sans
resultat. Je propose, cc qui n'est contraire ni aux
status ni aux regles de procedure, de remettre le
cinquieme tour de scrutin et eventuellement les
suivants a la prochaine seance pleniere de
l'Asscmblee.
Decision: La proposition du President est
adoptee.

112. Election of three members of the Committe'e on Contributions: reference of
the item to the Fifth Committee (document A/144J

112. Election de trois membres du Comite
des contributions.
Renvoi et la
Cinquieme Commission (document
A/144)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Several delegations have asked me to propose to
the General Assembly that this item on our

Le PRESIDENT: Plusieurs delegations m'ont
demande de proposer al' Assemblee le renvoi de
ce point de I'ordre du jour a la Cinquierrre Corn-

,
,·1

I

i

!

cl,

~l

Jj

"~

Forty~njnth

Plenary Meeting

982

agenda should be referred to the Fifth Committee, which has not been consulted on the
matter and has therefore not been able to express
an opinion.
Decision: The proposal was adopted.

mission, qui n'a pas ere consultee sur ce point et
n'a pas pu, en consequence, emettre un avis.

113. Membership of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: report of the Fifth
Committe'e: resolution (document

113. Constitution de la Commission consultative pour les questions administratives et budgetaires. Rapport de la
Cinquieme Commission. Resolution
(document AI 193)

A/193)
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on our agenda is the report of the
Fifth Committee on the membership of the Ad.visory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (annex 33) .
I call upon Mr. Aghnides, representative of
Greece, Rapporteur, of the Fifth Committee.

,

19 November 1946

Decision: La proposition est adoptee.

Le PRESIDENT: Le point suivant a l'ordre du
jour est le rapport de la' Cinquieme Commission
sur la constitution de la Commission consultative pour les questions administratives et budgetaires (annexe 33) .
Je donne la parole a M. Aghnides, representant de la Grcce, Rapporteur de la Cinquieme
Commission.
M. AGHNIDES (Grece), Rapporteur (traduit
Mr. AGHNIDES (Greece), Rapporteur: I do
not think I need enter into any detailed explana- de l'anglais) : Je ne crois pas qu'il soit neeessaire
tion about the procedure we have followed to d'expliquer en detail la procedure que nous
appoint this Committee.
avons suivie pour aboutir a la constitution de
cette Commission.
Vous connaissez tous l'article du reglement inYou all know the relevant rule of the rules of
proc~dure, and you all know the mandate which terieur auquel nous nous somnies conformes, et
we received from the General Assembly at the le mandat que nous avons re~u de l'Assemblee
first part of its first session, l and also from your lors de la premiere partie de sa premiere session1.
deliberations when you decided to refer this ques- Vous vous souvenez egalement de vos deliberation to the Fifth Committee. In accordance with tions lorsque vous avez decide de soumettre cette
·the resolution of the Assembly and the rules of , question a la Cinquieme Commi~sion. Conformement a la resolution de l'Assemblce et aux
proc~dure, we proceeded to the election and the
appointment of the Advisory Committee on termes de notre reglement interieur, nous avom;
Budgetary and Administrative Questions. I will procede a l'election et a la nomination de la
therefore only read out to you the resolution, and Commission consultative pour les questions adsubmit it to your deliberation. I hope you will· ministratives et budgetaires. J e me contenterai
accept the proposal made in this connexion by done de vous donner lecture de la resolution et
the Fifth Committee:
de la soumettre a vos deliberations dans l'espoir
que .vous accepterez la proposition suivante, presentee par la Cinquieme Commission:
«The General Assembly)
"VAssemblee generale)
"1. Declares the following persons to be
"1. Declare que sont elus membres de la
elected as memb'ers of the Advisory Committee
Commission consultative pour les questions
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
administratives et budgetaires, aux tennes du
under the terms of reference laid down in rule
manclat clefini a l'article 40 du reglement inte40 of the provisional rules of procedure:
rieur provisoire :
Mr. Thanassis AGHNIDEs
(Greece)
(Grece)
M. Thanassis AGHNIDES
Mr. Andre GANEM
(France)
M. Andre GANEM
(France)
Mr. C. L. HSIA
(China)
M. C. L. HSIA '"
(Chine)
Mr. Valentin I. KABusHKo
" .
M. Valentin I. KABUSHKO
.
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques)
Mr. S. K. KmPALANI
(India)
(Incle)
M. S. K. KIRPALANI
Mr. Olyntho MACHADO
(Brazil)
M. Olyntho MAOHADO
(BrcRil)
Mr. G. MARTINEZ CABANAS
(Mexico)
M. G. MARTINEZ CABANAS .. (Mexique)
Sir William MATTHEWS
"
.
Sir William MATTHEWS
(United Kingdom)
(Royaume-U ni)
.
Mr. Donald C. STONE
.
M. Donald C. STONE
( United States of America)
(Etats- Unis d'Amcrique)
"2. Declares:
"2. Declare:
Mr. O. MACHADO
M. O. MACHADO
Sir William MATTHEWS
Sir William MATTHEWS
Mr. Donald C. STONE
M. Donald C. STONE
to be elected for a three-year term.
elus pour une periode de trois ans.
1!See Official Records of the General Assembly,
page. • ..

" yoir Comptes rendlls des seance. de l'As.embUe
generale, page ....

19 novembre 1946

983

"3. Declares:
Mr. Thanassis AGHNIDES
Mr. C. L. HSIA
Mr. Valentin 1. KABUSHKO
to be elected for a two-year term."
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the resolution proposed by the
Fifth Committee.
Decision: The resolution was adopted unani-

Quarante-I'leuvh~me seance ph~nierlt

"3. Declare':
M. Thanassis AGHNIDES
M. C. L. HSIA
M. Valentin 1. KABUSHKO
elus pour une periode de deux ans."

Le PRESIDENT: J e mets aux voix la resolution
presentee par la Cinquieme Commission.

Decision:

La resolution est adoptee al'una-

mously.

nimiU.

114. Utilization by UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) of the property
rights of the League of Nations in the
International Institute of Intellectual
Co-operation: report of the Fifth Committee: resolution (document A/196)

114. UtiHsation par "UNESCO (Organisf;ltion des Nati,ons Unies pour la
science, I'education et la culture) des
droits de propri:ete de la Societe des
Nations sur l'lnstitut international de
cooperation intellectueHe. Rapport
de la Cinquieme Commission. Resolution (document AI 196)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the report of the
Fifth Committee on the utilization by UNESCO
of the property rights 'of the League of Nations
in the International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation (annex 34).
I call upon Mr. Aghnides, Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee.
Mr. AGHNIDES (Greece), Rapporteur: This
is a very simple matter. I am not going to read
the first part of this report, as I am sure you
have all read it. I shall simply read the
resolution:

Le PRESIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle la
discussion sur le rapport de la. Cinquieme Commission sur l'utilisation par l'UNESCO des droits
de propriete de la Societe des Nations sur 1'lnstitut international de cooperation intellectuelle
(annexe 34).
Je donne)a parole M. Aghnides, Rapporteur
de la Cinquieme Commission.
M. AGHNIDES (Grece), Rapporteur (traduit
de l'anglais): La question est tres simple. Il est
inutile que je vous donne lecture de la premiere
partie de mon rapport; je suis sur que vous en
avez tous pris connaissance. .Te vais donc lire
seulement le texte de la resolution:
«L' Assembtee generale,
"1. Recommande que l'UNESCO reprenne aussitot que possible apres l'elaboration de son statut de£initif selon les modalites
de l'article XI, paragraphe 2, de sa constitution, les fonctions et activites de l'Institut
international de cooperation intellectuelle qui
entrent dans le cad.;e du programme adopte
a la conference generale de l'UNESCO, tel
qu'il est expose dans le projet d'accord entre
les Nations Dnies et rUNESCO, l confonnement a l'Article 63 de la Charte des Nations
Unies;
"2. Recommande, en outre, qu'un accord
soit conclu entre l'UNESCO et l'Institut avant
le 31 decembre 1946, de fa<;on a faciliter la
reprise par l'UNESCO des fonctions et activites visees au paragraphe 1 de la presente
resolution;
3. Invite le Secretaire general, pour assurer,
sous les auspices de l'UNESCO, la continuite
de l'ceuvre accomplie par l'Institut international de cooperation intellectuelle, a autoriser
l'UNESCO a utiliser les avoirs de l'lnstitut
transferes aux Nations Unies par la Societe
des Nations."
Le PRESIDENT: Je mets aux voix la resolution
presentee par la Cinquieme Commission.

((The General Assembly,
"1. Recommends that as soon as possible
after UNESCO has been definitely ~stablished,
it shall take over, in accordance with Article
XI, paragraph 2, of its Charter, such of the
functions and activities of the International
Institute of Intellectual Co-operation as may
be performed within the scope of the programme adopted at the UNESCO General
Conference, as set forth in the draft agreement
between the United Nations and UNESC0 1
under the terms of Article 63 of the United
Nations Charter;
"2. Further recommends that an agreement
be concluded between UNESCO and the Institute before 31 December 1946, in order to
facilitate the assumption by UNESCO of the
functions and activities referred to in paragraph 1 of the present resolution;
"3. Invites the Secretary-General, in order
to ensure, under the auspices of UNESCO,
the continuity of the work performed by the
International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation, to authorize UNESCO to utilize
the assets of the Institute transferred by the
League of Nations to the United Nations."
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to, the vote the resolution ,submitted by the
Fifth Committee.
Decision: T he resolution was adopted unanimously.
1

Documents A/77, Aj77/Corr.l, and A/77/Corr. 2.

Decision:

La resolution est adoptee a l'una-

nimite.
'Documents A/77, Aj77/Corr.l, A/77/Corr. 2.

i.

Forty-ninth Plenary Meeting

984

115. Travelling expenses of members of
Commissions of the Economic and
Social Council: report of the Fifth
Committee:
resolution
(document

A/197)

,

19 November 1946

115. Frais de deplacement des membres
des Commissions du Conseil economique et social.
Rapport de la
Cinquieme Commission. Resolution
(document AI 197>

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the report of
the Fifth Committee on the travelling expenses
of members of Commissions of the Economic and
Social Council (annex 35).
I call upon Mr. Aghnides, Rapporteur.

Le PRESIDENT: Le point suivant a l'ordre du
jour est le rapport de la Cinquieme Commission
sur les frais de deplacement des membres des
commissions du Conseil economique et social
(annexe 35).
Je donne la parole a M. Aghnides, Rapporteur.

Mr. AGHNIDES (Greece), Rapporteur: Our
Committee had two proposals before it, the one
containing the resolution from the Economic and
Social Council; and th~ other, the proposal from
the United States of America. After discussion,
the Fifth Committee rejected the resolution of
the Economic and Social Council by twentyeight votes to five. It then took a second vote,
when it adopted the first part of the United
States proposal. I am now going to read to you
the text of the resolution:

M. AGHNIDES (Grece), Rapporteur (traduit
de l'anglais): Notre Commission a ete saisie de
deux propositions. L'une contient la resolution
presentee par le Conseil economique et social;
l'autre emane de la. delegation des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique. Apres discussion,. la Cinquieme
Commission a rejete la resolution du Conseil
econonomique et social par vingt-huit voix
contrecinq. Puis, Et. la suite d'un second vote,
elIe a adopte la premiere partie de la proposition
des Etats- Unis. J e vais vous donner lecture du
texte de cette resolution:
"L'AssembUe generale decide:
"Les frais de transport reels exposes par
les membres des Commissions et des SousCommissions du Conseil economique et social
pour se rendre aux reunions des Commissions
et des Sous-Commissions et pour en revenir,
ainsi que les frais reels exposes au cours de
missions confiees a l'occasion des travaux de
ces Commissions et Sous-Commissions, seront
supportes par le budget des Nations Unies.
Les indemnites pour frais de voyage a1ler et
retour allouees aux membres assistant aux
reunions des Commissions et Sous-Commissions s'elevent au plus au montant du transport en premiere classe, selon un itineraire
approuve, de la capitale de l'Etat Membre au
lieu ou doit se reunir la Commission ou la
Sous-Commission; il ne sera pas verse d'indemnites de subsistance, sauf lorsque ces frais
figureront au tarif' officiel des premieres classes
des transports publics. Le remboursement des
frais de voyage exposes par chacun des Etats
Membres s'efl'ectuera par deduction sur la:
contribution annuelle."·
.

"The General Assembly resolves that:
"The actual travelling expenses of members
of Commissions and Sub-Commissions of the
Economic and Social Council to and from
meetings of the Commissions or Sub-Commissions and actual expenses for travel on
business of the Commissions or Sub-Commissions shall be borne by the budget of the
United Nations. The maximum travelling
allowances to and from meetings of each
Commission or Sub-Commission shall be restr{cted to the equivalent of first-class accommodation by recognized public transport via
an approved route from the capital city of
the Member State to the place where the
Commission or Sub-Commission is meeting,
and shall not include the payment of subsistence except where this is included as an integral part of the regular posted schedule for
first-class accommodation for recognized public transport. Actual travelling expenses shall
be reimbursed to each Member by means of
an adjustment in the Member's annual contribution."
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put the resolution to the vote.

Le PRESIDENT: Je mets aux voix la resolution.

Decision: The resolution was adopted unanimously.

Decision: La resolution est adoptee a l'unanimite.

116. National Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies: report of the Third Committee: resolution (document A/192)

116. Societes nationales de la CroixRouge et du Croissant-Rouge. Rapport de .Ia Troisieme Commission.
Resolution (document A/192)
Le PRESIDENT: Nous alions discuter maintenant le rapport de la Troisieme Commission sur
les organisations nationales de la Croix-Rouge
et du Croissant-Rouge (annexe 36).
Je donne la parole a Mme Lionaes, representante de la Norvege, rapporteur.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the report of the
Third Committee on National Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies (annex 36).
I call upon Mrs. Lionaes, representative of
Norway, Rapporteur of the Third Committee.

19 novembre 1946

985

Mrs. LIONAES (Norway), Rapporteur: On
behalf of the Third Committee, I present to the
General Assembly the resolution on National
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

You all know the wonderful work undertaken
by these societies in peacetime as well as during
the war. This work is one of the noblest manifestations of the solidarity of mankind: namely,
the improvement of health, the prevention of
.. disease, and the mitigation of suffering throughout the world. The work of international solidarity achieved by these societies effectively
assists the idea of understanding and peace
between nations.
Considering the invaluable help of the National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in
the matter of humanitarian needs, the Third
Committee of the General Assembly unanimously
adopted the resolution submitted by the Belgian
delegation concerning these societies. This resolution requests that at all times the independent
voluntary nature of the National Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies be resp:ected, and that
the necessary steps be taken so that contact may
be maintained between these societies of all
countries.
The text of the resolution is as follows:
«The General Assembly draws ~he attentiQn
of the Members of the United Nations to the
fact that the following purposes are of special
concern, namely:
"( a) That the said Members should encourage and promote the establishment and
co-operation of duly authorized voluntary
National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies;
"( b) That at all times the independent
voluntary nature of the National Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies be respected in
all circumstances, provided they are recognized by their Governments and carry on
their work according to the principles of the
Geneva and The Hague Conventions and in
the humanitarian spirit of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent;
"( c) That the necessary steps be taken to
ensure that in all circumstances contact may
be maintained between the National Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies of all countries, so as to enable them to carry out their
humanitarian task."

Quarante-neuvieme seance pleniere

Mme LIONAES (Norvege), Rapporteur (traduit de l' anglais): Au nom de la Troisieme
Commission, j'ai l'honneur de soumettre a. l'Assembl6e gencrale une resolution concemant les
societes nationales de la Croix-Rouge et du
Croissant-Rouge.
Vous connaissez tous l'reuvre adniirable accomplie par ces societ~s en temps de paix, comme
en temps de guerre .. Cette reuvre est l'une des
plus nobles manifestations de la solidarite humaine; elle a contribue, dans le monde entier,
a amcliorer les conditions sanitaires, a prevenir
les maladies et a atMnuer les souffrances.
L'ceuvre de solidarite internationale accomplie
par ces \ocietes est un puissant facteur de comprehension et d'entente entre les nations.
Considerant !'aide inestimable apportee par
les soci6tes nationales de la Croix-Rouge et du
Croissant-Rouge au soulagement des miseres
humaines, la Troisieme Commission de I'Assemblee generale a adopte a l'unanimite une resoI ution, relative a. ces societes, presentee par la
delegation belge. Cette resolution demande que
soit respecte a tout moment le caractere autonome et benevole des societes nationales de la
Croix-Rouge et du Croissant-Rouge et que soient
prises les mesures necessaires pour maintenir le
contact entre ces societcs dans tous les pays.
Je donne lecture de cette resolution:
"DAssemblie generale appelle l'attention
des Membres des Nations Unies sur l'interet
tout particulier qui s'attache a ce que:
"a) Les Etats Membres encouragent et
favorisent la creation de soci6tes nationales
de la Croix-Rouge et du Croissant-Rouge de
caractere bCnevole et dllment autorisees ainsi
que leur cooperation;
<Cb) Soit respecte en tout temps et en toute
circonstance le caractere autonome et benevole des societes nationales de la Croix-Rouge
et du Croissant-Rouge, a condition que ces
societes soient reconnues par leurs Gouvemements et exercent leur activitc conformement
aux principes des Conventions de Geneve et
de La Haye et dans l'esprit humanitaire de la
Croix-Rouge et du Croissant-Rouge;
"c) Soient prises les mesures necessaires
pour maintenir en toutes circonstances le contact entre les societes nationales de la CroixRouge et du Croissant-Rouge de tous les pays,
de fa~on El leur permettre d'accomplir leur
ceuvre humanitaire."

The PRESIDENT (translated from French)·: I
put the resolution to the vote.
Decision:The resolution was adopted unanimously.

Le PRESIDENT: Je mets la resolution aux
voix.
Decision: La resolution est adoptee l'unanirnite.
.

117. Application of Articles 11 and 12 of
the Statute of the International Court
of Justice: report of the Sixth Committee: resolution (document A/191J

117. Application des Articles 11 et 12 du
. Statut de la eour internationale de
Justice. Rapport de la Sixieme Commission. Resolution (document AI
191)
Le PRESIDENT: Le point suivant a l'ordre du
jour est le rapport de la Sixieme Commission

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the report of

a

1

,·1'1"

Forty-ninth Plenary Meeting

19 November 1946,

986

the Sixth Committee on the application of
Articles 11 and 12 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice (annex 37).
I call upon Mr. Bailey, representative of Australia, Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee.

sur l'application des Articles 11 et 12 du Statut
de la Cour internationale de Justice (annexe 37).

Mr. BAILEY (Australia) Rapporteur: The
report of the Sixth Committee is technical. It
has been before Members of the Assembly. I
think the Chair will not wish me to read more
than the resolution which appears in paragraph
8 of the report:

M. BAILEY (Australie), Rapporteur (traduit
de l'anglais): Le rapport de la Sixieme Commission est de nature technique. 11 a ete distribue aux Membres de l'Assemblee. Je pense done
que le President me permettra de ne donner
lecture que du texte de la resolution qui figure
au paragraphe 8 du rapport de la Commission:

«The General Assembly,

Je donne la parole a M. Bailey, representant
de l'Australie, Rapporteur.

"D Assemblee generale,

«Approves the report on the application of
Articles 11 and 12 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice presented by the
Sixth Committee;
.
«Resolves to adopt provisionally, and subject to the concurrence of the Security Council, the following rule of procedure:

. uJ1pprouv,e le rapport de la Sixieme Commission sur l'application des Articles 11 et 12
du Statut de la Cour internationale de Justice;

Rule 99a
"Any meeting of the General Assembly
held in pursuance of the Statute of the International Court of Justice for the purpose
of the election of members of the Court shall
continue until as many candidates as are
required for all the seats to be filled have
obtained in one or more ballots an absolute
majority of votes.
«Transmits the foregoing rule to the Security Council for its consideration."

Article 99a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put the resolution to the vote.

Decision: The resolution was adopted unani-

"Decide d'adopter provisoirement, et sous
reserve de l'avis conforme du Conseil de securite, l'article suivant:

"Toute seance de l'AssembIee generale
tenue conformement au Statut de la Cour internationale de Justice pour proceder a l'electipn de membres de la Cour, se poursuivra
jusqu'a ce que la majorite absolue des voix
soit allee, en un ou plusieurs tours de scrutin,
a autant de candidats qu'll sera necessaire
pour que tous les sieges vacants soient pourvus.
"8oumet l'artic1e ci-dessus a l'examen du
Conseil de securite."
Le PRESIDENT: Je mets aux voix la resolution.

Decision: La resolution est adoptee a l'una-

mously.

nimiti.

118. Transfer to the United Nations of
powers exercised by the League of
Nations under the International
Agreements, Conv'entions and Protocols on Narcotic Drugs: report of the
Third Committee: resolution (document. AI 194)

118. Transfert aux Nations Unies des
pouvoirs exerces par la Societe des
Nations en vertu des accords, conventions et protocoles internationaux sur
les stupefiants.
Rapport de la
Troisieme Commission.
Resolution
(document A/194)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the report of
the Third Committee on the transfer to the
United Nations of powers exercised by the
League of Nations under the International
Agreements, Conventions and protocols on Narcotic Drugs (annex 38).
I call upon Mrs. Lionaes, Rapporteur.

Le PRESIDENT: Le point suivant a l'ordre du
jour est le rapport de laTroisieme Commission
sur le transfert des pouvoirs exerces par la Societe
des Nations en vertu des accords, conventions et
protocoles internationaux sur les stupefiants
(annexe 38).

Mrs. LIONAES (Norway), Rapporteup: In
introducing the report of the Third Committee,
I should like to say a few words ab~ut the importance and urgency of the matter before us.

Mme LIONAES (Norvege), Rapporteur (traduit de l'anglais): En presentant le rapport de
la Troisieme Commission, je voudrais ajouter
quelqo.es mots sur l'importance et l'urgence du
probleme qui se presente a nous.
Le controle international des stupe£iants, et
l'administration internationale qui fonctionne
dans ce domaine sont maintenant fondes sur unc
resolution du Conseil economique et social du
16 fevriei: 1946, etablissant la Commission des

The international control of narcotics and the
international administration functioning in that
field are now based on the resolution of the
Economic and Social Council of 16 February
1946, establishing the Commission on Narcotic

Je donne la parole a Mme Lionaes, Rapporteur.

, 9 novembre 1946

987

Drugs, and on the six international treaties mentioned in the document before us.
Seventy countries are bound by one or more
of these treaties which, together with the conventions creating the International Postal Union
and the Red Cross, belong to the most widely
ratified international treaties.
The full application of five of the narcotic
treaties required concurrent action by some of
the organs of the League of Nations, such as its
Council, its Opium Advisory Committee and
the Secretary-General.
The League having been dissolved, it was
necessary, first, to take provisional measures to
ensure the continuity of the international control
of narcotics and, secondly, to make the necessary
changes in the texts of the treaties with a view to
substituting for the League organs the corresponding organ of the United Nations.
With regard to the provisional measures necessary to ensure the continuity of the international control, I wish to mention the excellent
way in which the Secretary-General, acting in
accordance with the decisions taken by the
General Assembly during the first part of its
present session, made all the provisional arrangements required. Thus, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs will meet shortly at Lake Success,
and the Permanent Central Opium Board and
the Supervisory Body, constituted under the
1925 and 1931 Conventions respectively, continue to function without interruption.
With regard to the changes in the international treaties, the Economic and Social Council
and its Drafting Committee examined most carefully the amendments to be made and asked
the Secretariat to scrutinize the work done by
them and to call the attention of t~e Assembly
to any further changes that might be necessary.
The result of their work was embodied in
documents which were submitted to the Third
and Sixth Committees of the Assembly. In its
excellent report to the Third Committee, the
Sixth Committee, having suggested some slight
amendments, declared itself entirely satisfied as
regards the legal aspects of the draft Protocol
and its annex. Whereupon, the Third Committee approved the report now before the Assembly containing a draft resolution together with
a draft Protocol and annex as drawn up by the
Economic and Social Council, in which the
changes recommended by the Sixth Committee
have been taken into account.

I should like to congratulate and thank the
Economic and Social Council, its Drafting
Committee and the Secretariat for the work
they have accomplished. '
To provide a legal basis for the international
control of narcotics, we are required, however,

Quarante-neuvieme seance pleniere

stupefiants, et sur les six traites intemationaux
qui sont mentionnes dans le document qui nous
est soumis.
Soixante-dix pays sont lies par un ou plusieurs
de ces traites qui, avec les conventions qui ont
cree l'Union postale universelle et la CroixRouge, font partie des traitcs internationaux
ayant recueilli le plus grand nombre de ratifications.
L'application integrale de cinq des traites sur
les stupefiants exigeait une action commune de
certains organes de la Societe des Nations, tels
que le Conseil, la Commission consultative de
l'opium, et le Secretaire general.
La Societe des Nations ayant ete dissoute, il a
ete necessaire, tout d'abord, de prendre des mesures provisoires pour assurer la continuite du
controle international des stupefiants; et, en second lieu, de proceder aux modifications necessaires dans les textes des traites; en vue de
substituer 'aux organes de la Societe des Nations,
l'organe correspondant des Nations Unies.
En ce qui concerne les mesures provisoires
necessaires pour assurer la continuite du controle international, je voudrais mentionner l'excellent travail qu'a accompli le Secrctaire general
en prenant taus les arrangements provisoires requis conformement aux decisions adoptees par
l'Assemblee generale au cours de la premiere
partie de la presente session. C'est ainsi que la
Commission des stupefiants se reunira d'iei peu
a Lake Success et que le Comite central permanent de l'opium, de mcme que l'organe de controle constitues en vertu des conventions de 1925
et de 1931 respectivement, continueront a fonctionner sans interruption.
En ce qui concerne les modifications a apporter aux traites internationaux, le Conseil economique et social et son Comite de redaction ont
examine avec beaucoup de soin les amendements
qui doivent etre adoptes et ont demande au
Secretariat d'etudier le travail auquel ils se sont
livres en le priant d'attirer l'attention de l'Assemblee sur tous les autres changements qui pourraient etre necessaires.
Le resultat de leur travail est consigne dans
les documents soumis a la Troisicme et a la
Sixieme Commission de l'Assemblee. Dans son
excellent rapport a la Troisieme Commission,
la Sixieme Commission suggerant quelques
amcndements d'ordre secondaire, se declare
pleinement satisfaite quant aux aspects juridiques du projet de Protocole et de son
annexe. Rnfin, la Troisieme Commission a
approuve le rapport dont l'Assemblee est maintenant saisie et qui contient un projet de resolution et un projet de Protocole accompagne d'une
annexe, tel qu'il avait et€- redige par le COl1sell
economique et social; ces textes tiennent compte
des changements recommandcs par la Sixicrne
Commission.
Je tiens· a Wiciter et a remercier le Conseil
economique et social, son Comite de redaction
et le Secretariat pour le travail qu'ils ont ainsi
accompli.
Cependant, si nous voulons donner une base
juridique au controle international des stupe-

1

.

,"';

.,.

Forty~ninth

Plenary Meeting

988

19 November 1946

fiants, nous ne devons pas nous borner a approuvcr le rapport, le Protocole et son annexe; nous
devons veiller a ce que ces textes entrent en
vigueur a bref delai.
L'article 7 du Protocole indique que les amenArticle 7 of the Protocol provides that the
amendments to the international treaties on nar- dements aux traites internationaux sur les stupecotics shall come into force when a majority of fiants entreront en vigueur lorsqu'une majorite
the parties to each treaty have become parties des parties a chaque accord aura egalement
adhere au Protocole.
to the Protocol.
Le Conseil economique et social demande
The Economic and Social Council has therefore urged and the Third Committee also joins done instamment, et la Troisieme Commission
in this request, that the Protocol be signed with~ s'associe a cette demande, que le Protocole soit
out delay; the Secretary-General has asked signe sans delai. Le Secretaire general a prie
all Members of the United Nations to give their tous les Membres des Nations Unies de danDer a
representatives at the present session full powers leurs representants ala presente session des pleins
to this effect. If, as requested by the Economic pouvoirs a cet effet. Si tous les Etats Membres
and Social Council, all Member ~tates of the des Nations Unies, parties aux conventions interUnited Nations parties to international conven- nationales sur les stupefiants, signent le Protocole
tions on narcotics signed the Protocol at the au cours de la session actuelle, comme le depresent session, it would enter into force immedi- mande le Conseil economique et social, celui-ci
ately, and the international control of narcotic entrera immediatement en vigueur et le contr61e
drugs, which has so far yielded remarkably good international des stupefiants, qui a donne jusqu'a
results, would be continued without interruption. present des resultats remarquables, continuera
sans interruption.
J'ai l'honneur de soumettre a l' Assemblee
I now submit the report ,of the Third Committee, together with the report of the Sixth generale le rapport de la Troisieme CommisCommittee, the' resolution, the Protocol and its sion, avec le rapport de la Sixieme Commission,
la resolution et le projet de Protocole et son
annex for the approval of the Assembly.
annexe.
to do more than approve the report and the
Protocol and its annex. We shall have to see to
it that the latter enter into force without delay.

The PRFJ>IDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Tesemma, representative of
Ethiopia.

Le PRESIDE:NT: Je donne la parole a M.
Tesemma, representant de l'Ethiopie.

M. TESEMMA (Ethiopie) (traduit de l'angMr. TEsEMMA (Ethiopia): The Ethiopian
Government has for many years followed with lais): Le Gouvernement de I'Ethiopie suit avec
the closest attention the international efforts for la plus grande attention, depuis de nombreuses
the repression of the illicit traffic in drugs and annees, les efforts entrepris dans le domaine innarcotics, and desires in all ways to bring its ternational pour reprimer le commerce illicite
fullest co-operation to the successful achieve- des stupefiants; il desire apporter, de toutes les
ment of all the high ideals which have domin- manieres, sa plus complete collaboration, afin
ated the efforts in this field for well over a d'atteindre l'ideal eleve qui a inspire ces efforts
depuis un siecle.
century.
,
Par suite de la guerre, la position exacte de
Owing to various wartime conditions, the
status of the basic narcotic Conventions of 1912, l'Ethiopie a l'egard des Conventions de base de
1925, 1931 and 1936 has not been clear as 1912, 1925, 1931 et 1936, n'a pas toujours ete
regards the position of Ethiopia. In order to bien .comprise. Pour rendre notre situation
clarify this situation and to remove all possible tout a fait claire et ecarter tous 1es obstacles a
obstacles to a world-wide control of drugs and . un contr61e mondial des stupefiants, le Gounarcotics, the Ethiopian Government has vernement de I'Ethiopie m'a autorise a inforauthorized me to inform this Assembly of its mer l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies de
intention to adhere to the aforementioned Con- son intention d'adherer aux Conventions que
ventions. The Protocol which is now open for je viens de citer. Le Protocole qui est maintesignature by the Members of the United nant ouvert a la signature des Membres des NaNations quite properly provides for amend- tions Unies prevoit tfes opportunement la possiments to those Conventions so as to permit bilite d'amender certaines de ces Conventions,
the accession of States which were not originally de maniere a permettre aux Etats qui n,en
contracting parties. It is, of course, essential that etaient pas signataires a l'origine d'y adherer
this Protocol should enter into force before it maintenant. I1 est essentiel que le Protocole
would be possible for those States not originally entre en vigueur rapidement, afin que les Etats
contracting parties to adhere to the Conventions. qui n'adheraient pas aux Conventions a l,origine
puissent les accepter aujourd'hui.
In view of these circumstances, I take great
C'est pourquoi j'ai le plaisir d'informer I'Aspleasure in informing the Assembly that the semblee generale que le Gouvernement de
Ethiopian Government. hereby declares its in- l'Ethiopie a l'intention d'adherer aux Conventention of acceding. to the Conventions on opium tions sur les stupefiants des 23 janvier 1912, 19
and other narcotic drugs of 23 January 191 2, . £.evrier 19'25, 13 juillet 1931, 26 juin 1936. Il
19 February 1925, 13 July 1931, 26 June 1936, adhCrera a ceS Conventions auusit6t que le Pro-

19 novembre 1946

989

Quarante-neuvieme seance pleniere

as soon as the Protocol approved by this ABsembly has entered into force. The Ethiopian
Government will also at that time sign and accept the Protocol I have just mentioned.

tocole adopte par l'AssembIee generaIe sera entre
en vigueur. Le Gouvernement ethiopien signera
et :;l.cceptera au meme moment le Protocole auquel je viens de me referer.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Noel-Baker, representative of the
United Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
M. Noel-Baker, representant du Royaume-Uni.

M. NOEL-BAKER (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je desire, au nom du Gouvernement
et de la delegation britanniques, remercier
Mme Lionaes pour son rapport, appuyer tres
chaudement sa declaration, et feliciter avec elle
la Sixieme Commission du remarquable travail
accompli. Je tiens aussi a feliciter le professeur
Bailey, avo<;at general du Gouvernement australien, qui a rempli les fonctions de Rapporteur
de cette importante Commission. Je me rejouis
egalement de l'adhesion de l'Ethiopie aux
Conventions sur le trafic des stupefiants; ceux
qui connaissent cette question s'accorderont en
efIet avec moi pour estimer cette adhesion
comme .particulierement importante.
Au cours de la premiere partie de la presente
At the first part of its session in London, the
Assembly recognized that the post-war narcotic session de l'Assemblee generale a Londres, il a
problem was urgently important in many parts ete reconnu que la question des stupefiants avait
of the world, and for that reason definitely pris, apres la guerre, un caractere d'urgence et
established the Narcotics Commission, the only· d'importance en beaucoup de pays du monde.
body of this kind which we set up there. My En consequence, l' Assemblee a decide alors, de
delegation is extremely anxious, as every other constituer une Commission des stupefiants le
delegation is, I am sure, that there should be no seul organisme de cette nature que nous ayons
institue a Londres. Nous desirons vivement,
break in the control of the drug traffic.
comme toutes les, delegations, j' en suis certain,
qu'il n'y ait aucune interruption dans le contr6le
du trafic des stupefiants.
La Societe des Nations, comme l'a observe
The League of Nations, as Mrs. Lionaes has
said, did obtain very great results before the war. Mme Lionaes, a obtenu, avant la guerre, des
It is believed, indeed, according to reliable sta- resultats fort satisfaisants. On estime, en efIet,
tistics, that it reduced the illicit international selon des statistiques dignes de foi," que -la Sotrade in drugs by something like ninety per cent ciete des Nations a reduit dans la proportion de
or even more; that is to say, reduced it to one- 90 pour cent, ou peut-etre meme davantage, le
tenth of what it had been before the League's trafic illicite international des stupefiants; c'estwork was undertaken.
a-dire qu'une telle action a ramene ce trafic a un
dixieme du montant qu'il atteignait avant que
la Societe des Nations se fut mise a l'reuvre.
Ainsi que Mme Lionaes et le representant de
As Mrs. Lionaes and the Ethiopian representative have said, the Protocol must come into l'Ethiopie l'ont declare, il est necessaire que le
force to provide a legal basis for the work of the Protocole entre en vigueur afin que nous ayons
Commission. The Commission is to meet again une base juridique precise pour le travail de la
on 27 November, and we hope that the Protocol Commission. La Commission des stupefiants doit
may be in force by then, or as soon as possible se reunir a"nouveau le 27 novembre et nous esperons que le Protocole sera en vigueur a cette
thereafter.
date ou aussitot que possible apres.
Trente-cinq signatures sont requises en reThirty-five signatures are required in response
to the invitation of the Secretary-General. I have ponse a l'invitation du Secretaire general. rai
full power from my Government to sign this les pleins pouvoirs de mon Gouvernement pour
Protocol, and I intend to do so before the end of signer ce Protocole. Je compte le faire avant la
the Assembly. I hope that thirty-four other fin de l'Assemblee et j'espere que les trentequatre autres delegations feront de meme.
delegations will do the same.
Mr. NOEL-BAKER (United Kingdom): I
want, on behalf of my Government and delegation, to thank Mrs. Lionaes for her report, to
endorse very warmly what she has said, to join
with her in expressing appreciation of the work
done by the Sixth Committee, and in particular
our gratitude to the Solicitor-General of Australia, Professor Bailey, who acted as Rapporteur on this important subject. I should like also
to welcome, very warmly, the adhesion of Ethiopia to the drug traffic Conventions, an adhesion
which I think those who know the matter will
agree is of particular importance.

a.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. van Kleffens, representative of the
Netherlands.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. van Kleffens, representant des Pays-Bas.

Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): Thirtyfour years ago the foundation for an interna-

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de
l'anglais): I1 y a trente-quatre ans, la campagne

4
990

Forty-ninth Plenary Meeting

tional campaign against the abuse of narcotic
drugs was laid at The Hague, when the Opium
Convention of 1912 was signed.
Ever since those days the Netherlands Government has been greatly interested in the progress
of the struggle to rid humanity of the abuse
of narcotic drugs. The achievements of the
League of Nations in this field were among its
mogt successful contributions. It is therefore
gratifying to see that one of the first practical
measures taken by the Economic and Social
Council was to continue the work of the League
of Nations, to draw up the Protocol that is now
before us, to legalize the transfer to the United
Nations of the functions and powers of the
League of Nations under the different Conventions on narcotic drugs.
One of the characteristics of the Conventions
on, narcotic drugs was that they were among
those most widely accepted. To be effective, this
had to be so.
It is the sincere hope of the Netherlands Government that all parties to the Conventions of
1925, 1931 and 1936 will sign the Protocol
,vithin a short period of time and bring it into
force, so as to re-establish the system of effective
control of opium and narcotic drugs that existed
before the war.
The Netherlands delegation will recommend
to its Government to sign the Protocol at a
very early date, if possible during the present
Assembly.

19 November 1946

internationale contre l'abus des stupefiants a
commence par la signature a La Haye, en 1912,
de la Convention de l'opium.
Depuis lors, le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a
suivi avec grand interet les progres de l'ceuvre
entreprise pour delivrer l'humanite de l'abus des
stupefiants. Les realisations de la Societe des
Nations dans ce domaine constituent l'une des
parties les plus constructives de son ceuvre. On
constate donc avec satisfaction que l'une des
premieres mesures effectives prises par le Conseil
economique et social consiste a poursuivre
l'ceuvre de la Societe des Nations, et a etablir, a
cette fin, le Protocole qui nous est presente et
qui doit consacrer juridiquement le transfert aux
Nations Unies des fonctions et pouvoirs exerces
par la Societe des Nations aux termes des diverses Conventions sur les stupefiants.
Les Conventions sur les stupe£iants possedent
cette caracteristique de figurer parmi les accords
qui portent le plus grand nombre de signatures.
11 doit en etre ainsi pour que ces Conventions
soient efficaces.
L'espoir sincere du Gouvernement des PaysBas est que toutes les parties aux Conventions de
1925, de 1931 et de 1936 signent le Protocole
a bref delai et le mettent en vigueur de maniere
a retablir le systeme de controle efficace de
l'opium et des autres stupefiants qui existaient
avant la guerre.
La delegation des Pays-Bas recommandera a
son Gouvernement de signer le Protocole a bref
delai et si possible an cours de la presente
Assemblee.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Quo Tai-chi, representative of
China.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Quo
Tai-chi, representant de la Chine.

Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China): The Chinese
Government has consistently supported the system of international control of narcotic drugs.,
It is a system which has been built up step by
step for over thirty years, and which we consider essential to the well-being of mankind.

I am in a position to announce to the Assembly that the Chinese Government will be among
the first to sign tIlls new Protocol.

M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine) (traduit de ranglais): La Chine a donne un appui constant au
systeme international de controle des stupefiants,
systeme qui a ete construit, element par element,
au cours de trente annees et plus, et que nous
considerons comme essentiel pour le bien-etre de
l'humanite.
La delegation chinoisc a participe d'une maniere active a la creation de la Commission des
stupefiants ainsi qu'aux discussions relatives aux
mesures destinees a transferer aux Nations Unies
les fonctions exercees dans ce domaine par la
Societe des Nations. Nous avons ecoute avec
interet l'excellent rapp~rt de Mme Lionaes an
nom de la Troisieme Commission. Nous demandons instamment que l'Assemblee agisse avec
rapidite en adoptant le projet de resolution et en
approuvant le projet de Protocole et ses annexes.
De telles decisions sont necessa,ires, car le fonctionnement ciu systeme de controle doit se poursuivre sans interruption.
Je suis en mesure d'annoncer a l'Assemblee
que le Gouvernement chinois sera parmi les premiers a signer le nouveau Protocole.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mrs. Roosevelt, representative of the
United States of America.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a Mme
Roosevelt, representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

The Chinese delegation has taken an active
part in the work of establishing the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, and in the consideration of
the steps to effect the transfer to the United
Nations of the functions which the League of
Nations exercised. We have listened with interest
to the excellent report of Mrs. Lionaes on behalf
of the Third Committee, and we urge prompt
action by this Assembly in adopting the draft
resolution and in approving the draft Protocol
with'its annex. This is necessary because the
functions and the system of control must go on
without interruption.

,

,
991

'19 novembre 1946

Mrs. ROOSEVELT (United States of America): My delegation has felt that it wanted
to say a word on this very important subject.
There has been great interest on the part of the
United States from the very beginning in this
question of narcotic drug control. We have participated actively in the work. We are keenly
appreciative of the work which has been done
by the Economic and Social Council and the
Secretariat of the League of' Nations, and of
that which is now being carried on by the
Secretariat of the United Nations.
When communications were disrupted by the
second world war, and work could not be carried
on in Geneva, the Permanent Central Opium
Board and the Supervisory Body found a home
in the United States, and we were glad to have
the opportunity of showing tangible appreciation
of the value of the work which had been done.

It is generally recognized that the League of
Nations has done an extraordinarily good job
in the field of narcotic drug control. It is essential, in order not to have a break in that work,
that the United Nations should take it over. For
that reason the steps that were necessary to
make this possible had to be undertaken now.
The international Agreements, Conventions and
Protocols are now consolidated in a new Protocol drawn up hy th~ Secretary-General. Upon
approval by the General Assembly, this Protocol
will be open for signature. It is hoped that the
signatures will be appended here, because it will
be so much easier if that is done. The United
States expects to sign th~ Protocol, subject, of
course, to the subsequent Congressional ratification.

We strongly urge that all the other Members
of the United Nations should sign th~ Protocol
during this session of the General Assembly. This
work must go on for the good of the people of
the world, and we feel sure that the United
Nations will continue it with the full support of
all of us.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There are no more speakers on my list. I put to
the vote the report of the Third Committee, the
draft resolution, the Protocol and annex, together
with the report of the Sixth Committee. Is there
any objection?

Decision:

The

documents were

adopted

Quarante-neuvieme seance pleniere

Mme ROOSEVELT (Etats-Unis d'Amerique)
(traduit de l' anglais): Ma delegation desire
ajouter quelques mots sur ce tres important sujet.
Les Etats-Unis ont suivi des le debut, av-ec grand
interet, cette question du contr6le des stupcfiants. Nous avons pris une part active a cette
tache. Nous apprccions vivement l'reuvre accomplie par le Conseil economique et social et par
le Secretariat de la Societe des Nations, et qui
est maintenant poursuivie par le Secretariat des
Nations Unies.
Lorsque les communications ont cte interrompues du fait de la deuxieme guerre mondiale et
que cette reuvre n'a pu se poursuivre a Geneve,
le Comite social permanent de l'opium et l'Organe de controle des stupefiants se sont etablis
aux Etats-Unis; nous avons ete heureux d'avoir
ainsi l'occasion de montrer de fa<;on tangible
combien nous appreeions le travail accompli
dans ce domaine.
L'on s'accorde generalement a reconnaitre que
la Societe des Nations a accompli une reuvre
particulierement remarquable dans le domaine
du controle des stupefiants. 11 est indispensable,
pour eviter une discontinuite, que l'Organisation
des Nations Unies poursuive une telle action. I1
fallait done que les mesures necessaires a cette
fin fussent entreprises des maintenant. Les accords, conventions et protocoles internationaux
existants ont ete groupes dans un nouveau Protocole redige par le Secretaire general. Ce Protocole, une fois que l'Assemblee generale l'aura
approuve, sera ouvert aux signatures. I1 faut
esperer que les signatures seront apposees au
cours de la presente session, ce qui simplifierait
considCrablement la procedure. La delegation
des Etats-Unis est disposee a signer le Protocole,
sous reserve, bien entendu, d'une ratification
ulterieure par le Congres.
Nous demandons avec insistance a tous les
autres Membres de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, de signer le Protocole au caurs de la presente session de l'AssemblCe generale. 11 s'agit
d'une a:uvre qui doit se poursuivre pour le bien
de tous les peuples du monde, et nous sommes
certains que l'Organisation des Nations Unies
tiendra a poursuivre cette a:uvre avec le plein
concours de tous ses Membres~

, I

Le PRESIDENT: 11 n'y a plus d'orateur inscrit.

Je roets aux voix le rapport de la Troisieme
Commission, le projet de resolution, le Protoco1e
et son annexe ainsi que le rapport de la Sixieme
Commission. 11 n'y a pas d'opposition?

Decision: Les documents sont adoptes

a

unanimously.

l'unanimite.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Secretariat will prepare the texts of the
Protocol and of the annex for th~ signature of
the States, and will inform the delegations of
the day and time when, as well as the place
where, these documents will be open for signature.

Le PRESIDENT: Le Secretariat preparera les
textes du Protocole et de son annexe pour les
soumettre a la signature des Etats, et fera savoir
en temps opportun aux delegations le jour,
l'heure et le lieu ou le Protocole et son annexe
seront soumis a la signature des Etats.

,'.,

,

Forty-ninth Plenary Meeting

992

19 November 1946

1
,I

119. Question of the re-examination by
the Security Council of certain applications for admission to membership
in the United' Nations: report of the
First Committee: resolution (document

A/185)
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the report of the
First Committee on the question of the admission of certain States to membership in the
United Nations (annex 39).

1. call upon Mr. Viteri Lafronte, representative of Ecuador, Rapporteur of the First Committee.

119. Question d'un nouvel examen par le
Conseil de securite de cerfaines 'demandes d'admission is l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Rapport de la
Premiere Commission.
IMsolution
(document A/185)

Le PRESIDENT: Le point suivant a l'ordre du
jour est le rapport de la Premiere Commission
sur la question d'un nouvel examen par le
Conseil de securite de certaines demandes d'ad·
mission a l'Organisation des Nations Unies
(annexe 39).
Je donne la parole a M. Viteri Lafronte, representant de l'Equateur, Rapporteur de la
Premiere Commission.

M. VITERILAFRONTE (Equateur), Rapporteur
(traduit de lJanglais): Vimportante question de
l'admission des nouveaux Membres a fait l'objet
d'une etude approfondie a la Premiere Commission. Trois rapports differents ont ete
presentes par cette Commission a l'examen de
l'AssembIee; ils contiennent un expose des
differents points relatifs aux aspects principaux:
de la question.
Le premier rapport conceme les demandes
The first report concerning the admission of
the applications on which the Security Council d'admission au sujet desquelles le Conseil de sehas presented recommendations, was approved curite a presente des recommandations, il a ete
by the General Assembly in the past week. In approuve par l'AssembIee generale dans le
accordance with that project, we have had today courant de la semaine derniere. En consethe satisfaction of receiving the three new Mem- quence, nous avons aujourd'hui la satisfaction
de recevoir parrni nous' les trois nouveaux
bers of the United Nations.
Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Le deuxieme rapport, prepare et approuve par
A second report has been prepared and approved by the First COJ;nmittee. This second la Premiere Commission, a trait aux candidareport relates to the applications of some nations tures de certaines nations desireuses d'etre
which wish to be admitted as Members of the admises en qualite de Membre de l'Organisation, '
United Nations, and on the applications of candidatures sur lesquelles le Conseil de securite
which the Security Council did not make recom- n'a pas fait de recommandations.
mendations.
Le troisieme rapport, qui sera discute par la
The third report, that I shall present after
this one, concerns some rules for the admission 'suite, a trait a certaines regles relatives a l'admission denouveaux Membres dans l'avenir.
of new Members in the future.
In the present report, relating to the applicaLe rapport precite, rclatif aux candidatures
tions about which the Security Council has not sur lesquel1es le Conseil de securite n'a pas fait
made any recommendation, the following reso- de recommandations, contient la resolution
lution is presented:
suivante:
"Applications for membership in the United
"Des demandes d'adrnission comme MernNations were submitted by the People's Rebres des Nations Unies ont ete presentees par
public of Albania, the Mongolian People's
la Republique populaire d'Albanie, la RepuRepublic, the Hashemite Kingdom of Transblique populaire de Mongolie, le Royaume
jordan, Ireland and Portugal;
hachemite de Transjordanie, l'Irlande et le
Portugal;
"Le Conseil de securite, qui a examine ces
"The Security Council, which examined
demandes, n'a fait aucune recommandation
these applications, has not made any recomconcernant les Etats ci-dessus mentionnes;
mendations ;
"Etant donne que, confonnement a l'Ar. "Since membership in the United Nations
tiCle 4 de la Charte, peuvent devenir Membres
is open to all peace-loving States which accept
des Nations Unies tous les Etats pacifiques qui
the obligations contained in the Charter and
acceptent les obligations de la Charte et,
which, in the judgment of the Organization,
au jugement de l'Organisation, sont capables
are able and willing to carry out these obligations, as stated in Article 4;
de les remplir et disposes a le faire;
((ThereforeJ the General Assembly recom«En consequenceJ l' Assemblee generale remends that the Security Council re-examine
commande que le Conseil de securite examine

Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador), Rapporteur: The important matter of the admission of
new Members has been considered in the First
Committee with deep attention, and in three
different reports it has presented for the consideration of the General Assembly the different
points relating to the principal aspects of the
matter.

!
ii

1'I

:
. t,.

19 novembre 1946

993

Quarante-neuvieme seance pleni~re

de nouveau les demandes d'admission comme
.Membres des Nations Unies presentees par les
Etats ci-dessus mentionnes, en tenant compte
des titres de chacun consideres d'apres les
criteres de la Charte, tels qu'ils resultent de
l'Article 4 de la Charte."
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Arce,
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Arce, representative of Argentina. representant de l'Argentine.
M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espaMr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): The Argentine delegation will vote gnol): La delegation de l' Argentine votera la
for the resolution now being considered which resolution qui est actuellement devant l'Assemhas been approved by the Political Committee, blee, et que la Commission des questions polifollowing a discussion of proposals presented by tiques a adoptee apres avoir discute les proposithe delegations of Egypt, the Philippine Repub- tions des delegations de 1'Egypte, des Philippines
lic and Panama regarding the admission of new et du Panama relatives a l'admission de nouMembers, but will do so with one express veaux Membres; mais en votant cette resolution,
ma delegation fera une reserve expresse.
reservation.
In our view, the Security Council ought to
A notre avis, le Conseil de securite aurait dO
have made recommendations either for or against faire des recommandations pour ou contre les
the applications of Mongolia, Albania, Portu.e;al, demandes de la Mongolie, de l'Albanie, du
'Ireland and Transjordan, so that its recom- Portugal, de 1'Irlande et de la Transjordanie,
mendations could be submitted to the General afin que ces recommandations puissent etre
Assembly. In default of such recommendations, soumises a l'Assemblee generale. A defaut de
favourable or unfavourable to the claims of the recommandations, soit favorables soit defavoraapplicant States, we would have been prepared bles aux demandes d'admission des Etats postuto agree that the Security Council should submit lants, nous aurions ete disposes a accepter que le
a recommendation for postponement after con- Conseil de securite, apres avoir examine ces
sideration of the applications. What we cannot demandes, recomrnandat de les ajourner. Ce
accept is that the Security Council should con- que nous ne pouvons accepter, c'est que le
sider applications without expressing any opin- Conseil de securite examine des demandes
ion on them, thereby obliging the General d'admission, sans emettre aucun avis aleur sujet,
obligeant ainsi l'Assemblee generale a ignorer
Assembly officially to ignore them.
ces demandes.
'
11 n'est point suffisant que les divers votes du
The fact that the various votes in the Security
Council are recorded in the minutes is not suffi- I Conseil de securite figurent aux proces-verbaux.
cient. The Council must submit a formal Le Conseil doit prendre une resolution formelle.
resolution. The view that applications may be Nous paralt erronee la these selon laquelle des
considered without any formal recommendation demandes d' admission pourraient etre examinees
being made appears to us to be wrong. It is for sans qu'une recommandation formelle flit bnise
the Assembly to decide whether to accept or to a leur egard. C'est a 1'Assemblce qU'il appartient
reject applications for admission, but if they are de decider d'accepter ou de rejeter les demandes
submitted to it without any recommendation at d'admission; mais si ces dernandes sont soumises
all, whether in favour, or against or for post- a l'Assemblee sans etre accompagnees d'une recommandation que1conque-favorable, dCfavoponement, it is unable to take any decision.
rable ou tendant a l'ajournement-l'Assemblee
ne peut se prononcer.
It is an accepted principle of jurisprudence
11 resulte d'un principe general de jurispruthat a body entrusted with specific duties is, by dence que le pouvoir de celui a qui on confere
inference, competent to discharge those duties. une attribution determinee, comprend toutes les
Thus, just as the General Assembly is unable to facultes implicites necessaires pour l'exercice de
obstruct the exercise of functions proper to the cette attribution. Et, de meme que l'Assemblee
Security Council, so the latter cannot obstruct generale ne peut mettre obstacle a 1'exercice des
the exercise of the functions entrusted to the facuItes qui appartiennent en propre au Conseil
General Assembly by the Charter.
de securite, celui-ci ne peut empecher l'exercice
des attributions que la Charte confere al'Assemblee gcnerale.
This is not the place to start a discussion on
Ce n'est pas ici l'occasion d'ouvrir le debat
this point. We are content just to express our sur cette question. Nous preferons faire prendre
reservation, in order not to jeopardize the possi- acte de la reserve exprimee, de fa<;on a ne pas
bility that the proposal we are considering may exc1ure la possibiIite, pour la proposition que
help towards a favourable solution by agreement nous considerons, de recevoir une solution favobetween: this Assembly and the Security CounciL rable grace a 1'accord de cette AssembIee et du
Conseil de securite.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Je mets aux voix la resolution.
. I put the resolution to the vote.
Decision: The resolution was adopted una~i­
Decision: La resolution est adoptee a [Junamously.
nimite.
applications for membership in the United
Nations of the above-mentioned States on
their respective merits as measured by the
yardstick of the Charter, in accordance with
Article 4."

, .

.I ~

1

,.
:~

Forty-ninth Plenary Meeting

994

120. Rules governing the admission of
new Members to the United Nations:
report of the First Committee: resolution {document AI 190}
Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador), Rapporteur: The last report that I have to submit on
behalf of the First Committee concerning the
admission of new members, relates to the admission of new Members in the future (annex 40).
The resolution proposed by the First Committee
reads as follows:

"The General Assembly requests the Security Council to appoint a Committee to confer
with a Committee on procedure of the General Assembly with a view to prcparing rules
governing the admission of new I\tIembers
which will be acceptable both to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council."
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Vyshinsky, representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist RepUblics.

19 November 1946

120. Regles pour I'admission de nouveaux
Membres Cl l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Rapport de la Premiere
Commission. Resolution (document
A/190)
M. VITERI LAFRONTE (Equateur), Rapporteur (trad uit de l'anglais): Le dernier rapport
que je presente au nom de la Premiere Commission sur la question de 1'admission de nouveaux Membres, a trait a la procedure a observer
dans l' Cl venir pour cette admission (annexe 40).
Voici le texte, de la resolution proposee par la
premiere Commission:
aD Assemblee generale invite le Conseil de
securite a creer une Commission qui se concertera avec une Commission de procedure
cr6ee par l'Assemblee generale en vue de prepareI' un reglement fixant les conditions d'admission des nouveaux Membres qui puisse etre
adopte tant par l'Assemblee generale que par
le Conseil de securite."
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
M. Vychinsky, representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

M. VYCHINSKY) (Union des Repubiques sodaMr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
ReP':lblics) (translated from Russian): The listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): A l' egard
Soviet delegation takes the following stand in de la question qui est soumise actuellement a
the matter which is now awaiting decision by 1'Assemb1ee, la position de la delegation soviethe Assembly. The proposal is that the General tique est la suivante: selon la proposition dont
Assembly should recommend the Security Coun- nous sommes saisis, l'AssembIee generale devrait
cil to appoint a Committee for consultation with inviter le Conseil de securite a creel' une Commisthe Committee to be appointed in due course sion qui se concerterait avec une Commission
by the Gener<)1 Assembly, in order to establish creee par l'Assemblee generale en vue de prerul~s for the admission of new Members into pareI' un reglement pour 1'admission de nouthe Organization. Furthermore, the resolution veaux Membres au sein de l'Organisation. La'
submitted states that these rules must be accept- resolution qui nous est soumise precise d'ailleurs
able both to the Assembly and to the Security que ce reglement devra pouvoir etre adopte tant
Council.
par l' Assemblee que par le Conseil de s~curite.
On peut se demander alors; quels sont les
It may be asked: What are the grounds for
such a proposal? How far is it justified? Is motifs dont s'inspire une proposition de cc genre?
there any necessity for adopting that proposal? Dans queUe mesure est-dIe fondee? Y a-toil une
The Soviet delegation does not find a positive necessite quelconque d'adopter cette proposition?
answer to any of these three questions.
La cle1egation sovietique ne peut donner une
reponse positive it aucune de ces trois questions.
Les Articles 21 et 30 de la Charte disposent
Articles 21 and 30 of the Charter state that
the Assembly and the Security Council shall each que tant l' Assemblee que le Conseil de securite
adopt their own rules of procedure. Now, how- etablissent eux-memes leur reglement interieur.
ever, a completely new arrangement is proposed: Or, id, on nous propose une procedure toute
the formation of some sort of mixed committee nouvelle; on nous propose de creer une sorte de
which, at variance, or in any event not in commission mixte qui serait chargee d'elaborer
accordance with the arrangement provided by un reglement nouveau pour l'admission de
the Charter, will have to devise new rules of nouveaux Membres au sein de l'Organisation,
procedure for the admission of new Members ce qui constituerait une derogation a la prointo the Organization.
cedure prevue par la Charte ou, en tout cas, ne
acrait pas conforme a celle-ci.
On peut se demander alors: Quel est ce nouIt may be asked: What are these rules? Who
proposed them? Where is the draft of these veau reglement? Quels sont ses auteurs? Ou est
rules? In order to decide that it is necessary to cc projet de reglement? Avant de decider s'il est
elect a Committee with such terms of reference, necessaire de Creel' une Commission ayallt ce
it is advisable to investigate, to know before': ma,ndat, il faut etudier la question, il faut s'ashan?, that certai~ proposals exist, certain drafts, rmrer qu'il existe une proposition, un projet,
projects and plans, which the Committee must une ebauche ou un plan que la Commission
investigate. It is only by that means that a pourrait examiner. Ce n'est que dans cc cas
decision can be reached. But there is no pro- qu'on pourrait prendre cette decision. Or" i1 n'y
ject, no plan, no proposal and no draft, and a ni ebauche, ni plan, ni proposition, ni projet.
,!

»

19 novembre 1946

995

Quarante-neuvieme seance pleniere

there will only be a Committee which will 11 n'y aurait done qu'une Commission ayant
have carte blanche and consequently will do as carte blanche et pouvant, par consequent, faire
its desires and fancy dictate, merely to introduce ce que bon lui semble, et eUe n'existerait que
one does not know what new rules of procedure, pour 'etablir on ne sait que! nouveau reglement,
in addition to those rules of procedure which alors que nous avons deja un reglement, et qu'il
already exist and operate, and which are doing fonctionne, sornme toute, de fas:on assez satisfaisante.
so rather satisfactorily.
A cette objection principale, j'ajouterai encore
Besides this main consideration, it should be
borne in mind that, as is already known, apart ceci: en dehors des Articles de la Charte que
from those articles of the Charter which I have je viens de mentionner, il y a, nous le savons, un
just mentioned, there are also separate rules of reglement interieur pour l'Assemblee generale et
procedure for the General Assembly and for the un autre pour le Conseil de securite. Nous
Security Council respectively: Rules 113, 114, avons les articles 113, 114, 115 et 116 du re~
115, 116 for the General Assembly and 58, 59, glement interieur de l'Assemblee et les articles
58, 59 et 60 pour le Conseil.
60 for the Security Council.
Pourquoi ne pas agir dans le cadre de la
Why not operate within the framework of the
Charter? If it is necessary to introduce any Charte? S'il faut apporter des modifications a
changes in this or that set of rules, the Security telle ou telle regIe de procedure, le Conseil de
Council and the General Assembly can each deal securite et l'AssembMe generale peuvent le faire
with that matter separately. If they require later chacun de son cot,e. S'il est necessaire ensuite de
to reach agreement with one another, to co-or- collationner et d'harmoniser ces modifications,
dinate, to harmonize, this also can be done. .on pourra le faire ulterieurement. Pourquoi
What reasons are there at the present time veut~on Creel' maintenant une Commission mixte
for appointing a mixed Gommittee which is not qui n'est pr,evue ni par le reglement in:terieur ni
contemplated either by the rules of procedure or par la Charte et qui constituerait, a proprement
by the Charter, and which is, in fact, a departure parler, une derogation a la Charte? On ne le
from the Charter, only subsequently to give that ferait en somme que pour donner a cette ComCommittee an opportunity to decide questions mission la possibilite de J:1esoudre toutes les quesas it thinks fit?
tions comme bon lui semble.
La delegation sovietique estime qu'il n'y a
The Soviet delegation considers that there are
no reasons for resorting to such an arrangement aucune raison de suivre la procedure qu'on
as is now proposed for working out any supple~ nous propose en vue d'elaborer un reglement
mentary rules, whatever they may be, the nature complementaire,D'ailleurs que! serait ce regleand subject of which are unknown. The Soviet ment? Sur quoi porterait~il? On n'en sait rien.
del~'ation will therefore vote against this pro- C'est pourquoi la delegation sovietique votera
posal, and invites the other delegations to do contre cette proposition; c'est pourquoi elIe
invite les autres delegations a. faire de meme.
likewise.

a. M.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Makin, representative of Australia.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
Makin, representant de l'Australie.

Mr. MAKIN (Australia): I think that it was
obvious to all those who took part in the debate in the First Committee that the present
rules were regarded as unsatisfactory in those
aspects that have been mentioned regarding the
question of admitting new Members. Surely,
if experience itself has shown that the con~
ditions do not provide the best results, we should
be willing to make such amendments as are
essential in order to secure the very best consideration of these matters.

M. :MAKIN (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Il est apparu clairement, je crois, a tous ceux
qui ant participe aux debats de la Premiere
Commission que les regles appliquees jusqu'a
present, en ce qui concerl1e l'admission de nouveaux Membres, ne sont pas satisfaisantes. Puis~
que l'experience prouve que la manihe actueUe
de proceder n'aboutit pas a de bans resultats, il
est certain que nous devons apporter les amendements ntkessaires pour assurer, dans les meilleures conditions, l'examen des demandes d'admission.
La prop~sition que nous examinons est un
moyen d'obtenir de meilleur~ resultats, tout en
donnant satisfaction aux deux organismes interesses. J'estime que cette proposition ne constitue nullement une infraction a la Charte. Le representant de l'Union sovietique n'a donne au~
cun exemple pJ:1ecis, ni aucun argument expliquant comment cette proposition pourrait en~
freindre la Charte; tout au moins aurait-on du,
a man avis, nous faire connaitre, d'une maniere
plus detaillee, en quoi consiste l'infraction, si l'on
soutient qu'il en existe une.
La resolution a ete adoptee au sein de la

. The proposal before us is a means to bring
about better results and to give satisfaction to
both agencies. I feel that there is no infringement of the Charter at all. The representative
of the Soviet Union gave no specific instance or
argument as to how it infringes the Charter,
and I think we are entitled, at least. to have
some elaboration of that point, if it should
be insisted upon that there is such an infringement.

The Committee adopted the proposal by a
~

1

Fiftieth Plenary Meeting

7 December 1946

996

large majority, and we ask the Assembly to maintain the decision taken by the First Oommittee.

Commission par une majorite importante, et
nous demandons a 1'AssembIee d'accepter la decision de la Premiere Commission.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before putting to the vote the conclusions of the
First Committee, I shall consult the Assembly
on the question whether it wishes the vote to be
taken by roll-call, or whether a vote by a show
of hands would appear to be sufficient.

Le. PRESIDENT: Avant de mettre aux voix les
conclusions de la Premiere Commission, je consuIte l' Assemblee sur le point de savoir si elle
entend pr-oceder au vote par appel nominal ou
si le vote mains levees lui paralt suffisant.

Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): A show
of hands will suffice.
Decision: The resolution was adopted by
thirty-two votes to nine, with one abstention.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Il suffit
de voter main levee.
Decision: La resolution est adoptee par
trente-deux voix contre neuf, et une· abstention.

The me~ting rose at 6:25 p.m.

a

a 18 h. 25

CINQUAI\I'I'IEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Eleld on Saturday, 7 December 1946, at 8 p.m.

Tenue le samedi 7 decembre 1946,

a 20 heures.

TABLE DES MATIERES

CONTENTS

Page

121. Tributes to the memory of Mr. Simon
Diamantopoulos and Dr. Leo Rowe ... , 997
122. Request for the inclusion of two additional items on the agenda: report of the
General Conunittee
, 997
123. Election of six members of the Economic
and Social Council.(continuation) ..... 998
124. Appointment of external auditors: report
of the Fifth Conunittee: resolution..... 999
125. Election of three members of the Committee on Contributions and term of
office of members elected to the Committee: report of the Fifth Committee:
resolution
999
126. Election of six members of the Economic
and Social Council (continuation) ..... 1000
127. Simultaneous interpretation system: report of the Fifth Committee: resolution.100l
128. Privileges and immunities of the Staff of
the United Nations: report of the Fifth
Committee: resolution
1002
129. Election of six members of the Economic
and Social Council (continuation)
1002
130. Tax equalization: report of the Fifth
1003
Committee: resolution
131. Date of the regular session of the General Assembly: report of the Fifth Committee: resolution
1003
132. Election of six members of the Economic
and Social Council (continuation) ..... 1004
133. Transfer of the assets of the League of
Nations: report of the Fifth Committee:
resolution
1004
134. Official seal and emblem of the United
Nations: report of the Sixth Committee:
resolution
1005
135. Election of six members of the Economic
and Social Council (continuation) ..... 1006
136. Treatment of· Indians in the Union of
South Africa: report of the Joint First
and Sixth Committee
1006
President: Mr. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgium').

a

La seance est levee

FIFTIETH PLENARY MEE1'ING

''
&

Lt, ..

Pages

121. Hommage a la memoire de M. Simon
Diamantopoulos et du Dr Leo Rowe . . .. 997
122. Demande relative a l'inscription de deux
points supplementaires a l'ordre du jour.
Rapport du Bureau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 997
123. Election de six membres du Conscil economique et social (suite) . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 998
124. Designation de Commissaires aux compt~s. Rapport. de la Cinquieme CommisSIOn. ResolutIOn
999
125. Election de trois membres au Comite des
contributions et duree du mandat des
membres clus. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission. Resolution
999

126. Election de six membres du Conseil economique et social (suite)
1000
127. Systeme d'interpretation simultanee. Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission. Resolution
1001
128. Privileges et immunites du personnel des
Nations Unies. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission. Resolution
1002
129. Election de six membres du Conseil economique et social (suite)
1002
130. Perequation d'impots. Rapport de la
Cinquieme Commission. Resolution .... 1003
131. Date de la session ordinaire de l'Assemblee generale.
Rapport de la
Cinquietne Commission. Resolution .... 1003
132. Election de six membres du Conseil economique et social (suite)
1004
133. Transfert des avoirs de la Societe des
Nations. Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission. Resolution
1004
134. Sceau officiel et embleme de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Rapport de la
Sixieme Commission. Resolution
1005
135. Election de six membres du Conseil economique et social (suite)
1006
136. Traitement des Hindous etablis dans
l'Union Sud-Africaine. Rapport de la
Commission mixte des Premiere et
Sixieme' Commissions
1006
President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgiql),e).

:.''.'

.. .•. .•.....•..•....

:1
'.'

~.

.. '."...••....

'j
