Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Invites States which have not yet done so to
ratify the international instruments concluded in the
field of human rights, in particular the following:
(a) International Convention on the Elimination
of Ali Forrns of Racial Discrimination; 11
( b) International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and Optional Protocol; 12
(e) International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights; 12
3. Urges the world community to celebrate the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights in such a way as to contribute in a
significant manner to the realization of the principies,
values and ideals contained in the Declaration for the
benefit of all mankind.
2163rd plenary meeting
2 November 1973

3068 (XXVIII). lnternational Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime
of Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 2922 (XXVII) of 15 November 1972, in which it reaffirmed its conviction that
apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes
and principies of the Charter of the United Nations
and is a crime against hurnanity,
Recognizing the urgent need to take further effective
rneasures with a view to the suppression and punishment of apartheid,
Mindful of the need to conclude, under the auspices
of the United Nations, an lnternationa.l Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid,
Convinced that the Convention would be an irnportant step towards the eradication of the policies and
practices of apartheid, and that it should be signed and
ratified by States at the earliest possible date and its
provisions implemented witbout delay,
Considering also that the text of the Convention
should be made known throughout the world,
l. Adopts and opens for signature and ratification
the International Convention on the Suppression and
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, the text of
which is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Appeals to ali States to sigo and ratify the Convention as soon as possible;
3. Requests all Governrnents and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to acquaint the
public as widely as possible with the text of the Convention, using all the inforrnation media at their disposal;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
urgent and wide dissemination of the Convention and,
for that purpose, to publish and circulate its text;
5. Requests the Econornic and Social Council to invite the Commission on Human Rights to undertake the
functions set out under article X of the Convention.
2185th plenary meeting
30 November 1973
11 Resolution 2106 A (XX), anncx.
12 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

75

ANNEX
lnternational Convention on the Suppreesion and
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid

The States Parties to the present Convention,
Reca/ling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, in which ali Members pledged themselves to take
joint and sepa<rate action in co-operation with the Organization for the achievement of universal respect for, and observance of, hnman rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Considering the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which states that ali human beings are born free and equal
in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to ali the
rights and freedoms set forth in the Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour or national origin,
Considering the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,13 in which the
General Assembly stated that ,the process of liberation is irresistible and irreversible and that, in the interests of human
dignity, progress and justice, an end must be put to coloniafüm
and ali practices of segregation and discrimination associated
therewith,
Observing that, in accordance with the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination,14 States particulady condemn racial segregation and
apartheid and undertake to prevent, prohibit and eradicate ali
practices of this nature in territories under their jurisdiction,
Observing that, in the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,1~ certain acts wbich
may also be qualified as acts of apartheid constitute a crime
under internationaI law,
Observing that, in the Convention on the Non-Applicability
of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes Against
Humanity,16 "inhuman aots resulting from the policy of
apartheid" are qualified as crimes against hurnanity,
Observing that the General Assembly of the United Nations
has adopted a numbeir of resolutions in which the policies and
practices of apartheid are condemned as a crirne against
hurnanity,
Observing that the Security Council has emphasized that
apartheid and its continued intensification and expansion seriously disturb and threaten international peace and security,
Convinced that an International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid would
rnake it possible to take more effective measures at the international and national levels with a view to the suppression
and punishment of the crime of apartheid,
llave agreed as follows:
Article I
1. The States Parties to the present Convention declare
that apartheid is a crime against humanity and that inhuman
acts resulting from the policies and practices of apartheid and
similar policies and practices of rncial segregation and discrimination, as defined in article II of the Convention, are
crimes violating the principies of international law, in particular the purposes and principies of the Charter of the
United Nations, and constituting a serious threat to international peace and security.
2. The States Parties .to the present Convention declare
criminal those organizations, institutions and individuals committing the crime of apartheid.
Article II
For the purpose of the present Convention, the term "the
crime of apartheid", which shall include similar policies and
13 Resolution 1514 (XV).
14 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

15 Resolution 260 A (III), annex.
10 Resolution 2391 (XXIII), annex.

General A111embly-Twenty-eighth Session

76

practices of racial segregation and discrimination as practised
in southern Africa, shall apply to the following inhuman acts
comrnitted for the purpose of establishing and rnaintaining
dornination by one racial group of persons over any other
racial group of persons and syslcrnatically oppressing thern:
(a) Denial to a rnernber or rnernbers of a racial group or
groups of the right to life and liberty of person:
(i) By rnurder of rnernbers of a racial group or groups;
(ii) By the infliction upon the rnernbers of a racial group
or groups of serious bodily or mental harrn, by the
infringcrnent of their freedorn or dignity, or by subjecting thern to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatrnent or punishment;
(iii) By arbitrary arrest and illegal irnprisonrnent of the
members of a racial group or groups;
(b) Deliberate irnposition on a racial group or groups of
living conditions calculated to cause its or their physical destruction in whole or in part;
(e) Any legislative measures and other measures calculated
to prevent a racial group or groups from participation in the
political, social, econornic and cultural life of the country and
the deliberate creation of conditions preventing the full development of such a group or groups, in particular by denying to
members of a racial group or groups basic human rights and
freedorns, including the right to work, the right to form recognizcd trade unions, the right to education, the right to leave
and to return to their country, the right to a nationality, the
right to freedom of movement and residence, thc right to
frecclom of opinion and expression, and the right to freedom
of peaceful assembly and association;
(d) Any measures, including legislative measures, designed
to divide the population along racial lines by the creation of
separate reserves and ghettos for the members of a racial
group or groups, the prohibition of mixed marriages arnong
members of various racial groups, the expropriation of landed
property belonging to a racial group or groups or to members
thereof;
(e) Exploitation of the labour of the members of a racial
group or groups, in particular by submitting them to forced
labour;
(/) Persecution of organizations and persorts, by depriving
them of fundamental rights and freedoms, because they oppose
apartheid.
Article Ill
International criminal responsibility shall apply, irrespective
of the motive involved, to individuals, members of organizations and institutions and representatives of the State, whether
residing in the territory of the State in which the acts are
perpetrated or in sorne other State, whenever they:
(a) Commit, participate in, directly incite or conspire in
the commission of the acts mentioned in article II of the
present Convention;
(b) Directly abet, encourage or co-operate in the commission of the crime of apartheid.
Article IV
The States Parties to the present Convention undertake:
. (a) To adopt any legislative or other measures necessary
to suppress as well as to prevent any encouragement of the
crime of apartheid and similar segregationist policies or their
manifestations and to punish persons guilty of that orime;
( b) To adopt legisla ti ve, judicial and administrative measures to prosecute, bring to tria! and punish in accordar~~ with
their jurisdiction persons responsible for, or accused of, the
acts defined in article II of the present Convention, whether
or not such persons reside in the territory of the State in which
the acts are committed or are nationals of that State or of
sorne other State or are stateless persons.
Article V
Persons charged with the acts enumerated in article II of
the present Convention may be tried by a competent tribunal

of any State Party to the Convention which may acquirc
jurisdiction over the person of the accused or by an international penal tribunal having jurisdiction with respect to those
States Parties which shall have accepted its jurisdiction.
Article VI
The States Parties to the present Convention undertake to
accept and carry out in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations the decisions taken by the Security Council
aimed at the prevention, suppression and punishment of the
crime of apartheid, and to co-operate in the implementation
of decisions adopted by other competen! organs of the United
Nations with a view to achieving the purposes of the Convention.
Article VII
I. The States Parties to the present Convention undertake

to submit periodic reports to the group established under
article IX on the legislative, judicial, administrative or other
measures that they have adopted and that give effect to the
provisions of the Convention.
2. Copies of the reports shall be transmitted through the
Secretary-General of the United Nations to thc Special Committee on Apartheid.
Article VII!
Any State Party to the present Convention may call upon
any competent organ of the United Nations to take such action
under the Charter of the United Nations as it considers
appropriate for the prevention and suppression of the crime
of apartheid.
Article IX
l. The Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights
shall appoint a group consisting of three members of the
Commission on Human Rights, who are also representatives
of States Parties to the present Convention, to consider reports
submittcd by States Parties in accordance with article VII.
2. If, amnng the members of the Commission on Human
Rights, there are no representatives of States Parties to the
pre.en! :onvention or if there are fewer than three such representatives, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall, after consulting ali States Parties to thc Convention,
designate a representative of the State Party or representatives
of the States Parties which are not members of the Commission on Human Rights to take part in the work of the group
established in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article,
until such time as representatives of the States Parties to the
Convention are elected to the Commission on Human Rights.
3. The group may meet for a period of not more than five
days, either befare the opening or after the closing of thc
session of the Commission on Human Rights, to consider the
reports submitted in accordance with article VII.

Article X
l. The States Parties to the present Convention empower

the Commission on Human Rights:
(a) To request United Nations organs, when transmittiog
copies of petitions under article 15 of the International Convention on ,the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, to draw its attention to compla.ints concerning acts
which are enumerated in article II of the present Convention;
(b) To prepare, on the basis of reports from competent
organs of the United Nations and periodic reports from States
Parties to the present Convention, a list of individuals, organizations, institu,tions and representatives of States which are
alleged to be ,responsible for the crimes enumerated in article II of the Convention, as well as those against whom
legal proceedings have been undertaken by States Parties to
the Convention;
(e) To request information from the competent United
Nations organs concerning measures taken by the authorities
responsible for the administration of Trust and Non-SelfGoverning Territories, and ali other Territories to which
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December

Resolution11 adopted on tbe report11 of tbe Third Committee

1960 applies, with regard to such individuals alleged ,to be
responsible for crimes under article II of the Convention who
are believed to be under their territorial and administrative
jurisdiction.
2. Pending the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV), the provisions of the present Convention shall
in no way limit the right of petition granted to those peoples
by other international instruments or by the United Nations
and its specialized agencies.

77

(b) The date of entry into force of the present Convention
under article XV;
(e) Denunciations under article XVI;
(d) Notifications under article XVII.
Article XIX
l. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, English,
Frcnch, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of tbe United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations sball
traasmit certified copies of tbe present Convention to ali States.

Article XI
1. Acts enumerated in article II of the present Convention

sball not be considered political crimes for the purpose of
extradition.
2. Tbe States Parties to the present Convention undertake
in sucb cases to grant extradition in accordance with their
legislation and with the ,treaties in force.
Article XII
Disputes betweeen States Parties arising out of the interpretation, application or implementation of the present Convention which have not been settled by negotiation sbal1, at the
request of the States Parties to the dispute, be brought befare
the Jnternational Court of Justice, save wbere the parties to
tbe dispute bave agreed on sorne other form of settlement.
Article Xlll
Toe present Convention is open for signature by ali States.
Any State which does not sign the Convention befare its
entry into force may accede to it.
Article XIV
l. The present Convention is subject to ratification. lnstru-

ments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
2. Accession sball be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
Article XV
l. The present Convention shall enter into force on the
thirtieth day after the date of the deposit with tbe SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations of the twentieth instrument of
ratification or accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Convention or
acceding to it after the deposit of the twentieth instrument of
ratification or instrument of accession, the Convention sball
enter into force on the thirtieth day after the date of the
deposit of its own instrument of ratification or instrument
of accession.
Article XVI
A State Party may denounce the present Convention by
written notification to tbe Secretary-General of the United
Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year after the date
of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
Article XVII
1. A request for the revision of the present Convention
may be made at any time by any State Party by meaos of a
notification in writing addressed to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nations shall
decide upan the steps, if any, to be taken in respect of such
request.
Article XVIII
Toe Secretary-Oene.-al of the United Nations shall inform
ali States of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions under articles
XIII and XIV;

3069 (XXVIII). Elimination of all forma of
religious intolerance
The General Assembly,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,
Referring to its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 December 1962, 2020 (XX) of 1 November 1965, 2295
(XXII) of 11 December 1967 and 3027 (XXVII) of
18 December 1972,
Reaffirming the equal importance of both a declaration on the elimination of all farms of religious intolerance and an international convention on the elimination of ali farms of intolerance and of discri.mination
based on religion or belief,
Taking into account the decision taken al its twentyseventh session to accord priority to the completion
of the Declaration on the Elimination of AII Forms of
Religious Intolerance befare resuming consideration
of the draft International Convention on this subject,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council and
the Commission on Human Rights had no opportunity
to consider properly the draft Declaration on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of Religious Intolerance 17
and to present their recommendations thereon, and
that, despite the etfórts of Member States, it has not
been possible to complete the final draft of a Declaration
during the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assembly,
Considering that the draft articles prepared by the
Working Group set up by the Commission on Human
Rights at its twentieth session, 18 and suggestions, comments and amendments thereto submitted by Member
Sta tes, 10 constitute a suitable orientation far the preparation of a draft Declaration on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Religious Intolerance,
Believing that the preparation of a draft Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forros of Religious Intolerance requires additional study,
l. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights at its thirtieth
session to consider, as a matter of priority, the elaboration of a draft Declaration on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Religious Intolerance, taking into account
the observations submitted by Governments as well as
the opinions expressed, the suggestions put forward
and the amendments submitted in the course of the
discussion of this question at the twenty-eighth session
1 7 A/8330, annex l. For the printed text, see Of/iclal Record,
of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 8 (E/3873), para. 294.
1 8 A/8330, annex 11. Por the printed text, see Of/icial Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 8 (E/3873), para. 296.
10 A/9134 and Add.1 and 2.
