S/PV.7102

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7102nd meeting

Monday, 27 January 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hmoud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-third progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2013/761)

14-21736 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1421736*

S/PV.7102

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-third progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2013/761)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedures, I invite Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou
Souleymane, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Côte d’Ivoire and Head of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome
Ms. Mindaoudou, who is joining us today via videoteleconference from Abidjan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/761, which contains the thirty-third
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Côte D’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mindaoudou.
Ms. Mindaoudou: It is a great honour for me to
address the Security Council for the first time since I
assumed my responsibilities as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, in July 2013.
Côte d’Ivoire continues to make good progress, and
the country is firmly on the path to lasting peace and
stability. Socioeconomic reforms implemented by the
Government are beginning to have tangible results, with
good economic growth, an influx of foreign investment
and a renewed private sector. The Government has
initiated a series of institutional reforms aimed at
enhancing political inclusiveness, including putting in
place legislation requested by the political opposition
on the financing of political parties.
As the report before the Council (S/2013/761)
underscores, the Government, under President

2/6

27/01/2014

Ouattara’s leadership, has made significant conciliatory
gestures towards the political opposition, notably
by provisionally releasing from prison several highranking individuals associated with former President
Laurent Gbagbo. The Government has also taken
steps towards addressing the root causes of the Ivorian
crisis, including by enacting legislation on land tenure
issues and nationality, which are critical for the
national reconciliation process. Dialogue between the
Government and 11 opposition parties in the context
of the permanent framework of dialogue continues,
and has resulted in important progress in the political
reconciliation process.
While the former ruling party, the Front populaire
ivoirien (FPI), still refuses to participate in the
permanent framework of dialogue, important advances
were made with respect to direct dialogue between the
FPI and the Government as well as with the ruling party.
In early December, the FPI and the Rassemblement des
républicains (RDR) met for the first time in a decade.
The holding of that meeting in a cordial atmosphere
generated important momentum, and I welcome the
shared commitment expressed by both parties to
continuing further dialogue in a reconciliatory manner.
The FPI also resumed direct dialogue with the
Government in September and held meetings, most
recently on 15 January. Although there was no
concrete breakthrough on outstanding issues, those
meetings are an important demonstration of the will of
political stakeholders in Côte d’Ivoire to address their
differences through constructive dialogue. As the report
before the Council indicates, the FPI has proposed the
establishment of a new dialogue forum — the états
généraux de la République, which would include a
wider spectrum of civil society — that the President
has agreed to review closely.
The Government has made efforts to advance
security sector reform. It has also set an ambitious target
of disarming the full caseload of former combatants by
June 2015. In the area of human rights, the Government
has extended the mandate of the special investigation
and examination cell, which is tasked with investigating
crimes committed during the post-electoral crisis.
Meanwhile, during his New Year address to the nation,
President Ouattara announced that he had requested the
Minister of Justice to review the possibility of releasing
additional prisoners detained during the post-electoral
crisis. He also reiterated the Government’s commitment
to intensifying efforts to ensure the voluntary and

14-21736

27/01/2014

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

safe return of political refugees, with the support of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the respective countries where the
political refugees reside. We have already witnessed
the return of several senior officials and military
personnel affiliated with former President Gbagbo and
the FPI, and refugees across the borders with Liberia,
Ghana and Guinea. Those actions have contributed to
enhancing the political climate in Côte d’Ivoire.
Côte d’Ivoire’s economy is on a fast track to recovery
and growth rates are impressive. That is due in part to
enhanced political stability and the financial support of
its international partners. It is also worth noting that the
Government has continued to strengthen its presence at
the local level, including through the recent nomination
of members of the corps préfectoral. At the same time,
local and traditional leaders are increasingly engaged
in supporting social cohesion. They are also closely
engaged in addressing intercommunity tensions and the
challenges with regard to the evacuation of protected
forests, particularly in the west.
Notwithstanding the good progress that is being
made and the Government’s genuine resolve, Côte
d’Ivoire has continued to grapple with security-related
challenges and the situation remains fragile. Recurrent
incidents of intercommunity and ethnic violence, as
well as armed robbery and organized crime, continue
to pose a major challenge to stability and security. The
national security apparatus still requires considerable
reform, including in order to rid it of those elements
that are involved in incidents of violence and abuse.
The lack of clarity with regard to the status of dozos,
or traditional hunters, further contributes to the
insecurity and poses a threat to the human rights of
citizens in many areas of the country. The Government
has responded proactively to addressing the violence
by launching in November, with the support of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI),
an operation aimed at disbanding armed groups and
removing illegal checkpoints.
In the west of the country, serious threats to peace
and security persist due to the illegal circulation of
weapons, coupled with networks affiliated with the
former regime, former combatants and other criminal
elements on the border with Liberia. In addition, most
of the root causes to the conflict are still to be fully
addressed in that region. On a positive note, the good
cooperation between the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire
and Liberia, as well as between UNOCI and the United

S/PV.7102

Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), continues to
yield good results and we have not witnessed a major
cross-border attack in nearly a year.
Earlier this month, I visited several localities in
the west of Côte d’Ivoire, where I met community and
religious leaders and local authority representatives.
There, I again witnessed the fragility of the situation on
the ground and the need for the international community
to remain alert and fully engaged in order to ensure
that the times of chaos, violence and insecurity are
buried deeply in the past. My interlocutors stressed the
importance of promptly addressing the root causes of
the conflict and of ensuring that justice is served.
UNOCI is in the process of reconfiguring its
military component and of consolidating its presence in
the west and other high-risk areas, as requested by the
Council. By the end of December, the Société Général
de Surveillance had been withdrawn from the country
and the national security institutions had assumed full
responsibility for providing the security of high-ranking
members of Government and other political figures. By
the end of June, we will have completed the drawdown
of 1,700 troops, as requested by resolution 2112 (2013),
ensuring a strengthened force capacity in the west.
UNOCI is also working closely with the Secretariat
on planning for the appropriate composition, posture
and strength of the UNOCI force up until and during
the Ivorian elections, which will be developed in the
context of a strategic review of UNOCI and UNMIL
that will take place next month. Specific proposals will
be provided to the Council in our May report.
The promotion of a culture of respect for human
rights is essential to successful national reconciliation.
It is of crucial importance that impunity for human
rights violations end and that the perpetrators be
brought to justice, irrespective of their status or
political affiliation. I remain concerned about the lack
of progress in bringing to justice the perpetrators of
the most heinous attacks committed in 2012, including
those on the Nahibly camp for internally displaced
persons and the killing of seven United Nations
peacekeepers in Para.
The United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire and the
Government have worked closely to develop ambitious
yet realistic benchmarks for sustainable peace, which
are annexed to the report before the Council. We will
continue to work closely with the Government in order
to achieve those important benchmarks. As requested

14-217363/6

S/PV.7102

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

by the Council, UNOCI and the United Nations country
team conducted an extensive evaluation of UNOCI’s
mandate with a view to identifying those tasks that
could eventually be handed over to the country team
and the broad timelines for that possible handover. The
preliminary results of that exercise are provided as an
annex to the report before the Council.
However. I wish to underscore two points raised by
the Secretary-General in his report. First, the resource
constraints facing the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes in a stabilizing context such as that of
Côte d’Ivoire have put severe limits on the capacity of
those bodies to assume additional tasks. Many agencies
have been forced to close or limit their operations
in Côte d’Ivoire owing to more pressing challenges
elsewhere in the world. Secondly, more fundamental
is the importance of ensuring that peacekeeping
transitions, both security and civilian, in any country
underscore the primary goal and objective of handing
over any residual peacekeeping tasks to the sovereign
authorities of the country. Going forward, that is what
we will be prioritizing in Côte d’Ivoire, working closely
with the Government.
Looking ahead, as Côte d’Ivoire and many of its
neighbours in the West African region move towards
presidential elections in 2015, it is important to work
now to put in place the conditions for an environment
conducive to peaceful elections. In that regard,
considerable progress will be needed in key areas,
notably with regard to electoral reforms, disarmament
and security sector reform. Côte d’Ivoire will continue
to need support in consolidating the gains achieved to
date.
It is essential to continue to press upon the Ivorian
leaders the need to preserve the gains made so far and to
engage in dialogue in a spirit of mutual accommodation,
in particular in the preparation of the election in 2015.
That is particularly important as there has been a recent
resurgence of hate speech in some media outlets. The
international community cannot allow for such a trend
to take root or to be tolerated as that was one of the
triggers of the 2010 crisis. In that regard, I am engaging
closely with political, religious and community leaders,
who have an important role to play in defusing tension
and condemning such behaviour.
The continued support of the Security Council,
Member States and international and regional partners
remains essential in order to enable the country to
overcome the numerous challenges, particularly with
4/6

27/01/2014

regard to security, national cohesion and genuine
political dialogue. It is equally important that the
United Nations be fully equipped to continue to fulfil its
responsibility in supporting the Government’s efforts
to stabilize the security situation, protect civilians,
strengthen State authority and promote reconciliation.
I wish to thank the Council for its continued support
for our collective effort in support of the people and
Government of Côte d’Ivoire as they stride towards
sustainable stability.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Souleymane for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation takes note of the excellent report
of the Secretary-General contained in document
S/2013/761, of 24 December 2013. We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Côte d’Ivoire, Ms. AÏchatou Mindaoudou Souleymane,
for her outstanding briefing on the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire. We congratulate her on the remarkable work
she has accomplished in such a short time since her
arrival in Côte d’Ivoire six months ago.
I would like to make a few brief comments on some
aspects that my delegation views as critical with respect
to the security situation, political dialogue, the national
reconciliation process and economic recovery.
With regard to the security situation, we agree
with the report of the Secretary-General that the
security situation has improved significantly since the
Head of State assumed responsibility for the defence
sector. During the past year, no major attack against
the security forces or public institutions was noted.
The establishment of the Centre for the Coordination
of Operational Decisions has reduced the incidence
of serious crimes such as raids and armed robberies.
That has led to a positive trend in the security index
recognized by the United Nations, which rose from 3.8
in 2012 to 1.3 in 2013 across the country.
That improvement has created conditions conducive
to the return of international organizations that had
left the country — including the Japan External Trade
Organization, AfricaRice, the African Development
Bank, which will be in the country until 2015, and the
Regional Office of UNESCO — and to the planned
establishment of a regional office of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in Côte d’Ivoire. However,
14-21736

27/01/2014

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

as the Special Representative noted, concerns remain
with regard to the border with Liberia, given the ongoing
presence of mercenaries and the illegal trafficking of
weapons.
Nevertheless, we note significant calm in the
west of the country. No attacks have been reported
there for over a year. Thus, the situation has improved
significantly following the strengthening of the
quadripartite cooperation among the security services
of the Côte d’Ivoire, those of Liberia, the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.
With regard security sector reform (SSR), major
activities undertaken by the Ministry of Defence
include the strengthening of the legal and institutional
frameworks and the reorganization of the armed forces;
the strengthening of the managerial and operational
capacities of the army; the improvement of the security
situation; the promotion of unity within the army and
the bolstering of social cohesion; the promotion of the
spirit of defence; the management of the military forces;
the development of a training system; contributions
to subregional, regional and international peace and
stability; and the promotion of good governance.
I would like to point out that the Head of State
personally presided over 43 sessions of the National
Security Council and the Prime Minister presided over
six sessions. Some 32 per cent of the SSR goals have
been met, and 44 per cent are in the process of being
met. The remaining 24 per cent should soon be met.
In that regard, we thank our partners, in particular
UNOCI, and all of our international, bilateral and
multilateral partners, who provide valuable assistance,
especially in the framework of the consultative group
that meets monthly to take stock of the SSR situation
in Côte d’Ivoire.
With regard to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR), as of 31 December 2013
the Authority for Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration had returned or reintegrated 27,351
former combatants, representing 91 per cent of the
goal of 30,000 sought for the end of 2013. Weapons
collected include 6,521 Kalashnikov assault rifles,
6,398 grenades, 409 shells, 632 rockets and 390,777
munitions. It should also be noted that the DDR process
led by the Côte d’Ivoire Government is fully inclusive
in that it integrates former combatants from both sides
without exception. There are branches of the DDR
Authority in the south in Abdijan; in the centre in

S/PV.7102

Bouaké; in the north, in Korhogo, Ferké, Boundiali and
Bouna; and in the west, in Man, Duékoué, Toulepleu,
Guiglo and San Pedro. The DDR Authority was even
able to account for former combatants who fled to
Togo, Ghana and Liberia.
With respect to funding, the State of Côte d’Ivoire
has financed 80 per cent of that process. In that regard,
we would like to thank UNOCI, the European Union, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD) for their support for the process.
I note that there are still 47,000 former combatants to
be reintegrated or returned. The task is daunting, but
thanks to the experience of the Authority for DDR, we
hope that by the end of 2015 all former combatants will
be effectively reintegrated or reinstated. In that regard,
we wish to thank in advance the European Union,
the African Development Bank and the Government
of Japan, which have indicated their intention to join
UNOCI, UNDP, the World Bank and IFAD in helping
Côte d’Ivoire to achieve all its DDR goals.
With regard to the particular case of the dozos, the
traditional hunters who participated in some clashes
during the post-election crisis, which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned,
initiatives have already been undertaken by the
Ministry of the Interior and Security to urge them to
return to their traditional activities. That commitment
was strongly reiterated recently by President Alassane
Ouattara in his capacity as supreme commander of the
army.
With regard to political dialogue, we welcome
the thaw in the political situation in Côte d’Ivoire,
as was underscored by the Special Representative.
In that regard, President Alassane Ouattara has
demonstrated his leadership in creating a peaceful
political environment and give the opposition room to
better express its differences of opinion in a democratic
context. That commitment has been exressed in
powerful gestures, such as the provisional release of 14
members of the former regime and the upcoming review
of other cases that could also benefit from that measure;
decisions taken by the Council of Ministers to unfreeze
the bank accounts of members of the former regime;
and appeals by the President to the politicalopponents
and army officers and soldiers in exile to return to the
country.
The President of the Republic’s initiatives have led
to a relaxing of the situation, which we commend. That

14-217365/6

S/PV.7102

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

was constructively manifested by the resumption on
15 January of direct dialogue between the opposition
and the Government, which is promising; the effective
return to Côte d’Ivoire on 17 January of the former
Director General of the Autonomous Port of Abidjan,
a leading member of the party of former President
Gbagbo; and the return from exile of 1,288 former
members of the Forces de défense et de sécurité with
a guarantee for their safety, who were welcomed on
Friday, 24 January at a ceremony held in the parade
grounds of the Ministry of Defence, thanks to an appeal
launched by President Alassane Ouattara. Before
arriving, I was informed that the former Minister of
Defence of President Gbagbo had also returned to Côte
d’Ivoire this weekend.
Along the same lines, it is worth mentioning the
draft law on the status of the opposition, which has
been adopted by the Council of Ministers and will soon
be submitted to the National Assembly, as well as the
draft text on the funding of political parties. All of
those developments clearly indicate President Alassane
Ouattara’s intention to firmly establish a genuine and
transparent culture of democracy in Côte d’Ivoire.
With regard to national reconciliation, after
two years of operation the Truth, Dialogue and
Reconciliation Commission officially provided
its report to the President on 21 November 2013.
The report recommends in particular the effective
implementation of the rural land law, the adoption of a
gender perspecyive in the country’s overall policies, the
reduction of inequalities in regional development, the
establishment of a republican army with appropriate
and modern resources, good governance, the fight
against impunity and the strengthening of democracy.
On that occasion, the President of the Commission
noted that the majority of Ivoirians consulted want to
uncover the truth about the period from 1990 to 2011 to
be established. The Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission therefore intends to make a public appeal
to those who were victims between 1990 and 2011.
With regard to the economic recovery, under the
leadership of President of the Republic and with the

6/6

27/01/2014

coordination of the Prime Minister, Côte d’Ivoire is
experiencing a robust economic recovery, as evidenced
by the growth rate of 8 per cent achieved in 2013, and
that of 9 per cent predicted for 2014. The country is
consolidating its position as the world’s leading cocoa
producer, having produced 1,449,000 tons of cocoa
beans in 2012-2013, representing 40 per cent of world
cocoa production.
In general, numerous economic and social
infrastructure construction or restoration projects
have been completed or are in progress, in particular
in the sectors of roads, water, education, health, social
housing and energy. Regarding the energy sector, it
should be noted that the sixth gas turbine of the Ivorian
Electricity Production Company, a private operator,
came into service last week, increasing the production
capacity of the national grid by 1,600 gigawatt hours a
year.
It is useful to recall that an international forum to
promote investment will be held in Abidjan between
29 January and 1 February. Some 2,200 participants
are expected, and the forum will be of great relevance
to the economic recovery of Côte d’Ivoire.
On the basis of all of these positive developments,
the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, fully aligned with
the United Nations approach, supports the planned
drawdown and reconfiguration of UNOCI’s military and
police presence between now and 2015, as mentioned in
the report before us.
Finally, the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, aware of
its primary responsibility to re-establish lasting peace
and stability in the country, is committed to playing its
full role in achieving the operational objectives agreed
in coordination with the United Nations, in the context
of the strategic planning of the transition from UNOCI
to a Peacebuilding Commission configuration.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

14-21736
