S/PV.7239

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7239th meeting

Friday, 8 August 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Khair
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Adamu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-50017 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1450017*

Ukraine

S/PV.7239

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Šimonović,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Zagreb.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council again on the
human rights situation in Ukraine.
On 28 July, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights issued the
fourth monthly report of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which covered
the period from 8 June to 15 July 2014. Today, I will
highlight the report’s key findings, and I will focus
on the rapidly deteriorating situation in the east of
the country and provide updates on the situation since
15 July.
At the outset, let me say that the downing of the
Malaysian civilian aeroplane, which occurred on 17 July,
killing 298 people, calls for our unanimous sorrow and
sympathy for the victims’ families and for our outrage.
While the downing of the plane may constitute a war
crime, a thorough, effective, independent and impartial
investigation is needed to determine the facts and
circumstances of that act. That investigation is now
under way, but it is disturbing to learn that the volatile
security situation at the crash site continues to hamper
international investigators, despite the ceasefire zone
declared by the Government of Ukraine around the

2/20

08/08/2014

area. It is urgent to stop the fighting and to secure the
crash site. At the same time, of course, more broadly,
there must be accountability for those responsible for
other war crimes, serious violations of international
humanitarian law and gross violations of human rights
law, as documented by the findings of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission.
The intense fighting in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions of eastern Ukraine is extremely alarming.
The United Nations human rights monitoring mission
reports mounting casualties and serious damage
to infrastructure. All Ukrainians are paying an
increasingly high price. As the Council is aware, the
ceasefire declared by the Government was in effect for
10 days, from 20 to 30 June. The report describes the
rapid escalation of hostilities that has occurred since the
end of that ceasefire, which, it notes, was violated over
100 times. It also notes the rapid professionalization of
the armed groups, which are increasingly well organized
and equipped with heavy weaponry. Their political and
military leadership includes not only Ukrainians but
also citizens of the Russian Federation.
On 2 July, constitutional proposals were made,
including on decentralization, local governance
structures and the preservation of the use of the
Russian language. Those have been among the main
concerns of the Russian-speaking population in the east
of the country. Meanwhile, the human rights situation
has deteriorated significantly in pockets of territory
in Luhansk and Donetsk, which are still controlled
by armed groups and where the Government has been
undertaking its security operations.
The report details what amounts to a reign of fear
and terror in areas under control of the armed groups,
twinned with the breakdown of law and order. There
have been reports of human rights abuses, including
abductions, detentions, torture and executions in those
areas, all of which have increased the terror of civilians
who are trapped there or held as hostages. More must
be done to protect the lives of innocent people and to
bring perpetrators to account. That must start with an
immediate cessation of hostilities.
Since April, some 924 people have been abducted
by armed groups, including 811 politicians, journalists,
professionals, students and other civilians and
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
monitors, while 113 servicemen, military border guards
and security personnel have been detained. Those
figures are provided by the Government.
14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

Abducted individuals have been used as an exchange
currency to free members of armed groups detained by
the Government, to extort money or property and as
a source of forced labour — to dig trenches or build
barricades close to the epicentre of the violence. Some
vulnerable groups, such as persons living with HIV or
drug users, have been made to “work off their guilt” as
forced labour or to fight on the front lines. Recently,
as the Government of Ukraine has regained control
over more of the territory in the east formerly held by
the armed groups, many hostages have been freed or
released through negotiations. But, as of 5 August, the
whereabouts of 465 people remain unknown.
The situation of children affected by the conflict
is particularly worrying and requires more concerted
commitments by all parties to ensure the effective
protection of those children. While it seems that
considerable efforts have been undertaken to evacuate
children from the area of hostilities, according to the
Ukrainian ombudsperson about 300 children remain
in several orphanages in the areas under the control
of the armed groups. Children experience specific
vulnerabilities in the context, and allegations of
abductions or attempted abductions continue to persist.
On 8 July, the authorities of the Russian Federation
announced that a former Ukrainian military pilot held
in a pretrial detention centre in the Russian Federation
would be charged with complicity in the killing of two
Russian TV journalists on 17 June near Luhansk. The
circumstances of her capture have been controversial.
The Russian authorities state that she freely crossed
the border into the Russian Federation and was
subsequently arrested because she had no documents
and was masquerading as a refugee. The Ukrainian
Government says she was abducted in Luhansk by
armed groups and was taken to the Russian Federation
in an operation coordinated with the Russian secret
services. The Ukrainian Consul was permitted to visit
her on 16 July. She remains in detention.
Fighting in and around population centres has
resulted in heavy loss of life and very significant
damage to property and civilian infrastructure. Both
sides must be reminded of the imperative that they act
proportionately and take precautions to avoid deaths
and injury of civilians. Otherwise they will be held
accountable for the casualties that could have been
avoided.
The United Nations human rights monitoring
mission and the World Health Organization estimate

S/PV.7239

that from the date of the onset of fighting in mid-April
to 7 August, more than 1,543 people were killed in
the east, including civilians, military personnel and
members of the armed groups. At least 4,396 have been
confirmed wounded; the real number is likely to be
much higher.
Some internally displaced people are beginning
to return to territories in the east where the Ukrainian
Government has regained control. The United Nations
human rights monitoring mission visited Slovyansk
earlier this week, and I am pleased to report that life
in that city is returning to normal. Water, electricity
and gas supplies have been restored to 95 per cent
of previous capacity, and children have returned to
kindergarten.
The city no longer needs humanitarian aid,
according to the acting mayor. However, a disturbing
discovery was made in Slovyansk when a mass grave
was uncovered containing 14 bodies, at least 2 of
which were identified as abducted members of a local
evangelist church in that city. The United Nations
human rights monitoring mission spoke to the father of
the two identified individuals, who said that the church
had been threatened by members of the armed groups
on a number of occasions before armed men abducted
four church members on 8 June as they left their church
service. Until the bodies were exhumed on 24 July,
their whereabouts had been unknown.
As the Government regains more territory formerly
controlled by the armed groups, it must ensure that
all atrocities are fully investigated under the full
application of international human rights norms and
guarantees, which include the avoidance of reprisals.
Allegations about arbitrary detention and abuses by
Government forces have to be investigated and acted
upon promptly and decisively.
I wish to inform the Council that the United Nations
Human Rights Office has received a “White Book” on
alleged human rights violations in Ukraine prepared by
the Russian Federation covering the period from April
to mid-June 2014, which we are currently reviewing.
Some of the cases have already appeared in previous
reports of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission. I would reiterate that the Government of
Ukraine should investigate all alleged human rights
violations, as recommended by the mission.
In the Autonomous Republic of Crimea,
harassment and discrimination has intensified against

14-500173/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

Ukrainian nationals, Crimean Tatars, representatives
of religious minorities, minority groups in general
and activists who opposed the 16 March “referendum”
in the area. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates
that more than 15,200 people have left Crimea, while
tens of thousands continue to flee the fighting in the
east, bringing the total number of internally displaced
persons in Ukraine to more than 117,910, according to
UNHCR, as of 5 August. The report details a number of
recommendations to the Government for the purposes
of addressing outstanding issues.
The ability of Ukrainians to exercise their
freedoms of expression, association, peaceful assembly,
movement and religion or belief, as well as their political
rights, has been strongly affected by the current crisis.
In the east, those rights have been strictly curtailed by
the armed groups. In a significant moment, the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission reported
that, on 1 August, residents of Severodonetsk — a city
regained by Ukrainian forces on 22 July — were able
to openly gather in the central square in a flash mob
to express support for Ukraine. That was the first such
rally allowed since March.
However, worrying trends include the rise of hate
speech, particularly in social media, and a number
of incidents targeting Russian-owned banks and
businesses on the ground that are alleged to be financing
terrorism. Freedom of expression has also come
under attack, especially in the east, where attempts at
media manipulation have been especially egregious in
territory under the control of armed groups.
Journalists in Luhansk were required to meet the
political leadership of the armed groups every Monday
to discuss what to cover and how, and those who did
not comply were threatened and blocked, and their
equipment destroyed. The so-called Defence Minister
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic has
prohibited journalists, cameramen and photographers
from taking photos, videos and audio recordings, and
banned them from working in combat zones and in
proximity to military objects. As a result, a number of
journalists, including foreign media professionals, have
been harassed.
Ukrainian journalists are treated even more harshly.
In that regard, I note with concern the abduction of a
local field producer for CNN, who was taken from a
hotel in Donetsk on 22 July, held for four days, severely
beaten and accused of being a Ukrainian spy.
4/20

08/08/2014

It is imperative that the parties to the conflict be
assisted in finding a way out of this murderous and
potentially even more explosive crisis. I welcome the
Ukrainian President’s proposal for a new round of talks
to find a way to restore the ceasefire. A first meeting was
held in Minsk on 31 July, where important agreements
were made to secure the crash site of the Malaysian
Airlines plane and to release a sizeable number of the
hostages being held by armed groups.
Moreover, even once the current crisis has been
resolved, deep psychological scars will remain. The
fabric of society is being torn apart by the continuous
and ongoing violence and fighting. The misinformation
being spread is building divisive narratives, hardening
people’s resolve and deepening social divides. The
residents of areas in the east affected by the prolonged
fighting, particularly children, may need psychological
assistance to heal and to rebuild their lives. Many
others, such as the victims of torture and former
hostages, especially those held for long periods, will
require help to recover.
There is a clear need for a multi-year human
rights national plan of action for Ukraine based on
the recommendations of the United Nation human
rights mechanism and the work of the human rights
monitoring mission. It is critically important that the
recommendations in the annex to the report be part
of the broader reform agenda as the international
community and Ukraine prepare for a major donor
conference later in the autumn.
As the report notes, the Government needs to
seriously address the wider systemic problems facing
the country, such as corruption, with respect to good
governance, the rule of law and human rights. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights reiterates its readiness to work with the
Government on those issues.
Civil society has played a vital role in Ukraine. The
report describes how citizens have become involved
in areas where their Government has been unable to
respond quickly enough, such as accommodating
people fleeing the fighting. Perhaps that new civic
spirit will help drive the next phase of much-needed
change in Ukraine.
Allow me to conclude by stressing the need to find
a peaceful solution to the current situation. We cannot
afford to wait a day longer when at least 50 people are
being killed or wounded every day. The price being

14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

paid by all Ukrainians as a result of the conflict is too
high. Ukrainians and Russian Ukrainians in the east
are losing their lives, but the whole country is paying
the price of the conflict as a result of the deterioration
of social services. The political and economic
consequences of the conflict spill over Ukraine’s
borders, negatively impacting human rights worldwide,
the civilian aeroplane tragedy being just the most
drastic example.
The President: I thank Mr. Šimonović for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for his
extensive briefing. The presence of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in eastern Ukraine and their reporting
from there remain essential. Such missions register and
report facts on the ground, identify the existing gaps in
Government policies and, in the case of the report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, offer important recommendations to the
Ukrainian Government. Such recommendations need to
be followed up as the country’s leadership undertakes
the comprehensive constitutional and administrative
reforms necessary for the country to recover after years
of corruption and neglect, as well as the impact of the
current crisis.
Those missions register the countless and ongoing
human rights violations by the Russia-supported armed
separatists, who, under the false pretexts of selfdetermination and violations of minority rights, have
dealt a blow to the rule of law and human rights in the
region as they persist in their efforts to erode Ukraine’s
sovereignty and to destroy its territorial integrity.
As the Assistant Secretary-General has just
mentioned, a reign of fear and terror in the rebel-held
areas prevails. The most recent report also points out
that law and order in the rebel-held areas has collapsed.
The rule of law has in fact been substituted by the rule
of the gun. The details provided by the report reveal
the true nature of the militant separatists and their
imported leaders, whom their main sponsor, Russia,
has sought time and again in the Chamber to portray as
mere peaceful protesters.

S/PV.7239

The trademark activities of those so-called peaceful
protesters, as the report points out, include intimidation,
abductions, illegal detention, torture and ill-treatment,
as well as the deliberate targeting of critical public
utilities, the illegal occupation and seizing of public
and private property, bank robberies and attacks on coal
mines. To date, 104 buildings remain under the control
of those illegal armed groups. Such illegally occupied
public buildings are often used to detain and torture
civil activists, journalists and political opponents.
Armed separatists have seized warehouses and
factories, using the premises as training camps or
military repair shops. Such actions, as well as their
threats and intimidation, have led to the shutdown of
many factories, causing unemployment in the region
to soar. As the Assistant Secretary-General has just
said, the separatists have abducted some 925 people,
the whereabouts of 465 of whom remain unknown.
Just this week, three Red Cross employees were
reportedly kidnapped and are being held in detention
by the armed militants. None of those actions, all of
which are clear and criminal violations of human rights
law, have ever been condemned by Russia, which has
instead repeatedly sought the Council’s condemnation
of Ukraine for its legitimate efforts to restore law and
order in the east of the country.
In the past two weeks, there have been new
reports — the Assistant Secretary-General has spoken
extensively in that regard — about the situation of
journalists and the media. More journalists have
gone missing or were harassed in eastern Ukraine.
Journalists attempting to report on the crash of Flight
MH-17, including representatives of Dagens Nyheter,
the BBC, the Daily Beast, Nieuwsuur, Time and Russia
Today, were detained and harassed by armed gangs.
As of 15 July, 13,381 people have moved from
Crimea and a new wave of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) is expected during the year, in addition to the
already large numbers of IDPs. The harassment and
discrimination against ethnic Ukrainians, Crimean
Tatars and representatives of religious and other
minorities continue. Restrictions on movement and
the right to peaceful assembly continue. The Crimean
Tatar leaders Mustafa Dzhemilev and Refat Chubarov
have been barred from entering their homeland by the
Russian occupying authorities.
The written records of execution orders,
authorized and signed personally by the so-called

14-500175/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

commander-in-chief of the illegal Donetsk People’s
Republic, Igor Girkin, also known as Strelkov, and
of the hearings of self-proclaimed military tribunals
convicting people to death have been found in
Slovyansk. An illegal militant group, representing no
one but itself and headed by foreign passport holders,
whose sole authority on the ground stems from the guns
that they carry, grants itself the authority to assign and
execute extrajudiciary death sentences on an illegally
occupied territory. The mass graves discovered recently
in areas liberated by the Ukrainian forces are a tragic
testimony to the degree of lawlessness that marks the
insurgent actions.
As the Assistant Secretary-General has just
testified, the armed insurgents are increasingly better
armed and use heavy weaponry, including mortars,
anti-aircraft guns, tanks and armoured vehicles. They
continue to shoot down helicopters and planes, even at
high altitudes, including the downing this week of a
Ukrainian military plane and transport helicopter.
Sources on the ground indicate the tendency of
the past days that whenever Ukrainian troops deploy
sufficient power to pose a threat to the militants and are
in a position to launch strikes against their positions,
the illegal armed groups redeploy to a nearby town,
exposing civilian populations to the threat of combat
and forcing them to flee, as they install their armed
vehicles, artillery and Grad rocket launchers in
residential areas.
The Government’s efforts to establish a ceasefire
or humanitarian corridors have been repeatedly
violated by the insurgents. While Russia is quick to
blame the Ukrainian authorities, we are yet to hear a
single condemnation by Russia of the reckless acts by
the insurgents, including around the crash site of the
Malaysian civilian airliner. We fully agree with the
Assistant Secretary-General about the importance of a
thorough and independent investigation into the crash
and the need to bring those responsible to account.
The reports of the OSCE monitoring mission
have affirmed the facts with regard to the movement
of armed individuals across the Russian border into
Ukraine and back. Instead of closing its borders to
such illegal movements of mercenaries and weapons,
Russia continues to carry out war games at Ukraine’s
eastern border. Alarmingly large numbers of combatready troops and armaments are once again amassed
on Ukraine’s borders. Defence Minister Shoigu’s latest
statements on the combat readiness of so-called Russian
6/20

08/08/2014

peacekeepers are also highly alarming and once again
raise serious questions about Russia’s true intentions in
the region.
No less troubling is Russia’s ongoing escalation
of Cold War rhetoric against Europe and the West,
now extended into sanctioning food imports, which
will undoubtedly affect the Russian population
itself. All those actions are the exact opposite to the
confidence-building and de-escalation that are so badly
needed, for which the international community has
called repeatedly. While we are seriously concerned
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
east of Ukraine and the civilian suffering — again, the
Assistant Secretary-General has spoken extensively
about that — we must be very clear. The key to ending
the suffering is in the hands of Russia and hinges on its
continued support to illegal separatist groups.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to start with two introductory
comments.
First and foremost, it would be remiss of me not to
note that we deem completely wrong the engineering
decision that was taken during the reconstruction of
the Security Council Chamber. Mr. Šimonović should
not cover up the historical picture by which the world
recognizes the Security Council. That error must be
corrected.
Secondly, we understand that everyone has the
right to a vacation, including Mr. Šimonović. However,
it is clear that he is a little divorced from reality here.
It is not clear what proposal by President Poroshenko
Mr. Šimonović is praising concerning the start of
talks on a ceasefire. We know nothing about any such
proposal.
Moreover, yesterday the Ukrainian authorities
stated that they were interrupting the ceasefire regime
established pursuant to resolution 2166 (2014) so as
to create the conditions necessary for an objective
international inquiry into the deaths of the passengers
on the Malaysia Airlines airliner, as a result of which
this investigation is confronted by serious problems.
I shall now return to the issue under discussion at
this meeting.
The Security Council did not request the report of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and therefore should not be discussing it, especially
since the report is interesting merely as an example of

14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

elegant political rhetoric, where facts and conclusions
are painstakingly shaped to fit a particular political
requirement. In reading the report, what jumps out is
the absence of what would seem to be the first thing one
would expect of United Nations human rights defenders,
namely, a call on the sides to cease all military activity,
as if the right to life were not the principal right of any
human being.
The report gave no space to a condemnation of the
instances of use by the Ukrainian security forces, in
populated areas, of artillery, multiple-launch rocket
systems and phosphorus shells, which are prohibited
by international conventions. Is there even any passing
reference to the promise made by Ukraine not to
bomb the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and to ensure
their security? Nothing is being said regarding the
flowery promise made by President Poroshenko to the
inhabitants of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions on this
very topic; there is no reference to this treacherous
breach of promises.
The escalation of the so-called anti-terrorist
operation, with its many casualties among the civilian
population, continues. Ukrainian security forces are
shelling residential neighbourhoods and infrastructure.
There is no end in sight to the shelling of Gorlovka.
Yesterday, five individuals died there and 10 were
injured; a church burned down; a power station was
destroyed; and the water supply has been interrupted.
Thursday morning, the centre of Donetsk was again
shelled. Shells hit a hospital admission ward as well
as residential high-rises and a bus depot. Overall, 156
power substations, 18 boilers and seven gas lines were
destroyed. These are but a few examples.
The report pushes the idea that the self-defence
formations are to blame for everything. They are
accused of everything short of cannibalism. For
example, in paragraph 5 it is stated that those formations
were deliberately targeting critically important
infrastructure. In other words, they are not only firing
upon themselves, they are doing it intentionally. What
has led to this brilliant conclusion? And why is there
no similar conclusion regarding the actions of the
Ukrainian authorities, which are methodically bombing
residential neighbourhods? Sometimes from one day to
the next they are fighting on the same, almost destroyed
high-rise building.
A separate topic is the situation of children.
According to the information we have received, there
are 1,223 child orphans in the Donetsk and Luhansk

S/PV.7239

regions. The authors of the report termed the efforts
of the self-defence formations to take those orphans
to safety to the Russian Federation as attempted
kidnapping. The report also contains a reference to
seriously ill children to whom Russia could provide
expert assistance. It states with satisfaction that as a
result of the intervention of the Ukrainian authorities,
the children remained in Donetsk. It seems that United
Nations philanthropists believe that children thrive
under fire.
Russia’s requests to human rights bodies regarding
the evacuation of children have not received any
response from Kyiv. What do United Nations human
rights defenders think about this? Do children not
deserve safety?
More than 820,000 Ukrainians are currently
finding shelter in Russia. Requests for regulating their
status total 188,000. In our territory we have set up 643
temporary shelters for those who have nowhere else
to go. Currently there are 47,500 individuals there, of
which more than 16,000 are children.
The report gives plenty of useful advice to the
Ukrainian authorities. It suggests incorporating those
who are eradicating the civilian population of southeastern Ukraine, the so-called volunteer battalions,
into the armed forces of Ukraine.
The criminals who are currently killing women and
children and committing other serious human rights
violations must be arrested and brought to justice.
But instead of this, it is proposed that they should be
legitimized. Perhaps one should also legitimize the
foreign mercenaries that are taking part in the so-called
anti-terrorist operation, something the Ukrainian
authorities no longer conceal.
It would be remiss of me not to mention the
extremely biased picture painted by the report
regarding the situation of journalists. Allegedly only
one representative of the Russian media was detained
and then released by the Ukrainian army, and not
a word is said about the detention and beating up of
journalists from the television channels Zvezda and
LifeNews. The reported version, that the two Russian
journalists who died could have been killed by the selfdefence formations, is false.
Regarding the human rights situation in Ukraine,
one cannot focus solely on the territory under the
control of the self-defence formations, which, judging
by the report, suffers from a complete absence of

14-500177/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

the rule of law. Is there any rule of law in the rest of
Ukraine? There is a passing reference in the report
to a number of steps that are aimed at banning the
Communist Party of Ukraine. These legitimately
elected parliamentarians are currently being brutally
persecuted, including by law-enforcement agencies, for
their political convictions. This is but another step in
the systematic punishment of those who have come to
power as a result of the armed revolt of their political
opponents, who, by the way, just happen to represent
the south-eastern part of the country.
A clear example of the disregard for the principle
of the rule of law is the lack of progress in investigating
the serious crimes committed in the Maidan and in
Odessa and Mariupol. In the current atmosphere of
fear, is it any wonder that Odessans and the citizens of
other areas do not trust the investigators sent by Kyiv
and refuse to cooperate with them, even as documents
relating to these crimes are disappearing without a
trace? This is mentioned in the report.
It is clear, and it is confirmed in the report, that
the armed forces, including the Ukrainian security
services, now have unprecedented power and are clearly
violating fundamental human rights. They are seizing
people without due process, using violence against
detainees, and using the tactics of intimidation and
threats to extract testimony from witnesses. Bearing in
mind the fact that the justice system is paralysed, what
sort of impartial investigations and prosecution can we
expect in Ukraine?
The Government of Ukraine is ignoring the
commitments it has undertaken, including under
the Geneva statement of 17 April. The process of
constitutional reform in Ukraine, which envisions
decentralizing power, expanding the authority of the
regions and giving the Russian language special status,
is being put off indefinitely. In fact, there is now talk
of strengthening presidential power, which is exactly
the opposite of what was demanded by the Maidan
protesters demanded, whom the authorities are trying
to get rid of. That begs the question, what did the people
fight for?
We wish once again to underscore the harmfulness
of attempts to resolve the crisis in Ukraine through
violence. We call for an immediate end to military
actions in the country and a solution to the humanitarian
problems.

8/20

08/08/2014

A very important step should be the speedy
beginning of constitutional reforms, which should
involve all the regions of Ukraine and would be open to
public consideration. As for the unfounded conjectures
in the report regarding the situation in Crimea, which is
part of the Russian Federation, this cannot be a subject
for discussion at today’s meeting, which is dedicated to
the situation in Ukraine. Having adopted the historic
decision on reunification with Russia, the inhabitants
of Crimea have delivered themselves from the horrors
that are unfolding for everyone to see in the southeastern part of Ukraine.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for his
briefing.
Armed conflicts have continued to escalate in
eastern Ukraine, resulting in severe casualties and
property damage. China is deeply concerned about the
situation.
In armed conflicts, civilians are the most fragile
and vulnerable group. Three days ago, Mr. Ging of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
briefed Council members here in this Chamber on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
The international community should call on all
parties to take, as soon as possible, actions aimed at
easing the situation in Ukraine, building mutual trust
and finding a political solution to the crisis. The priority
now is to implement an immediate ceasefire through
political consultations, carry out a comprehensive
dialogue and, on the basis of initiatives such as the
Geneva agreement, fully leverage the role of existing
dialogue and the liaison mechanism in search of a
comprehensive political solution.
The Ukrainian crisis can be addressed only
through political means. In that process, the legitimate
demands of all sides and ethnic groups have to be fully
accommodated in order to achieve a balance of interests
for all. The international community should also play a
constructive role in seeking a political solution to the
crisis by vigorously engaging in mediation, pushing for
talks, encouraging the parties concerned to maintain
dialogue and increased engagement, and creating
favourable external conditions for effective interaction
among all parties.
China supports all efforts aimed at easing the
situation, ending the crisis and promoting a political

14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

solution. We stand ready to work with other members
of the international community to continue to play an
active and constructive role in that regard.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We also
thank Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, for his briefing on the human rights
situation in Ukraine. We also commend the entire team
of the United Nations human rights monitoring mission,
who continue to diligently perform their mission in that
difficult environment.
Earlier this week, the Council met on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7234).
We expressed our concern with regard to the recent
developments, including the rapidly growing number
of refugees and internally displaced people, as well as
the deteriorating humanitarian situation. I would like
to recall that, in the same meeting, Rwanda proposed
holding a monthly meeting under the agenda item “The
situation in Ukraine”, in order to have a comprehensive
view and a regular assessment of the crisis in Ukraine,
instead of the current ad hoc, piecemeal and letterbased approach.
The report under review gives a gruesome
description of the situation in eastern Ukraine. Since
April, more than 15,000 innocent civilians have been
killed and 4,000 injured. In only five days — between
10 and 15 July — about 478 people were killed,
including women and children.
Furthermore, the population in areas controlled by
armed groups has been subjected to abduction, arbitrary
detention, forced labour and forced recruitment, sexual
harassment, torture and execution. On the other hand,
Ukrainians, including children, are caught between
fights of armies that continue to deploy heavy weaponry
in disregard of human life and seriously damaging
civilian infrastructure. We agree that this could
amount to violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law.
Rwanda condemns the use of civilians as human
shields by armed groups, such as the incident of 14 June
where two people were killed and eight were wounded.
We urge all parties involved to act proportionately and
to protect civilians as a matter of priority. The issue of
abduction and detention is of particular concern, with
more than 900 people reported to have been abducted
since mid-April, among whom there are a large number
of women and girls. The growing trend and tactics

S/PV.7239

being deployed by armed groups, including abduction
and torture, is extremely worrying. Also worrying are
reported cases of reprisals and illegal detention by
the Government, including the illegal detention of a
Russian journalist for a long time and in an unknown
place, as well the anti-Russian hate speech in the social
media and the targeting of Russian-owned banks and
businesses. All those serious human rights violations
must be thoroughly investigated and those responsible
must be held accountable. We urge the human rights
monitoring mission and the national preventive
mechanism to redouble their efforts in ensuring that
human rights are upheld and respected.
With regard to the crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, Rwanda remains deeply concerned that the
ongoing investigation is being hindered by the fighting
around the crash site. It is imperative that the utmost
security be guaranteed for the international investigators
to carry out their mandate. Let us not forget that the
families are still grieving for their loved ones. We owe
them respect and the dignity they deserve. The remains
of those killed must be immediately returned for proper
burial, and the consequences of the plane crash must be
determined with a sense of urgency.
Finally, let me reiterate our call for the need to
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. In that regard, we call on all
parties to respect the ceasefire, de-escalate the
situation and engage in an open political dialogue to
find a lasting solution to the crisis, based on President
Poroshenko’s peace plan. We do not want to find
ourselves with another long-lasting crisis, adding to
many others already on the agenda of the Council. We
urge all members to consider the lives of Ukrainians
and to use any influence they may have to encourage
political dialogue. Failure should not be our default
option, as it will continue to undermine the credibility
of this institution.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Mr. Šimonović for his presentation
of the fourth report of the human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine, which remains an essential
source of information for us. I would like to take this
opportunity to express our full support for the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and all the staff of the mission, who
are working under very difficult conditions.
The security, humanitarian and human rights
situations in Donetsk and Luhansk continue to

14-500179/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

deteriorate due to the armed separatist groups operating
there. In the east of the country, arbitrary arrests,
forced disappearances, summary executions, hate
speech — in a word, terror — are affecting all civilians.
Those who return after having been abducted report
having been tortured by armed groups. The separatists
are deliberately targeting public infrastructure to
restrict civilian access to water, electricity and medical
care, and thereby increase their humanitarian needs.
Fighting and acts of intimidation are causing civilian
casualties and displacement. The report presented to us
illustrates that situation.
In Crimea, discrimination is now common and
Tatars are victims of harassment and intimidation,
while the commission of inquiry, despite our repeated
requests, still has no access to the Crimea.
Displacement and destabilization in the east, where
the main industrial centres are located, have economic
consequences for the entire country.
The violence is fuelled and maintained from
outside. As Mr. Šimonović has just reminded us, the
armed groups are increasingly more professional and
well armed. Their leadership is made up primarily of
people from the Russian Federation, who apparently
fought in Chechnya and Transnistria. We denounce
the presence of those foreign elements and call for an
immediate end to outside support. We join the appeal
launched by the Ukrainian Government for the flow of
arms and fighters from Russia to cease.
We reiterate our call for the fighting in eastern
Ukraine to stop and for armed groups there to lay
down their weapons and evacuate all public buildings
occupied illegally. The separatists must engage in a
process of political dialogue that allows them to express
their position legally and peacefully. The trilateral
contact group under the auspices of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe is playing a key
role in that regard so that the Ukrainian authorities and
those groups can constructively achieve a ceasefire.
Faced with this situation, the Ukrainian Government
has a responsibility to take appropriate and proportionate
measures, in accordance with international standards,
to fight armed groups, protect people and control of its
borders. It has already taken steps to provide assistance
to people forcibly expelled from their homes. Wherever
Kyiv has restored its authority, basic services to the
population are operating again and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has

10/20

08/08/2014

noted the return of displaced persons. We encourage
the full cooperation of the Ukrainian Government with
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
to continue to meet the humanitarian needs. We also
welcome the solidarity of Ukrainian citizens in helping
those who have been displaced.
Everything must be done to encourage a return to
calm, which is a necessary precondition for launching
a political dialogue. That involves, first and foremost, I
repeat, control of the Russian/Ukrainian border so that
the flow of weapons and men is stopped.
The international community stands ready to
support Ukraine in its current efforts to regain its unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We welcome the
organization by the European Union, at the beginning
of July, of a meeting of the contact group aimed at
coordinating economic assistance to Ukraine.
New measures against Russia have been
necessary — adopted by the European Union, the
United States, Canada, Japan and Switzerland.
They demonstrate the international community’s
determination to push Russia to work towards a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate how much
we regret the fact that the investigators of the crash of
Flight MH-17 have still not been able to complete their
task in spite of the efforts of Australia, the Netherlands
and Malaysia, in full cooperation with the Ukrainian
authorities. As Ms. Pillay said, we could be talking
about a war crime here, and every effort should be
made to ensure that those responsible answer for their
actions. Generally speaking, every element that the
commission of inquiry collects should be able to be
used in judicial proceedings.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for his briefing.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council follows
a national day of mourning in Australia yesterday,
when all Australians remembered those who died
when Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down
over separatist-held territory in eastern Ukraine. That
deplorable crime, unanimously condemned by the
Council, is a reminder of the terrible consequences of
the violence in eastern Ukraine and of the deliberate
actions of armed separatist groups. It is a reminder to
all those who stoke the flames of division that fuelling
violence has widespread, devastating and often
unpredictable consequences.
14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

In the days immediately following the adoption
of resolution 2166 (2014), an international mission for
the protection of the investigation was established, led
by the Netherlands, with Australian and Malaysian
participation. Despite intimidation by separatists and
their frequently imposed restrictions on access to
the crash site, the unarmed mission accessed it on a
number of occasions, locating and recovering human
remains and personal effects and recovering evidence.
We worked swiftly and thoroughly in the areas of
highest priority, and the mission has now completed the
substantive part of its work at the site at this stage. On
Wednesday the Netherlands announced the mission’s
withdrawal from the site. When search and security
conditions improve we will return there to ensure that
we have recovered all identifiable remains.
The investigation into the cause of the crash will
of course continue, led by the Dutch safety board with
input from the International Civil Aviation Organization
and other international partners. As with the parallel
investigation into possible criminal responsibility for
the downing of MH-17, this is again an international
effort coordinated by the Dutch. The results of those
investigations will be crucial elements in ensuring
accountability, as demanded by resolution 2166 (2014),
and it is imperative that all States cooperate fully with
those efforts.
We are very concerned about what the fourth
report on Ukraine by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović today have said. The
report tells two stories. In most of Ukraine under
Government control, the Government has taken steps
towards making constitutional and political reforms,
including protecting minority rights, and there has been
some movement towards establishing accountability.
Judicial reform has also begun, although that needs
much more work. Those steps are still incomplete, but
they are going in the right direction.
Conversely, the report paints a dire picture of
the human-rights situation in separatist-held parts of
Ukraine — abductions, torture, extra-judicial killings
by armed groups, increasing numbers of civilians
killed, deliberate targeting by armed groups of critical
public utilities such as water, electricity, sewerage, and
growing numbers of internally displaced people. These
illegal armed groups have seized Ukrainian territory
through violent means and — I quote from paragraph
26 of the report — “inflicted on the populations a reign

S/PV.7239

of intimidation and terror to maintain their position of
control”. These groups have no legitimacy; their actions
have had terrible consequences. In separatist-controlled
areas, as the report says, the rule of law has disappeared
and been replaced by the rule of violence. This is now
the fourth time that the Council has received a United
Nations report documenting these human-rights abuses.
The pattern has continued, and in some places under
separatist control it has worsened significantly. Those
responsible for the violations have acted with impunity.
This cannot continue, and they will be held accountable
for their crimes.
No country can accept illegally armed insurgents
taking control of parts of its territory. In these
circumstances of continued destabilization and use of
force by separatists, the Ukrainian authorities have the
right to protect their own citizens and reassert control
over their sovereign territory. They must of course do
so in a manner proportionate to the circumstances, and
all parties must comply with international humanitarian
law. It is self-evident that the human rights and
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine will improve
only with an end to the conflict. That requires that
separatist groups lay down their arms and cease using
violence against the Ukrainian State.
It also requires that Russia stop its provocation
and destabilization of eastern Ukraine and use
its considerable influence over the separatists to
de-escalate the situation. But Russia has not done so.
It has not taken action to control its borders. Weapons
and fighters continue to flow from Russia into eastern
Ukraine, fuelling the conflict. The build-up of Russian
troops along the Ukrainian border, the Russian military
exercises in the area and the rapid deployment of new
and sophisticated military capabilities only add to the
destabilization of eastern Ukraine. Serious concerns
about Russian military preparedness — what actually
looks like combat readiness — are widespread among
countries in the region and around the world. Our
concerns have been aggravated by Russia’s attempts to
construct a case for intervention in eastern Ukraine, a
case that is fraudulent and cynically self-serving. The
humanitarian problems in eastern Ukraine are a result
of the instability and conflict deliberately manufactured
by armed groups and supported by Russia. That has
inevitably produced a worsening humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine, but effectively one limited to areas
occupied by the separatists and certainly not on the
scale of what we understand by a humanitarian crisis.
Russia can most usefully contribute to alleviating the

14-5001711/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

situation by ending its support for separatist groups and
influencing them to end the conflict.
In conclusion, the human-rights situation, the
downing of MH-17 and the humanitarian plight of
many are all the result of the systematic, manufactured
destabilization of eastern Ukraine. The consequences
have been grave for Ukraine and its people, and now
also for the people of many other countries who have
lost their citizens. This destabilization must stop.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović for his very thorough briefing on the humanrights situation in Ukraine.
Luxembourg shares the deep concern of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights about
the collapse of the rule of law and the worsening
violence in the areas of eastern Ukraine controlled
by separatist armed groups. The report based on the
thorough work of the United Nations human-rights
observation mission reveals the seriousness and
extent of the human-rights violations committed by
these groups. Systematic recourse to intimidation,
abductions, forced disappearances, forced recruitment
and labour, arbitrary detention, torture, executions,
assassination and destruction of civilian infrastructure
sows terror among the people. The victims of these
heinous acts are not only those who openly oppose
the separatists but also ordinary citizens, teachers,
journalists, students, women and children. These grave
violations of human rights must stop. Those who have
committed them must be brought to justice in order to
account for their actions.
The situation is especially worrying in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. The people there are caught in
the crossfire of the intensifying clashes between the
Ukrainian security forces and the illegal armed groups,
which are increasingly heavily armed. The report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights gives the example of a case in which
illegal armed groups used the civilian population as
human shields. The report also mentions that these
groups are positioning themselves and carrying out
their attacks from densely populated areas, thereby
endangering the civilian population. Such behaviour
is irresponsible. It is unacceptable. All parties must
respect international humanitarian law.
We take this opportunity to once again call on
Russia to distance itself from the illegal armed groups in

12/20

08/08/2014

the east of Ukraine and to publicly condemn violations
of human rights and international humanitarian
law committed by these groups. For its part, in its
operations, Ukraine must act in a proportionate manner,
in compliance with international standards, and ensure
the protection of civilians.
On a more positive note, there is clear improvement
in the human rights situation in Ukrainian cities that
have been liberated from the clutches of the separatists.
We encourage the Ukrainian authorities to commit to
improving the lives of local people, in particular by
rebuilding infrastructure and restoring basic services.
The deteriorating situation in eastern Ukraine
should not lead us to forget the human rights
situation in Crimea. The people of Crimea, especially
Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, who support unity in
Ukraine continue to be subjected to intimidation and
discrimination. Minorities who have not yet left the
peninsula live in an atmosphere of fear. The plight of
people affected by HIV and AIDS illustrates the tragic
negative impact of the illegal annexation of Crimea by
Russia. According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, 20 patients
have died since 10 June due to a lack of proper medical
treatment.
At the political and diplomatic levels, all efforts
should be aimed at creating conditions conducive to the
implementation of President Poroshenko’s peace plan.
The talks initiated between Ukraine and Russia under
the trilateral contact group, under the auspices of the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), are essential in that
regard. They must continue in order for an agreement to
be found as soon as possible on the release of hostages
and the establishment of a mechanism to monitor the
ceasefire. The OSCE observer mission that has just
been deployed to the two border posts at Gukovo and
Donetsk on the Russian side of the border is also an
element that could help reduce tensions. Russia, for its
part, must stop any destabilizing action.
Let me conclude by stating a simple imperative. To
honour the memory of the hundreds of victims of the
conflict in Ukraine, including the 298 people aboard
Flight MH-17, which was shot down three weeks
ago, we must redouble our diplomatic efforts to find
a political solution to this conflict as soon as possible
in accordance with President Poroshenko’s peace plan.
We owe it to the millions of civilians who want respect

14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7239

for their most basic rights and do not want to be the
victims of a conflict that dates back to another era.

areas near the crash site in order to guarantee the safety
and security of the international investigation.

Mr. Khair (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.

We urge all parties to exercise restraint and not to
resort to hostile acts or engage in provocative actions. It
is also essential that they distance themselves from any
hate speech and other wrong type of speech to ensure
that displaced persons can return to their homes as
quickly as possible.

Jordan has taken note of the contents of the fourth
report of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and the recommendations it
contains. In that respect, we would like to express our
support for the United Nations efforts and those of
the Secretary-General to achieve a peaceful political
solution to the conflict in Ukraine. We also urge all
parties in Ukraine to cooperate with the United Nations
human rights monitoring mission and to guarantee the
freedom of its members and their safe and secure access
to the various sites throughout Ukraine.
Jordan would like to express its concerns regarding
the wide scale chaos and terror and the intimidation,
arrests and executions of civilians in eastern Ukraine,
as noted in the report, which have resulted in the
displacement of a great number of civilians. We would
like to reiterate the need for the Ukrainian Government
to protect civilians in keeping with international law and
applicable international humanitarian norms. We urge
the parties to avoid targeting civilians or carrying out
reprisals against them and to protect the most vulnerable
categories of the population, including children. We
urge all parties that possess some sort of influence in
Ukraine to work to put an end to the deterioration of the
situation in order to create an environment conducive to
a political solution to the conflict.
Jordan welcomes the progress achieved by the
Ukrainian authorities on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the previous three
reports. We call on the Ukrainian authorities to devote
greater efforts to promoting the rule of law and human
rights, as outlined in the most recent report. We also
call on them to work to reform the civilian and security
sectors. Similarly, it is essential to be mindful of the
concerns of minorities and groups whose primary
language is not Ukrainian, in order to achieve a
democratic, pluralistic society in which all citizens can
enjoy their full rights.
Jordan expresses its concern regarding the
deterioration of the security situation in eastern
Ukraine and its impact on the investigation of the crash
site of the Malaysian aeroplane. All the relevant parties
must therefore abide by resolution 2166 (2014), which
demands that an end be put to military activities in

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović and his team
for the thorough research contained in the report of the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine.
This is an extremely challenging time for the people
of Ukraine. No-one should be driven from their home,
and we are committed to doing everything possible
to assist the displaced, regardless of where they have
fled. No-one should be forced to live without access
to essential medicine or with only an hour of access to
water a day.
As we have consistently made clear throughout
this conflict, and as we reiterate today, all sides must
take every precaution to prevent the loss of civilian life.
The humanitarian situation needs addressing, but not
by those who have caused it. That is why we welcome
the fact that the Ukrainian Government has created
humanitarian corridors, which are allowing critical aid
to get into — and civilians to get out of — separatistcontrolled areas. Ukraine is making a concerted effort
to address the complex needs of approximately 117,000
people who have been internally displaced. In doing
so, Ukraine is working effectively with international
humanitarian organizations to provide assistance.
This week, Russia proposed creating humanitarian
corridors to assist the affected populations in Ukraine.
But in Ukraine, urgent humanitarian assistance
should be delivered by the international humanitarian
organizations that have the expertise, experience and
independence to provide it. It should not be delivered
by Russia. Given that Ukraine has allowed international
humanitarian groups to deliver aid within its territory,
there is no logical reason that Russia should seek to
deliver it. Therefore, any further unilateral intervention
by Russia into Ukrainian territory, including one under
the guise of providing humanitarian aid, would be
completely unacceptable and deeply alarming, and it
would be viewed as an invasion of Ukraine.

14-5001713/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

We welcome today’s statement by the International
Committee of the Red Cross that it is exploring the
possibility of providing more support in conflict areas,
which is something they can do once they have worked
out the modalities with the Ukrainian authorities and,
critically, once they have the security guarantees they
need from the armed separatists, something Russia has
not yet helped to secure. If Russia wishes to channel aid
to those populations, I am certain that my colleagues
on the Council can take swift steps to ensure that
an impartial international aid organization like the
International Committee of the Red Cross can deliver
the aid on Russia’s behalf.
Last week the Russians again floated the idea of
sending Russian “peacekeepers” to eastern Ukraine.
A Russian peacekeeper in Ukraine is an oxymoron. At
every step in the current crisis, Russians have sabotaged
peace, not built it. It is particularly worrisome given
Russia’s purported annexation of Crimea, which
was predicated on calls by an illegitimate puppet
Government for Russia to send troops to restore peace.
Peacekeepers are impartial, yet Russia fully supports
Russian armed separatists in the conflict.
We have seen the peace that Russian occupation
has brought to Crimea since that time. As the most
recent United Nations report makes clear, the freedoms
of speech and assembly have been violently repressed,
ethnic minorities systematically persecuted and
civilians abducted with impunity, 350 of whom are
still unaccounted for. The United Nations also said that
no progress has been made on any of the 17 previous
recommendations it has made to Russia on serious
human rights problems in Crimea.
Russia has repeatedly accused members of the
Council of politicizing a humanitarian situation, but
Russia has it backwards. In fact, it is Russia that is
trying to disguise a political crisis — one manufactured
and exported by Moscow — as a humanitarian one.
The very humanitarian problems that Russia is
decrying in eastern Ukraine and turning a blind eye
to in Crimea are directly traceable to violence it has
facilitated or supported. Why have thousands of people
been displaced? Look no further than the “egregious
human rights abuses” in separatist-controlled areas
documented in the United Nations report. Why do
civilians lack access to basic services? The United
Nations report documents the “deliberate targeting by
the armed groups of critical public utilities like water,
electricity and sewage plants”.

14/20

08/08/2014

In recent weeks, Russian cross-border military
assistance to illegal separatists has actually increased
substantially. Russian tanks, infantry fighting vehicles,
multiple rocket launcher systems and truckloads of
munitions continue to flow to separatists while new
fighters are trained on Russian soil. Russia continues
to take actions that escalate the conflict, amassing
more and more troops and hardware near the border,
launching extensive military exercises this week and
shelling across the border into sovereign Ukrainian
territory.
Perhaps most shocking is that Russia has doubleddown on its support for rebels and provocative actions
after witnessing the horrific carnage that resulted from
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. On
Wednesday, international investigators were once again
forced to suspend their work at the MH-17 crash site
due to risks of being taken hostage by illegal armed
groups and the threat felt by the increased concentration
of Russian troops nearby. That is deplorable. It is yet
another insult to the dignity of the victims and their
loved ones, who have already endured more than any
families should ever have to endure. It flies in the face
of the resolution adopted by the Security Council and
the unified commitment to justice that the resolution
embodies (resolution 2166 (2014)). It obstructs efforts
to punish those responsible for that abhorrent crime.
In conclusion, let me read from a statement given
by a senior Russian official:
“The population is panicking and there are a
growing number of refugees who are attempting
to flee in order to save their lives. A humanitarian
catastrophe is in the making. Over the past week,
the Russian Federation has continued to receive
refugees. However, tens of thousands of innocent
civilians remain in the conflict zone. Those
circumstances dictate the logic of the steps to be
taken by us now.”
Those remarks were delivered by a senior Russian
official in the Security Council about a region where
Russian-backed separatists were sowing violence.
Only the remarks were delivered on 8 August 2008, six
years ago to the day, and the country that the Russian
senior official was speaking about was not Ukraine
but Georgia. Playing the role of Luhansk and Donetsk
was the province of South Ossetia. We all know
what followed. South Ossetia, Crimea, now eastern
Ukraine — similar words have presaged military action.

14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

The onus is on the Council and the entire international
community to meet legitimate humanitarian needs and
do so urgently, but in so doing to make sure that history
does not repeat itself.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for his
briefing.
We also appreciate the dedicated work of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
and welcome its fourth report, which provides a clear
assessment of the situation on the ground. As the report
elaborates in detail, the continuing violence in eastern
Ukraine has resulted in a growing number of casualties
and a further deterioration of the human rights situation.
We are troubled that illegal armed groups have
committed serious human rights violations, including
abductions, arbitrary detentions, torture, harassment
and killings. New allegations of military tribunals
and execution orders by armed groups are particularly
alarming. All allegations of such egregious crimes
must be investigated thoroughly, and the perpetrators
must be held accountable.
Meanwhile, it is worrisome that the situation in
the east is now affecting the border region of Ukraine,
along with a significant increase in the number of
people fleeing the eastern region. Hate speech is also
deepening divisions between communities and fueling
tensions.
In the light of such a volatile situation, we believe
that the only way out of the crisis is an immediate
cessation of all hostilities through constructive
dialogue. To achieve that, it is of paramount importance
that all parties agree on an immediate, genuine and
durable ceasefire, building upon relevant agreements,
including the Berlin Joint Declaration.
At the same time, the illegal armed groups must
lay down their arms and stop provocative actions
aimed at destabilizing Ukraine. We support the
critical role of the trilateral contact group and the
observer mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe at the Russian-Ukrainian border
in de-escalating intentions to create the conditions for
a political process.
Before concluding, we once again call attention
to the importance of a full, thorough and independent
international investigation of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17. All concerned parties must

S/PV.7239

comply with their obligations under resolution 2166
(2014) and fully cooperate with such an investigation.
Despite ongoing tensions on the ground, we
continue to believe that a political solution is necessary
and attainable. There is not a moment to lose. With
that shared sense of urgency, we once again encourage
all concerned parties to continue exerting maximum
efforts to seek a peaceful political solution.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for his briefing.
The fourth report of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine presents a
worrying depiction of the deteriorating human rights
and humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the
country. It gives an account of extensive breakdown of
public utilities as well as a mass exodus of citizens. The
intensified clashes between the Ukrainian military and
rebel forces over the past few days indicate a collapse
of the rule of law, which has led to grave violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
To address the humanitarian situation in eastern
Ukraine, the parties to the conflict must engage in direct
dialogue with the aim of resolving their differences.
There can be no military solution to the conflict.
Rather, as we have observed, since the conflict began,
that will only exacerbate the political and humanitarian
situation and continue to take a toll on innocent
civilians. Undoubtedly, efforts by the Government to
regain control of the rebel-controlled territories have
come at a huge cost in terms of civilian casualties and
the destruction of vital infrastructure. It has also led to
a rapid escalation of hostilities. We therefore urge the
Government to ensure full application of international
human rights norms and guarantees.
In the face of the rising number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), we urge all sides to allow free
and safe movement of the population. We also reiterate
our call for an effective preparedness mechanism
that will alleviate any challenges that IDPs might be
exposed to, particularly as the winter approaches.
The Government of Ukraine should work stridently
to establish a unified registration system for internally
displaced persons and exempt humanitarian assistance
from taxation. It should also ratify the United NationsGovernment customs agreement that would facilitate
the entry of humanitarian workers and goods to the
region.

14-5001715/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

The parties to the conflict must exercise restraint.
They must respect the Charter of the United Nations,
work on the basis of consensus, show commitment to
compromising and seek a comprehensive settlement
through peaceful means. We reiterate our call on
Member States with influence to work assiduously and
to use the existing bilateral and multilateral instruments
in resolving the crisis.
For its part, the international community should do
more to promote peace and dialogue. In that connection,
we acknowledge the purposeful and spirited engagement
of the United Nations in the efforts to re-establish order
and stability in Ukraine. It should continue to play a
pivotal role in resolving the crisis. Nigeria supports all
efforts that would result in the easing of tensions and
propel the parties towards a peaceful settlement.
On the economic impact of the crisis, we note
the crippling effects of the recession in Donetsk and
Luhansk, which, if not properly addressed, could have
a severe impact on the rest of the country. The region,
which is the hub of industrial enterprise and mining,
has been harshly affected. Factories and businesses
have shut down. Public utilities have been damaged, gas
reserves have been exhausted and there is a shortage of
water and medical supplies. The task of rebuilding will
indeed be very daunting, particularly in the light of the
economic recession currently gripping the country.
The challenges facing the Government of Ukraine
are enormous. The yearning for the restoration of law,
order and security, on the one hand, and the arduous
task of combating the armed separatist groups, on the
other, cannot be overemphasized. Nigeria reaffirms
that only a cessation of hostilities and the return to
dialogue can present an opportunity for the redress of
the humanitarian situation. To that end, we believe that
the recommendations contained in the report, which
stressed the imperative for the entrenchment of the rule
of law, accountability and the administration of justice,
are central to the sustainability of peace, security and
development in Ukraine.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović for his briefing on
the human rights situation in Ukraine.
The ongoing deterioration of the security and
human rights situation in eastern Ukraine continues
to be of great concern. The actions of armed groups,
the increased number of armed men and weapons,

16/20

08/08/2014

including heavy weapons, unilateral acts, the intensified
fighting and the human rights violations, which seem
to be growing, continue to fuel the spiral of violence,
threatening to further exacerbate the humanitarian
situation. The toll in human lives increases with each
violent confrontation, and the situation of the civilians
still in the areas of fighting is extremely worrisome.
The death of 298 people as a result of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 on 17 July could
constitute a war crime, as the Assistant SecretaryGeneral Šimonović has just said. We recall that in
resolution 2166 (2014) the Security Council demanded
that those responsible be held accountable for their acts.
The human rights violations described in the report
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights during the reporting period are very
worrying. The cases of kidnapping, illegal detention,
torture, murder, execution, extortion and destruction
of property are unjustifiable. Despite the repeated calls
of the international community for all the necessary
measures to be taken for the effective prevention
and protection of human rights, including economic,
social and political rights, and for the guarantee of
their full enjoyment by all Ukrainians, irrespective of
their ethnicity, language, cultural group, religion and
location in the country, the human rights violations
seem to have become unremitting. There must be an
in-depth investigation of such violations and their
perpetrators must be brought to justice.
The risks involved are very high and the possibility
of finding a peaceful way out of the crisis is increasingly
subject to conditions. The more time passes, the deeper
the wounds and the more difficult the reconciliation
needed for a lasting peace will become.
Having talked about the humanitarian situation at
the most recent meeting of the Council (see S/PV.7234),
I will not repeat what we said then about Ukraine but
will limit myself to reiterating the urgent call to strictly
respect obligations with regard to the protection of
civilians in the areas affected by the violence. As noted
in the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, all those involved in
the hostilities must act in accordance with the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. We
also underscore the need to ensure the conditions for
civilians to leave the areas affected by the fighting
between the Ukrainian forces and armed groups, to
take all appropriate measures for the urgent needs of
the displaced to be met and to ensure that assistance

14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

reaches those who need it, including in areas not under
the Government’s control.
In conclusion, since the Council began to deal with
the situation in Ukraine, we have seen almost only its
continuous and significant deterioration. The Council,
marked by deep divisions on the issue, has not been able
to make a decisive contribution to achieving a political
and diplomatic solution to the crisis. Furthermore, the
efforts of the Secretary-General, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and other actors
have not yielded the expected results.
Argentina believes that the Security Council
must assume its responsibilities under the Charter
and facilitate a political and diplomatic solution to the
very worrisome situation facing Ukraine. However,
only through the constructive diplomacy of the most
influential actors, avoiding belligerent rhetoric, all
unilateral acts and any interference in the internal
affairs of States, whether military, political or
economic, and by working to calm the situation, while
exercising maximum self-restraint, can the conditions
be established for the urgent process of dialogue to
begin.
We emphasize the need to step up efforts in
that regard. To that end, it is essential that all actors
demonstrate political will and the conviction that the
only acceptable way is dialogue and that resorting
to violence is not an option. The Geneva and Berlin
declarations continue to serve as a road map to advance
a process of national dialogue that promotes trust among
the various communities and reassures all Ukrainians
throughout Ukraine that their main concerns will be
addressed.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, for his briefing.
Chile reiterates its concern about the human rights
situation in eastern Ukraine, in particular in Donetsk
and Luhansk, described in the report of United Nations
monitoring mission, especially with regard to the
allegations of abductions, torture, forced disappearances
and other forms of human rights violations and abuses
that have affected civilians in the areas controlled by
armed groups.
What I have just said underscores the need to
establish the rule of law and to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine in

S/PV.7239

accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international
law. In that context, all actions undertaken by the
Government of Ukraine in maintaining public order
in its territory must be carried out with full respect
for human rights and be proportionate to the situation
facing it.
Chile reiterates its strong support for the calls of
Mr. Šimonović to ensure accountability for all human
rights violations and abuses in Ukraine. We therefore
believe that it is essential that the valuable work carried
out by human rights monitoring mission in that country
be continued.
We would briefly refer to the downing of Flight
MH-17 on 17 July, merely to reiterate that the agreed
ceasefire should be respected by all parties. Resolution
2166 (2014) should be implemented; it demands the
immediate cessation of all military activities, including
those of armed groups, in the areas surrounding the
accident site, in order to ensure the security of the
international investigation team. The Council’s clear
message should be heeded by all.
We believe that the human rights violations and
abuses are directly related to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, about which the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs informed us
last Tuesday (see S/PV.7234). This is the result of the
intensification of fighting on the ground. We would like
to reiterate the call that we made previously to the parties
that they seek a peaceful solution to the crisis through
direct political dialogue, acting with moderation and
without taking any unilateral measures that could
increase tensions, and participating in international
mediation initiatives. We value in particular the role
played by the observer mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Here we reiterate once again our gratitude to
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for his briefing.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Mr. Šimonović for his briefing and to congratulate
him for this fourth monthly report of the United Nations
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine. Chad
remains deeply concerned at the situation in eastern
Ukraine, which, as confirmed by the most recent, has
only deteriorated, especially in the regions of Donetsk
and Luhansk, which have become zones of intense
clashes between the separatists and Government forces.

14-5001717/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

The use of heavy weaponry in and around
cities, causing massive destruction of residential
neighbourhoods and a great many civilian casualties,
the deliberate destruction of health centres and public
buildings, leaving entire neighbourhoods without access
to water or medical services, make life impossible for
those who are not able to flee the fighting. The civilian
population thus finds itself taken hostage by the
violence and the hostilities.
Chad condemns this increasing violence and calls
on Government forces as well as the separatist forces
to cease all hostilities immediately and to exercise
restraint. Chad deplores the increase in the number of
cases of abduction, kidnapping and illegal detention.
The United Nations monitoring mission has stated
that there were 222 cases of abduction and torture in
Ukraine during the past three months.
According to the report, there have been a significant
number of forced disappearances and executions
carried out by both separatist and Government forces,
and there are of course internally displaced persons.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees believes that there are currently 117,000
displaced persons in Ukraine. In his statement
made last Tuesday, Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, stated
that there were 4 million individuals at risk living in
conflict zones (see S/PV.7234). The situation of children
and vulnerable individuals is especially alarming.
Faced with this humanitarian disaster, Chad urges the
international community to provide logistical, material,
technical and financial assistance to the Ukrainian
Government as well as to the agencies present on the
ground to meet the needs of displaced populations.
Regarding the investigation of the crash of Flight
MH-17 and the unanimous adoption of resolution 2166
(2014), the Netherlands announced last Wednesday that
as a result of the fighting near the crash site, it would
suspend its investigation searching for the remains
of victims, which has been carried out for a few days
by a hundred or so Dutch, Australian and Malaysian
investigators. We deem this situation unacceptable
for the families of the victims and call on all parties
to respect the joint declaration by the trilateral contact
group made up of Russia, Ukraine and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, in which they
have committed themselves to provide free access to
the MH-17 crash site.
18/20

08/08/2014

Chad calls on all parties to implement resolution
2166 (2014) and for an immediate ceasefire to ensure
that the investigations can resume. Finally, we reaffirm
our commitment to the territorial integrity of Ukraine
and reiterate our call for an inclusive political dialogue
to resolve the Ukrainian crisis in a peaceful manner.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to thank Mr. Šimonović for his briefing
and for his latest report on Ukraine. I can understand
why Ambassador Churkin does not want the Security
Council to discuss this United Nations report, because
it provides further damning evidence of the appalling
abuses perpetrated against the civilian population
by pro-Russian armed groups in eastern Ukraine. It
also acknowledges Ukraine’s legitimate right and its
sovereign duty to restore law and order and to protect
its citizens.
We share the United Nations view that force must
be used proportionately and in full compliance with
domestic and international law. We welcome Ukraine’s
clear, unambiguous commitment to these important
principles.
There is one overwhelming conclusion to be drawn
from this report: that these armed groups cannot
possibly claim to be acting in defence of the civilian
population, the very same population against which
they are committing the most appalling human rights
abuses. They are abducting women and children in
order to extort money from their families. They are
using civilians as forced labour and as human shields.
They offered the local population the choice between
fighting on the front lines and facing detention, torture
and mistreatment. They abduct people simply because
they are HIV-positive and tell them that they must
“wash off the guilt with blood”.
All of these abuses and many more are detailed in
the United Nations report. These are not the actions of
those interested in protecting the civilian population.
They are the actions of violent and abusive armed
thugs. As the United Nations report puts it, these groups
exercise their power over the civilian population in raw
and brutal ways which are “putting the whole civilian
population at risk”.
In addition to those human rights abuses, the report
highlights the fact that separatists have deliberately
targeted critical public utilities, including water,
electricity and sewerage. In so doing, they are denying
14-50017

08/08/2014

Ukraine

the people under their control access to basic services.
We welcome the urgent action that the Ukrainian
Government is taking to restore these services in the
liberated areas.
So if these armed groups are not defending the
interests of the people they claim to represent, the
question must be asked: whose interests are they
defending? We must also ask why the Russian Federation
continues to support them. By supplying those groups
with weaponry, training and personnel, Russia is
fuelling the suffering of an innocent population, the
same people whose welfare they claim to care so much
about.
Throughout this crisis, Russia has acted in violation
of international law, in violation of human rights and in
violation of its own stated objectives. There have been
many moments when Russia has had the opportunity to
change course, when 100 countries rejected the illegal
annexation of Crimea, when Ukraine elected a new
President whose legitimacy could not be questioned,
when 298 innocent lives were lost in the shooting down
of MH-17. Yet despite those watershed events, Russia
continues recklessly to fuel the conflict. As we speak,
Russia is building up its forces on the Ukrainian border.
An additional 8,000 troops have arrived since 11 July.
Many more are stationed in the illegally annexed region
of Crimea.
Now we hear that Russia is ready to intervene on
humanitarian grounds to alleviate the suffering that
it has manufactured. This is completely unwarranted.
Russia is the problem, not the solution.
As we were briefed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs earlier this
week, the United Nations is already fully engaged.
United Nations agencies, including the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF, are present on the ground and are working
with the International Committee of the Red Cross,
international non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations and local communities to support
the Ukrainian-led humanitarian response. But rather
than supporting this effort, Russia threatens unilateral
action.
If Moscow wants to contribute, there are two things
it can do immediately: first, it can help to fund the
United Nations activities and, secondly, it can cease its
support for illegal armed groups. That is the only way
the people of eastern Ukraine will be able to return to

S/PV.7239

their daily lives free from the fear of intimidation and
violence that the report describes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): Let me also thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing today. Ukraine values
his important contribution and that of his team.
The mission’s latest report reveals the true nature of
the criminal organizations that are committing terrible
abuses against our citizens. Entire towns and villages are
being used as human shields. Gunmen are kidnapping
civilians for the purpose of ransom, exchange or use as
labour force; others, they are torturing and murdering.
How do those crimes help the people they
claim to represent? Their tactics are nothing more
than terrorism, threatening the lives, health, wellbeing of our compatriots. It is the obligation of the
Government to protect its own citizens. That is the
paramount objective of Ukraine’s operation against the
terrorists — terrorists who have refused to enter into a
political dialogue, terrorists who are led by foreigners
who are working for the secret service of the Russian
Federation.
The monitoring mission’s report also clearly
demonstrates that the Russian occupation of Crimea
has led to harassment and discrimination against ethnic
Ukrainians, Crimean Tatars, members of religious
minorities and activists who are opposed to the
so-called Crimean referendum of 16 March. Even now,
people continue to disappear. Ukrainian and Crimean
Tatar newspapers are under threat of being shut down.
We are deeply concerned with the violations. We
underline that as the occupying Power, it is Russia’s
responsibility to ensure the observance of human rights
and freedoms of the population of Crimea. On our part,
the Government of Ukraine will take all feasible efforts
to protect our compatriots’ rights and freedoms in the
occupied territories.
Ukraine will not tolerate politically motivated
cases against Nadia Savchenko and five other members
of the military, which are vivid examples of Russia’s
negligence of human rights standards. Allegations
brought against our citizens have no legal grounds and
are used as instruments of political manipulation and
pressure.

14-5001719/20

S/PV.7239

Ukraine

There is no humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.
However the growing number of internally displaced
persons from Crimea and the Luhansk and Donetsk
regions is disturbing. At the same time, the credibility
of the information on the huge number of refugees
from Ukraine to Russia presented by the Russian
authorities is very doubtful and needs to be assessed by
international experts.
The Government of Ukraine accepts the
recommendations contained in the monitoring mission’s
report. Ukraine is ready to further develop and deepen
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in order to ensure the
protection of human rights, taking into account all the
needs of the population of every region of our country.
We fully acknowledge that there is still a lot to be
done to strengthen the rule of law and democracy in
our country. Yesterday in his speech at the Constituent
Assembly of the National Council of Reforms,
President Petro Poroshencko said that a war could not
be an excuse for the lack of reform. We see the recently
signed Association Agreement with the European Union
as integral document that provides the framework for
reform in Ukraine.
The successful investigation of high-profile cases,
such as human rights violations during the protests
in Independence Square and the tragedy in Odessa.
is a matter of honour to the leadership of honour to
the leadership of Ukraine and remains a top priority.
Ukraine’s law enforcement agency will cooperate fully
with the United Nations mission in monitoring the
process of that investigation.
The downing of Flight MH-17 is a tragedy that may
constitute a grave violation of international law that

20/20

08/08/2014

may amount to war crimes. The Government of Ukraine
is making every effort to ensure a fair international
investigation of the incident, in accordance with
resolution 2166 (2014). We reiterate our call to Russia
to use its influence on the illegal armed groups in order
to make them grant it full and unimpeded access to the
crash site for the international investigation team.
We have conclusive evidence that Flight MH-17
was downed by Russian-backed terrorists with a Buk
missile system, which was fired by a crew and which
had been delivered from Russia. That was confirmed by
our intelligence — intercepted telephone conversations
of the terrorists and satellite images.
In conclusion, I would like to just say that the
situation on the Ukrainian/Russian border remains
extremely tense. Russia continues to build up its
military along the border with Ukraine and to shell
settlements and positions of the counter-terrorism
forces of Ukraine located near the border.
Russian military aircraft and drones violate
Ukraine’s air space daily. There are serious grounds
to expect a large-scale and open invasion of Russian
troops into Ukraine, under the guise of peacekeeping
operations. In that context, we want to state that no
Russian forces can enter the territory of Ukraine
without the consent of Ukrainian authorities. Any
Russian troops entering the territory of Ukraine will be
regarded as aggressors and treated accordingly.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

14-50017
