TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:25JULY1969
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 490) , , , , , , , , , , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda , . . . , . , , . . , , , , . , , , , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Lett’er dated 15 July j969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9331) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETIETH MEETiNG
Held in New York on Friday, 25 July 1969, at 3 p.m.
&es&~:

Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).

fiesent:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain,‘ Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 490)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Iri accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings of the
Council, I invite the representatives of Portugal, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Somalia, Kenya, the United Arab
Republic, Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra Leone, Tunisia,
Gabon, and the Dempcratic Republic of the Congo, to
participate in the debate of the Council, without the right
to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. de Miranda
(Portugal) took a place at the’ Council table, and Mr. M. A.
Fount (United Republic of Tdnzania), Mr. A. A. Farah
(Somalia), Mr. A. E. Osanya-Nyyneque (Kenya), Mr. A.
El-Erian (United Arab Republic), Mr. L. H. Diggs (Liberia),
Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. F. B. Savage (Sierra
Leone), Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia), Mr. J. Davin (Gabon), and
Mr. J. K. Nguza (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. Mr. MORALES SUAREZ (Colombia) (translated from
Spanish): My delegation enthusiastically congratulates the
delegation of the United States of America on the
extraordinary exploit achieved by the astronauts of Apollo
11. Mr. President, allow me to make the following statement on the item now before the Council.
3. On a previous occasion, I considered it appropriate to
express the idea that the adoption of the agenda implies

that the Security Council sets a limit on its own work, asjs
usually the case in deliberative bodies, Consequently, my
delegation’s task will be confined to a consideration of the
case submitted by Zambia in the letter circulated in
document S/9331. I must point out, as a general precedent,
that my delegation has frequently had occasion to express
its anti-colonialist position in the most categorical manner.
That position derives from the very basis of the structure of
the Colombian nation.
4. Having established this, and coming back to the
particular case before us, my delegation must express its
natural concern arising from the occurrence of events which
aggravate an extremely disturbing general situation. We feel
that an examination of this situation by the parties
concerned with a view to finding a just solution to the
problem should not be ruled out. My delegation considers
that, even now, this procedure might be considered by the
Security Council.
5, The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): I now
invite the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
6. Mr. NGUZA (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(translated from French): Mr. President and members of
the Security Council, my delegation duly appreciates the
honour you have done it by authocizing it to participate in
this debate in which, once again, a Member State of the
United Nations-in this case, Portugal-has arrogated to
itself the right to engage in military intervention in the
territory of another Member State, Zambia. Before speaking on this important matter, however, I hope you will
allow me, on behalf of the delegation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to pay tribute to the delegation of
the United States of America on the occasion of the
historic and unprecedented exploit of Apollo Il. Of course,
when we read Jules Verne, our dreams were drawn to that
unknown planet. And, of course, when we followed the
heroes of the Belgian writer Herg6, namely, Tintin, his dog
Milou, Captain Haddock and ProfeSsor Tournessol in their
adventures written for young people from 7 to 77 years of
age, we were carried away by the tehptation to discover
the mysteries of the moon. And have we not dreamed of
the moon when following the episodes of “Star Trek” on
television? But all that was only science fiction, and how
surprised we were to learn, on 20 July, that Neil Armstrong
and Buzz Aldrin had really walked on the moon! Thank
God they have also come back safe and sound, bringing us
samples which will perhaps help mankind to perfect its
technology.

7. I wonder whether it might not be a good idea to suggest
that bachelors who intend to get married should buy two
return tickets so that they can spend their honeymoon OII
the real moon. All this is possible now, thanks to the men
who for many days and nights have devoted themselvesto a
noble task deserving of the admiration of the whole world.
We would have to be very indifferent to fail to expressto
them our warm congratulations and, indeed, our profound
gratitude. This I do whole-heartedly. We were happy to
hear Neil Armstrong say, while he was on the moon: “We
are here to represent not only the United States, but all
mankind.”
8. I should like to ask my friend, Ambassador Buffum,
when he transmits the sentiments of the Members of the
United Nations to the astronauts, simply to sayto them on
behalf of my delegation, for their courage and for all they
have done: “Thank you, gentlemen.”
9. Now I must turn to mankind here on earth, so full, alas,
of vicissitudes; misunderstanding and intolerance. We must
admit that at this time when mankind is rightly rejoicing
over the progress of technology, it is to be feared that the
Latin dictum “Homo homini Eupus” forms the basis of
human relations.

denying that the hand caught is indeed its own; undoub~~
edly, it is just the fruit of imagination, or, rather, the char
has been thought up for purposes of propaganda and is
merely a slogan, Of course, we know all that, and so the
representative of Portugal did not surprise us in the least.
14. The representative of Portugal has told us that his
Government prefers to negotiate disputes, and that it has
done so in good faith, Obviously, negotiations are not
conducted in good faith if the acts under discussion are
repeated at the very time the negotiations are taking place,
That is certainly not called good faith, but arrogance, as Ihe
representative of Zambia has so rightly said. The Portuguese
delegation then told us that: “When, in a caseor two, it wa
found that the fault lay an ths Portuguese side, tha
Portuguese Government immediately expressed regret and
paid the amount of compensation demanded by Zambia”’
[148&h meeting, para. 811.
15. The representative of Portugal, therefore, admits that
his country has, at least on some occasions, violated
Zambian territory, Of course, he speaks of only one or 1%~
occasions, but we need not hold that against him; this
admission calls for congratulations on the attempt at
objectivity, It reminds me of the story of a professor at 21
university where the members of the faculty were required
to have been brilliantly successful each academic year
during their own university studies, One professor whose
file, discovered after the war, showed that before getting his
final degree he had failed five times in a single academic
year, was immediately called before the administrative
board, Unable to deny the facts, he defended himself by
saying: “But it’s not true! I only failed four times,“Thus.
if out of the 60 specific acts of aggression against Zambia,
Portugal admits to only two, that in no way alters the fact
that there have been deliberate violations of the Charter,

10. The Council has met to discusssome most unfortunate
acts occasioned by authorities of a Member State of an
Organization which has sworn to achieve the noble aims to
which all men aspire. As the members of the Council will
recall, my country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
has been obliged on three occasions to lodge a complaint
against Portugal in connexion with acts of open aggression
and manifest interference in the internal affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
11. On all three occasions,in 1966 and 1967, this Council
unequivocally condemned Portugal’s misdeeds with regard
to my country. And it wasno surprise to us in the Congo to
learn that the same country has perpetrated similar acts
against a fraternal country which shareswith us the fate of
other neighbours of the African territories still suffering
under the most inhuman oppression in the last stronghold
of the colonial era, of evil memory. My country could not
remain silent in this debate; it had a duty to denounce
forcefully the aggressiveacts perpetrated by the soldiers of
Lisbon against Zambia, a country which has age-old
affinities with the Congo,
’

16. Moreover, I have just received a cable from Kinshasa
proving Portugal’s bad faith, Everybody knows that, in ils
resolution 241 (1967) adopted on 15 November 1967
following a complaint lodged by my country againat
Portugal, the Security Council condemned any act of
interference by Portugal in the internal affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Previously, in ils
resolutions 226 (1966) of 14 October 1966 and 239 (1967)
of 10 July 1967, the Council had condemned Portugal for
its acts of aggression against the Democratic Republic ob
the Congo. The Lisbon Government, accustomed asit is ZO
piling up the resolutions of the United Nations in its dusty
archives, has paid no attention to those resolutions either;
since 1968, its representatives in Africa have perpetrated
flagrant violations against the Democratic Republic of IhE
Congo, It is true that there is a Swahili proverb which
says-please allow me to quote it in the original language“Mulimokuwa chunvi hamkosi utamu”, which might bc
translated as ‘A leopard cannot change its spots,”

12. In his statement at the 1486th meeting, the representative of Zambia, my distinguished friend Ambassador
Mwaanga, gave specific details regarding some 60 flagrant
violations suffered by his country. He cited places, dates,
people killed or kidnapped, and even the origin of the
weapons employed in these intolerable crimes. Villages
burned, people killed or kidnapped, women violated,
property looted-can this Organization, which has swornto
protect mankind from the scourge of war, enjoy the sight
of that picture, even in bare outline?

17. Mr. President, with your permission and with the
Council’s indulgence, I should like to give you the folluwing
details regarding Portuguese violations of the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo:

13. In response to all these details provided by the
Zambian delegation, the representative of the Lisbon
,Government has been content merely to make a general,
and cynical denial. My delegation expected that, of course.
We in the Congo have no more illusions: We know that,
even when caught red-handed, Portugal is in the habit of

(a) On 13 April 1968, there was a Portuguese raid.on the
village of Mbaka-Kosi, in the territory of Lukula in Central
2

Congo, The Portuguese soldiery engaged in theft, rape and
looting,

Non-Self-Governing Territories whosepeoples are deprived
of their right to self-determination and independence. They
are Territories whose populations see themselves unjustly
persecuted by the Portuguese forces and forced to leave
their ancestral land. They are Territories to which General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
applies, a resolution which the General Assembly and the
Security Council, in many relevant resolutions, have called
on Portugal to respect.

@/ Gn the night of 14-l 5 April 1968, Portuguese armed
forces invaded Congolese territory 100 metres inside the
frontier and disturbed the normal operation of the customs
service.
fcl On 18 May 1968, Portuguese terrorists dropped
thirty bombs on the villages of Kinsudi and Kimfidi, in the
territory of Madimba in Central Congo. The toll taken by
these crimes was10 dead and 6 seriously wounded.

21. Consequently, if there is a country living outside the
terms of the United Nations Charter and perpetrating acts
of aggression against innocent peoples and independent
African States, it is indeed Portugal.

/d/’ On 24 June 1968, a second Portuguese bombing
attack completely destroyed the village of Yongo, 3 kilometres inside the frontier.

22. It is hardly necessaryto mention the resolutions which
Portugal has simply trampled underfoot: General Assembly
resolutions 1807 (XVII), 1819 (XVII),
1913 (XVIII),
2107 (XX) and 2184 (XXI) and Security Council resolutions 163 (1,961), 183 (1963) and 218 (1965), to name
only a few.

(cl On 9 January 1969, a Portuguese commando unit
violated Congolese territory in the district of KatendeTshifoy, where it committed acts of vandalism and banditry
and kidnapped peaceful Congolese citizens.

(f) On 3 March 1969, 15 Portuguese soldiers violated the
Congolese area of Luena in order to recruit men, but the
villagers fled.

23. The record of Portugal’s violations of the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council is
sufficiently eloquent in itself for anyone who wishesto be
convinced of the indignation which Portugal’s colonial
policy arouses in world public opinion and of Portugal’s
bad faith when it accuses the Zambian Government of
violating the United Nations Charter.

(gj On the night of 6-7 May 1969, 20 Portuguese
terrorists surrounded the village of Chilofu, in the same
area, and machine-gunned the sleeping population, which
fled panic-stricken, every man for himself.

24. The truth is that the Zambian Government, like other
African countries including my own, has responded in the
affirmative to the appeal which the General Assembly, in its
resolution 2107 (XX), paragraph 3, has addressed to all
States: “in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to render the people of the Territories under
Portuguese administration the moral and material support
necessaryfor the restoration of their inalienable rights”. It
is the positive assistancewhich the African countries render
to the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau),
in responseto such appealsby the General Assembly, which
Portugal describes as acts of aggression and for which it
wishesthe Security Council to blame the Zambian Government. ,

(h) On 17 April 1969, a horde of Portuguese violated

Congolese territory in the Luena area and terrorized the
village of Fumbelo where they even carried off four
Congolese citizens,
18. Of course, the representative of Portugal will deny all
the’se facts, My delegation will listen to his complete denials
with the indifference bred by habit. But what my delegation cannot accept is the arrogant kind of justification by
the representative of Lisbon of what he terms “Marauding
bands” or “rebels” who, in the Portuguese representative’s
words, supposedly commit acts of aggression from Zambia
against “the Portuguese provinces in Africa”. Portugal has
already used the same words about my country in speaking
of the heroic struggle of the peoples of Angdla, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau).

25. Even if Portugal has lost its senseof reality, it should
not expect to involve the Security Council, this important
body, in its illogicality and its injustice by recommending
that the Council should blame those who respect its
decisions and the decisions of the General Assembly, and,
no doubt, congratulate those, including Portugal, who
systematically refuse to comply with the resolutions of the
United Nations, The Portuguese justifications are legally
wrong and politically arrogant. No, Mr. President, Portugal
deservesto be condemned forcefully and unequivocally.

19, The representative of Portugal, however, can scarcely
be unaware of the fact that he cannot permit himself, here,
within the halls of the United Nations, to offer such
justifications which are offensive to the Organization of
which Ms country is a Member. To be a member of an
organizatian, to adhere freely to a United Nations covenant
does not mean merely to have rights, such as the right to sit
and speak in this great assembly. Membership in an
organization also involves obligations on the part of the
State which is a party to a covenant, even though such
obligations may not always suit that State.

26. We Africans are peaceful people. Wehave no ambition
to annex either European territories, or territories in the
American continent, or any other territories. Besides, we
have no means to do so. All that we ask is that we be left in
peace. Leave us alone with our resources,which are said to
be limited, to seek any co-operation we wish for the
development of our people. Leave the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau), Zimbabwe, Namibia and

20, Now, Portugal obviously knows that from the standpoint of the United Nations, Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau) are not Portuguese provinces. They are, as
the speakers who have preceded me have emphasized,
3

the two Portuguese in question should be a point of honour
for the Zambian Government because those two Portuguese
officers were inveigled by the Zambian authorities and their
innocence has been proved to the satisfaction of the
ZambianHigh Court itself, which orderedtheir release.

other Territories in peace and let them decide their destiny
for themselves. The Portuguese and others like them have
only one right, namely, to go back to Europe where,
moreover, there is nothing that we envy them.
27. May this humble voice of Africa be heard in this lofty
Council, Distinguished members of the Council, it is UP to
you to speak now.

34. I have already explained to the Council the alleged
caseof Lushindu.At this stageI wish only to repeatwhat I
saidat the 1488th meeting, that our investigation of the
case continues. We have not yet arrived at definite
conclusionsabout it. Be that as it may, there is a world of
difference between populations crossingfrontiers for their
own .private purposesand a Government authorizing and
protecting armed attacks acrossfrontiers as Zambia does
and admitsdoing.

28. The PRESIDENT (translated fvom French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Portugal, on
whom I now call.
29. Mr, MIRANDA (Portugal): In his intervention yesterday /1489th meeting], the representative of Zambia
descended once again to a low level of insulting language.
Each one does as he knows best; and my delegation has no
doubt that the Zambian representative did the best that he
knows. My delegation is not surprised. As I said at the
1486th meeting, irisult is the last argument of one who does
not have right on his side. In trying to maintain ‘an
untenable accusation the Zambian representative has distorted the clear meaning of many of the statements I made
in the previous meetings. I will not waste the time of the
Council by repeating them. I shall limit myself to drawing
attention to my previous statements.

35. Finally, the Zambian representativesaidthat the talks
werebroken off becauseright from the start of thosetalks
in London we becameintransigent. All bilateral talks start
by eachparty giving its own version;discussioncomesonly
after that. Zambiagaveits version and we gaveours.That is
what happenedin London. But even at that preliminary
stageZambiadecidedto come to the Council without any
notice to us that the talks were goingto be abandonedby
it. The decision to come to the Council was taken
independently of the talks. I am sure the Zambian
representativewill not deny this. Or will he?

30. However, I shall briefly refer to a few remarks made
by the Zambian representative yesterday. He called the
Luso-Zambian mixed commission mythical. It is quite easy
for me to prove that the Luso-Zambian mixed commission
is very real and also that Zambia attributed great value to it,

36. My delegation will not deal with allegationsfalling
outsidethe scopeof this debatt?.Wewill limit ourselves
to
placingon record our rejection of all suchallegationsmade
in the courseof this debate.

31. It will be recalled that in my statement I referred to
the correspondence exchanged at the highest level between
Portugal and Zambia. The Zambian representative accused
Portuguese forces of blowing up the Luangwa Bridge in
1968. That accusation is gratuitous and false, as Zambia
was told even at that time. The Luso-Zambian agreement
was signed after that. It settled all previous allegations made
until then on both sides.

37. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor again. I apologize for having to
speakat this stage,since I have already spokenat length
during two of the meetingsthat we have held during the
lastsevendays.
38. I should like to thank the representativeof Portugal
becauseeach time he speakshe seemsto supplementthe
information which I have given the Council, and any
supplementaryinformation given to the Council, in the
view of my delegation, is always welcome, He hascon.
firmed a number of points I madein my speeches
at both
the 1486th and 1489th meetings, for which I am most
grateful to him. I also wish to assurehim that what he
describedas my “best”, of yesterday, wasindeednot the
bestthat we can produce.

32. The Zambian representative has mentioned refugees,
alleging that we have planted mines to prevent both their
escape and their return to harvest their crops. That
allegation is self-contradictory, On the other hand it
amounts to an admission that the displaced persons are
willing to return to Portuguese territory, as indeed many
have returned. We have always welcomed them. The mines
have not been planted to prevent their return, They have
been planted in Portuguese territory to make the terrain
difficult for raiders infiltrating from Zambia.

39. I want to reiterate the position of my Governmentin
regard to the incidents to which he has referred. I stated
yesterday and I state again that out of the 61 or so
incidents which occurred on our frontiers with Mozam.
bique and Angola only three incidents were investigated
and only one of the three was settled. The Portuguese
soldierswho were rightly releasedby our High Court in
Lusaka as a demonstration of the impartiality of our
judiciary, unlike that of the r&me in Lisbon, have been
detainedby my Presidentunder the Preservationof Public
Security Regulations.I statedthat if Portugalis prepared to
release the Zambiannationalswho havebeenkidnappedWe
shall make immediate arrangementsto releasethe Portaguesesoldierscurrently being held. If, on the other hand,

33. The Zambian representative has mentioned three or
four men supposed to have been killed on 24 January 1969.
We know of none. The Zambian representative has mentioned “our nationals”-that is, Zambian nationals-“who
had gone hunting near the Angola border”. I need hardly
comment on this amusing euphemism for raiders. He has
also referred to kidnapped Zambians as an alibi for
infliltrating raiders and he has tried to make it a bargaining
point for the return of the two Portuguese military persons
detained in Zambia. Even if there were kidnapped Zambians in Portuguese territory-there are none-the return of
4

the Portuguese representative and his Government insist
that our nationals are going to be kept in captivity
indefinitely, I wish to inform him that it is the intention of
my Government to hold on to the Portuguese soldiers as
long as Portugal holds on to our nationals.

43. The PRESIDENT (translated ffom French): I now
invite the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to take a place at the Council table and I give him
the floor.
44. Mr. N,GUZA (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(translated from French): I apologize, Mr. President, and
beg the indulgence of members of the Council, for making
another statement when the Council was perhaps about to
adjourn.

40. I know that the representative of Portugal is very
desperate. He has listened to one speech of condemnation
after another. The simple rules of human decency will not
permit him even at this late hour to make any desperate
attempt whatsoever to save his face.

45. I simply wish to say that, as was to be expected, the
representative of Portugal has hastened-on this occasion
without even taking time to think the matter over, as in his
custom-to
reject wholesale the evidence which I have
adduced to corroborate his bad faith concerning the acts of
aggression committed against our sister Republic of
Zambia, It is, of course, easier to deny everything than to
defend what is indefensible. I hope that members of the
Ccuncil have taken note of this point.

41. We have complained about Portuguese aggression. We
have tabuhated our case. We have given all the facts which,
one by one, he has not attempted to answer. I wish to
inform him that this Council, perhaps unlike the NATO
Council which he is used to, has certain rules of decency.
We are opposed to aggression by one State against another,
and it is the wish of the Zambian Government and the hope
of all peace-loving peoples throughout the world that
Portugal will not escape the utmost condemnation for the
aggression which it has committed against Zambia. We are
used to the diatribes with which he has outlining his case.
We have heard them over the years. We are totally
unimpressed and we reject them, as we did at the 1486th
and 1489th meetings.

46. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have no
other speakers on my list. If no representative wishes to
speak at this stage in the debate, I propose to adjourn the
meeting. Following consultations with the members of the
Council, it has been agreed that our next meeting will take
place on Monday, 28 July, at 10.30 a.m.

42. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): I wish only to state that
there are no Zambians detained on any Portuguese territory.

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

5

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Naiionr
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publicotioru
des
dhpositoires
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section

FlOJlY’ihlTb

M3AAHMt-l

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Los publicocioner

in United

Nations,

Nations
Unier
sent
entier.
Informer-vour
des venter,
New York

KAK

en todos porter
Ventas, Nueva

Litho

LES PUBLICATIONS

New York

de
del
York

los

Price:

DE LAS
Unidos

Cons&e

$U.S.

UNIES

en vente
dons
les librairies
et ler ogencar
ouprLs
de votre
libroiric
ou adresser-vows
b:
ou Geneve.

OPrAHH3A~HH

Nociones

mundo.
o Ginebro.

DES NATIONS

06bEAHHEHHblX

NACIONES

est6n

en vcnto

o su librero

o dirijore

0.50 (or equivalent

HAulblti

UNIDAS
en

in other

librerios

y cosos

a: Nocioner

currencies)

Unidas,

distribuidoros
Sscci6n

de

8213S-November

1972-2,050
