S/PV.8432

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8432

nd meeting
Wednesday, 19 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44655 (E)
*1844655*

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Israel and
Lebanon to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on recent developments in northern Israel
related to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
As members of the Council are aware, on
4 December the Israel Defense Forces announced that
they were conducting Operation Northern Shield to
uncover and disable tunnels believed to cross the Blue
Line from Lebanon into Israel. Today, two weeks later,
the Operation is ongoing. During that period, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) carried
out a series of technical visits at suspected tunnel sites
identified by the Israel Defense Forces near the Blue
Line. Based on its own findings, UNIFIL confirmed
the existence of four tunnels south of the Blue Line.
Technical assessments carried out by UNIFIL further
determined that at least two of those tunnels — one in
the vicinity of Metulla, close to Kfar Kila, north of the
Blue Line, and one near Zarit, close to Ramyah, north
of the Blue Line — cross the Blue Line and constitute
violations of resolution 1701 (2006).
From the outset, UNIFL sought to accurately assess
the alleged violations and to work with the parties to
maintain the prevailing calm along the Blue Line. To
that end, General Del Col, UNIFIL Head of Mission
and Force Commander, in coordination with the Acting
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, has consistently
engaged with the authorities in Israel and Lebanon.
A meeting of the tripartite mechanism took place on
2/18

19/12/2018

5 December, at which there was an initial exchange of
information between the two parties and a reaffirmation
of their commitment to avoid any escalation. Based on
additional information obtained by UNIFIL’s technical
teams, the Head of Mission and Force Commander
held several meetings with the Lebanese authorities,
including President Aoun.
A thorough investigation to establish the
trajectories and points of origin of the identified tunnels
is a complex task. The tunnels are between 29 and 46
metres below ground, difficult to detect and in close
proximity to areas that are sensitive for both parties.
While the tunnels do not appear, thus far, to have exit
points on the Israeli side, they are a serious violation
of resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL is acting judiciously
to complete its investigations of the tunnels — with
technical teams on the ground — and to work with both
parties to ensure that any tunnels, which are in violation
of resolution 1701 (2006), are disabled decisively and
safely.
This is a matter of serious concern. The United
Nations, including the Secretariat, has requested
the Lebanese authorities to ensure urgent follow-up
actions in accordance with the responsibilities of the
Government of Lebanon pursuant to resolution 1701
(2006). UNIFIL has requested the Lebanese authorities
to work with the mission to identify and disable any
tunnels crossing the Blue Line from Lebanon in
violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
I commend both the Israeli Defense Forces and the
Lebanese Armed Forces for their stated commitment
to continue to use the liaison and coordination
arrangements established with UNIFIL and their
intention to maintain the prevailing calm along the
Blue Line and avoid any escalation. The potential for
miscalculation, however, cannot be underestimated.
The parties have been reminded that provocative
activities along the Blue Line and heightened rhetoric
contribute to an environment of increased risk.
UNIFIL has observed subsequent gatherings
of civilians in Meiss Ej Jabal (Sector West) in close
proximity to the Blue Line. On 10 December, UNIFIL
observed a group of 30 to 50 individuals in civilian
clothes, led by a member of Parliament in Lebanon,
gather near Meiss Ej Jabal, with several individuals
crossing the Blue Line. On 16 December, about 500
people, including members of Parliament, participated
in a seven-hour-long gathering in Meiss Ej Jabal. Many
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of them crossed the Blue Line in connection with the
protest.
On 17 December, in connection with works being
carried out by the Israeli Defense Forces south of the
Blue Line near Meiss Ej Jabal, a Lebanese Armed
Forces soldier cocked his weapon, directing it towards
the Israeli Defense Forces. That prompted a total
of seven Lebanese Armed Forces and nine Israeli
Defense Forces soldiers to take position, pointing
their weapons at each other. UNIFIL’s liaison branch,
present throughout the entire period, intervened and
was successful in de-escalating the situation.
UNIFIL has deployed additional troops and liaison
teams to sensitive locations along the Blue Line. UNIFIL
will continue to assist the parties to maintain calm and
meet their obligations under resolution 1701 (2006). I
would like to recognize the continued important role
of UNIFIL under the leadership of Major General Del
Col. I would also like to thank the Security Council for
its continued support to UNIFIL. We will continue to
keep the Council apprised of relevant developments.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing
today.
Over the past few weeks we have seen images and
news of tunnels discovered in northern Israel. As the
Under-Secretary-General has told us this morning, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has confirmed so far the existence of four tunnels
close to the Blue Line and to date has independently
verified that two of those tunnels cross the Blue Line.
UNIFIL has also determined that two of those tunnels
constitute violations of resolution 1701 (2006). We can
only speculate how many more will be uncovered in the
coming days and weeks. Those facts are indisputable,
and they should leave no doubt on who is responsible.
The United States has taken Hizbullah’s threats to the
security of Israel and the Israeli people at face value,
and it is high time that the Council and the international
community do so as well.
The Council’s differing views on Hizbullah have
undermined the international community’s efforts to
support peace and stability along the Blue Line and

S/PV. 8432

between Israel and Lebanon. UNIFIL and the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
play a critical role in ensuring peace and stability. We
call upon them to proactively implement their respective
mandates to advance efforts towards a durable peace
between Israel and Lebanon.
It is both regrettable and incomprehensible
that some Council members dismiss the threat that
Hizbullah poses and its ability to act as a spoiler to the
Council’s broader objective for peace between Israel
and Lebanon. It is time that the Security Council acts
as one and speaks in one voice — Hizbullah is a serious
and a real threat. That reality must underpin all of our
actions moving forward from today.
To those who are not yet convinced that Hizbullah
is a serious threat to the peace and security of Israel,
Lebanon and the region I ask the following — What
further proof do you need? Did we forget the violence
in 2006? Do we not hear Nasrallah bragging of his
vast stocks of precise weapons and his ability to hit
anywhere inside Israel? We appreciate that Israel
and Lebanon expressed to UNIFIL that they have no
intention to escalate the situation along the Blue Line
any will continue to work with UNIFIL to that end.
We urge both partners to continue to exercise
restraint and to utilize fully UNIFIL’s liaison
capabilities. UNIFIL must be in a position to exercise its
mandate to the fullest extent possible. But can we know
with certainty that Hizbullah is equally committed to
maintaining peace and stability? The answer is no, we
cannot. The United States strongly supports Israel’s
efforts to defend its sovereignty and unconditionally
affirms Israel’s right to self-defence.
We call on President Michel Aoun and the
Lebanese Government to undertake all possible efforts
to halt Hizbullah’s illicit tunnelling into Israel and
to ensure that there is no escalation of tensions or
violence. That includes President Aoun directing the
Lebanese Armed Forces to act promptly to investigate
the suspected starting points of the tunnels. We also
call upon UNIFIL to take all the necessary measures to
ensure that its area of operations is not used for hostile
activities and to ensure that those tunnels do not pose a
threat to peace and security. UNIFIL must be provided
all possible relevant information, and full access to, the
suspected tunnel locations in southern Lebanon, if it is
to complete its independent assessment.

18-446553/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

The United States strongly supports the Lebanese
Armed Forces (LAF) as the sole legitimate defender
of Lebanon. We continue to work with others in the
international community to provide assistance to the
LAF to allow it to perform its mission as effectively
as possible. More broadly, we also call on Iran and
its agents to stop their aggressive behaviour and
provocation in the region, which pose an unacceptable
threat to Israeli and regional security.
We thank UNIFIL for the constructive liaison
role the mission has played between the Governments
of Lebanon and Israel in order to facilitate clear
communication, preserve stability along the Blue Line
and document these incidents. However, we urge the
mission to continue its heightened security posture and
visible presence in southern Lebanon and to actively
and regularly update the Security Council on this very
serious and ongoing issue.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing on the latest
developments along the Blue Line.
I would like to begin by acknowledging the
outstanding work of the personnel of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), who have
shown exceptional capacity to respond in recent days
and made it possible to maintain calm along the Blue
Line. That is a fact and must be said.
First, I would like to express our serious concerns
about the discovery by the Israeli Defense Forces of
tunnels entering Israeli territory, which were dug by
Hizbullah from Lebanon and confirmed by UNIFIL.
We have said it unequivocally and we repeat it — those
tunnels constitute a clear violation of resolution 1701
(2006), which calls for the cessation of hostilities along
the Blue Line between Lebanon and Israel. Those
activities must stop.
We have expressed our concern to the Lebanese
authorities and call on all parties to exercise the utmost
caution and restraint. That is imperative, especially in a
context where the risk is high of escalation resulting from
misunderstandings, misinterpretations, miscalculation
and anticipation errors. Maintaining calm along the Blue
Line, for which UNIFIL works daily, remains essential
for the entire region. It is therefore crucial that both
parties respect all the terms of resolution 1701 (2006)
and refrain from any provocation. President Aoun
announced that the Lebanese authorities had taken on
board the gravity of the situation and were ready to
4/18

19/12/2018

respond appropriately. We encourage them to continue
in that direction and to ensure that the Lebanese Armed
Forces are able to take action on two key counts: first,
in conducting appropriate investigations together with
UNIFIL, following the discovery of the tunnels; and,
secondly, to maintain calm and avoid any escalation
along the Blue Line.
Moving on to my second point, I would like to
come back to address the responsiveness of, and
efforts undertaken by, UNIFIL since 4 December to
independently shed light on this matter. The Force
mobilized immediately following the Israeli revelations.
It carried out its own independent verification of the
situation, making it impossible to call into question its
declarations on proven violations of resolution 1701
(2006) and confirming the credibility of those claims.
In that regard, I wish to commend the professionalism
of the Head of Mission, Major General Stefano Del Col,
who was able to fulfil his duties while maintaining the
trust of all parties.
UNIFIL has put in place follow-up measures to
formally establish the trajectory of the tunnels, and
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix has once again informed us
that the Force is ready to use all of the prerogatives at its
disposal, while fully respecting its mandate, of course.
We call on the Lebanese and Israeli authorities to
continue their close cooperation with the Force, as well
as their dialogue, particularly within the framework of
tripartite meetings, which play a vital role in preventing
any escalation of the situation on the ground. It is also
important, as I have said, that the Lebanese army have
access to the site, with the support of UNIFIL.
In that context, and this is my final point, the swift
establishment of a Lebanese Government of balanced
national unity remains essential within a deteriorated
regional context in order to revitalize the country’s
institutions, carry out the necessary reforms and ensure
the strengthening of the Lebanese State. Recent events
highlight that imperative need.
In that context, we welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Saad Hariri,
in carrying out those tasks and we encourage all
Lebanese parties to work in a spirit of compromise. We
reiterate France’s commitment to supporting the future
Government of Lebanon and the commitments made by
the Lebanese authorities with a view to implementing
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006), as well as
the policy of dissociation. Lebanon’s disassociation
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

from regional conflicts and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries are essential to its
stability. We also encourage Lebanon to relaunch its
national defence strategy, in line with President Aoun’s
statements. Finally, it is important that the Government
devote itself to the reforms that Lebanon needs and that
the Lebanese people expect, especially with regard to
its economy.
We will continue to support the Lebanese Armed
Forces through our contingent in UNIFIL and within
the framework of the announcements made at the Rome
II conference. We also remain fully committed to
supporting Lebanon’s stability through our economic
support, following the CEDRE conference, held on
6 April.
In order to confront this situation, our response
should be twofold: in the immediate future, we must
ensure calm and shed light on the tunnels that have been
uncovered, by cooperating with the Lebanese authorities
and UNIFIL in order to continue the investigative
work; and in the longer term, we must continue to
provide support, along with our international partners,
to the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Lebanese State
in order to enable them to meet the critical challenge of
controlling the entire Lebanese territory and stabilizing
the Blue Line. It is essential that the Council remain
united in order to contribute to those two objectives.
The Council can count on France’s full commitment to
that end.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his briefing today, his second one on this topic in less
than a week. We also thank the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and all staff
and force personnel of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We particularly thank the
Force Commander, Major General Stefano Del Col, for
his efforts to contain the current crisis and avoid any
further escalation in the region.
We also commend the Lebanese Government for
its efforts aimed at managing and resolving the crisis
since its emergence. The President of the Lebanese
Republic, General Michel Aoun, declared that Lebanon
remained committed to addressing the problem and
eliminating its causes, especially so that the crisis does
not realistically pose a genuine threat to peace and
security in the region. The President further stated that

S/PV. 8432

he remained committed to implementing the provisions
set out in resolution 1701 (2006) and to maintaining
stability in the south of the country, while rejecting
any practices that could lead to further escalation on
the border.
Lebanon has been experiencing continuous Israeli
provocations for many decades, the last of which is
Israel’s attempt to exaggerate the current incident
through the media and at the political and even military
levels by threatening to use military means to destroy
the tunnels. Meanwhile, Israel’s violations of Lebanese
sovereignty continue unabated almost daily.
Today’s debate provides us with an opportunity to
address the dangerous reality that Lebanon is facing,
as Israeli violations continue to increase and intensify.
The Israeli army continues to commit violations,
disregarding the safety of civilians and the fragile
stability of the region. Unfortunately, the constant calls
of the international community and the attempts of
UNIFIL have failed to put an end to those violations. If
the recent activities of the Israeli air force are anything
to go by, then we can fully expect those violations to
increase in the near future.
The provisions of resolution 1701 (2006) and, more
important, Lebanese sovereignty, are being violated
almost on a daily basis, as proven by the figures and
images provided by the Lebanese Government and
the reports of the Secretary-General. However, there
have been no calls for the convening of an emergency
meeting to discuss those Israeli violations, which we
believe are much more threatening than the topic of
today’s debate. There is all the more reason to convene
many open debates to discuss those Israeli violations.
For instance, there have been 550 air space violations
committed by Israel over the past four months alone,
totalling 2,000 flying hours.
The Israeli violations have not been limited to
that. There have also been electronic monitoring and
espionage activities by Israel, using its infrastructure
along the Blue Line and devices it placed on Lebanese
territory. A telecommunications war has been waged by
Israel against Lebanon, with an increase in the number
of telecommunications towers and monitoring devices
put in place to spy on the Lebanese network, thereby
violating the privacy of Lebanese citizens.
We reiterate our condemnation of Israeli acts of
aggression against Lebanese sovereignty by land, air
and sea. We emphasize our support for Lebanon’s call

18-446555/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

on the international community to implement resolution
1701 (2006), based on resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
(1978), thereby putting an end to Israel’s violations and
its continuous threats to Lebanon and Lebanese civil
facilities and infrastructure. In that regard, I refer to
the statement issued this morning by the Lebanese
Ministry for Foreign Affairs that renews its steadfast
position of being committed to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The Israeli violations we referred to did not
include its biggest violation, which is the ongoing
occupation of Lebanese territory. We stress Lebanon’s
legitimate right to end the occupation and have its
territory restored, including the Shaba’a farmlands,
the Lebanese Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part
of Al-Ghajar village. Lebanon has the right to resist
any aggression through legitimate means. We also must
make the distinction between terrorism and legitimate
resistance against Israeli occupation, which is a right
as set out in international charters and in the principles
of international law. Resistance is not considered a
terrorist act.
Although there is no permanent ceasefire primarily
because Israel insists on continuing its violations, we
welcome the continuous détente in UNIFIL’s area of
operations, which is made possible as a result of the
close cooperation between the Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL towards the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). That is clearly demonstrated by the
increasing number of their joint patrols. We call on all
parties to use current channels, including the Tripartite
Committee, to address all concerns and problems along
the borders. We also call on parties to continue their
cooperation and coordination within that Committee
in order to overcome any differences that could lead
to armed confrontations. In that regard, we commend
the achievements of the Lebanese Armed Forces
during the past period, both along the Blue Line and
throughout Lebanon.
We welcome the Lebanese army’s efforts to
continuously enhance security along the borders by
asserting the authority of the Government over all
the territories of Lebanon. Those efforts would assist
the Lebanese Government in honouring Lebanon’s
international commitments, including those made at
the Rome II conference to support the Lebanese army
and the Paris conference to support the Lebanese
economy. Both conferences reaffirmed the international
community’s commitment to the stability and prosperity
6/18

19/12/2018

of Lebanon. We renew our support to the Lebanese
Government in order to continue its disassociation
policy and avert any conflict in the region pursuant to
Baabda Declaration.
In conclusion, we renew Kuwait’s full solidarity
with Lebanon, while providing our political and
economic support to its Government and all its
constitutional institutions, towards safeguarding the
national unity, security, stability and sovereignty of
Lebanon over all its territories.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to join
other colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing.
I would also like to join other colleagues in
making clear that the United Kingdom also condemns
Hizbullah’s building of tunnels leading into Israel. As
others have noted, that is a clear violation by Hizbullah
of resolution 1701 (2006). It threatens Israel’s security,
Lebanon’s security and regional stability. We are
clear that Israel has the right to defend itself against
Hizbullah and all other armed militia groups that put its
security at risk. All Israelis and all Lebanese have the
right to live in peace without fear for their security. As
other speakers have noticed, we have witnessed for too
long Hizbullah’s blatant disregard for the resolutions
of the United Nations. Its continued possession of
weapons outside of the control of the Lebanese State,
reported attempts to acquire dangerous new missile
capabilities and its statements that threaten Israel
remain deeply alarming. Without an end to Hizbullah’s
illegal activities in Lebanon and the region, we will
continue to see regional stability threatened.
The United Kingdom recognizes the important work
that has been carried out over the past 12 years by the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to
maintain calm and stability along the Blue Line. We pay
tribute to those nations that have provided commanders
and troops to UNIFIL throughout that period. And the
existence of the tunnels reinforces the importance of
ensuring that UNIFIL’s mandate is effective, strong
and has full access to all its areas of operation. We
condemn any attempts to restrict UNIFIL’s freedom of
movement. We recognize that there is the question of
access to private property in the context of investigating
where the tunnels are. We recognize that that can be
difficult, but it is not impossible to resolve this issue.
We look forward to a workable solution being found.
We welcome the response of UNIFIL and its actions
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

to monitor the situation and maintain calm, including
by deploying additional troops and liaison teams to
sensitive locations along the Blue Line. It is vitally
important for UNIFIL to continue to liaise closely with
the Lebanese and Israeli authorities.
We call on the Lebanese State, and in particular the
Lebanese Armed Forces — as the sole and legitimate
defenders of Lebanon — working closely with UNIFIL,
to take appropriate action, as a matter of urgency, to
neutralize the tunnels. We encourage Israel to continue
to share with UNIFIL, to the fullest extent possible,
any information that would assist UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces in taking action. Where there
are difficulties, we urge all parties to work together
constructively to overcome them. It is not in the interest
of either of the sides for this situation to escalate.
The United Kingdom has been clear on many
occasions in the Council that it condemns Israeli
violations of Lebanese sovereignty — whether by land,
sea or air. Such actions undermine confidence and
stability. And we call for all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006), to be respected in full. In that regard, the
United Kingdom welcomes the commitments made both
by Israel and Lebanon, including the recent statement
by the Lebanese Ministry for Foreign Affairs regarding
the full implementation of the latter resolution, the
refusal to accept any violations and respect for the Blue
Line. Finally, the United Kingdom calls on all sides to
continue to abide by their commitments and to avoid
actions and rhetoric that could destabilize the situation
and the region.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for this morning’s update on Lebanon.
The recent developments along the Blue Line are indeed
worrisome, as they threaten Israel’s territorial integrity
and Lebanon’s stability.
We are deeply concerned about the discovery of
tunnels on Israeli territory. We note that a total of four
tunnels have been identified and that those tunnels
were built from the Lebanese side. Tunnels crossing the
Israeli-Lebanese border are a clear violation resolution
1701 (2006). It is important that further technical
investigations now be conducted independently and
in accordance with the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Lebanese
authorities must ensure urgent follow-up actions in
accordance with their responsibilities pursuant to

S/PV. 8432

resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL’s monitoring and
reports of violations of the resolution are crucial, and
the Security Council should be kept informed. We
condemn all violations of resolution 1701 (2006) by
both sides, including the almost-daily Israeli violations
of Lebanese airspace.
We call on all parties now to show restraint and
de-escalate tensions. UNIFIL plays an important role
in sustaining peace in Lebanon and in the region as a
whole. We welcome that UNIFIL has now stepped up
its efforts to preserve stability, and we emphasize the
importance of UNIFIL’s close cooperation with both the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces.
It is crucial to avoid any misunderstandings that could
lead to escalation. We therefore encourage the parties
to make full use of UNIFIL liaison, coordination
and tripartite mechanisms in the de-escalation of
any tensions.
The paramilitary capabilities of Hizbullah remain
a clear risk to the stability of Lebanon and elsewhere.
The provisions in resolution 1559 (2004) must be
swiftly implemented, including the provision on the
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias.
We welcome positive signs that a Lebanese
Government is to be formed soon. That is needed for
Lebanon to be able to take steps towards a politically
and economically stable and secure future. We welcome
President Aoun’s renewed commitment to developing
a national defence strategy once a Government is
formed. We encourage political leaders to support the
President in that endeavour. Building the capacity of
the Lebanese Armed Forces is important and requires
an increased focus. We strongly encourage continued
efforts in this regard, including in the maritime sector,
to enable an incremental and controlled reduction of
UNIFIL’s naval component in future. We also encourage
increased efforts to ensure that the LAF model regiment
in southern Lebanon becomes operational as soon as
possible.
There is full unity in support of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence, as demonstrated by the high-level held
conferences in Rome, Paris and Brussels earlier this
year. The international community must now continue
to assist Lebanon in delivering on its commitments
and build on the results of those conferences. Lebanon
must stay on its path towards stability and peace. This

18-446557/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

is important not only for Lebanon, but for the entire
region.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all, we
thank Mr. Lacroix for his detailed briefing. Let me also
at the outset express our appreciation for the work that
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has been doing since the discovery of the tunnels.
We especially commend the able leadership of Force
Commander Major General Del Col.
We had a chance to discuss this matter in closed
consultations last week, so let me reiterate three points
today: first, our condemnation of the tunnels; secondly,
appreciation of UNIFIL’s role and the necessary steps
forward; and, thirdly, the need for a sustainable solution.
First, on the Hizbullah tunnels, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is very concerned about the discovery of four
tunnels — constructed by Hizbullah — on the northern
Israeli border with Lebanon. We strongly condemn
these tunnel activities, which are part of Hizbullah’s
illegal and destabilizing activities in Lebanon and in
the region. Hizbullah’s actions are a flagrant violation
of Israeli sovereignty and international law, such as laid
down in resolution 1701 (2006). These tunnels pose a
serious threat to regional stability.
We recognize the Israeli right to defend itself,
within the limits of international law, and we underline
that Israel’s concerns for its security are legitimate.
We support the Israeli response in destroying these
tunnels, which cross into Israeli territory on the Israeli
side of the Blue Line. It is clear that these tunnels must
be taken seriously by the international community and
by the Council in particular.
This brings me to my second point, on UNIFIL’s
role and the necessary steps forward. We deeply
appreciate and support UNIFIL’s role and proactive
actions since the discovery of the tunnels. UNIFIL has
been checking the tunnels on the Israeli side and has
concluded so far that two of the four tunnels indeed
cross the Blue Line, violating resolution 1701 (2006).
UNIFIL has been able to decrease tensions. In
doing so, the tripartite mechanism has again proved
its added value. UNIFIL has also been in close contact
with the Lebanese authorities. The Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) have sent a very clear message on the
need for an investigation on the northern side of the
Blue Line.
In our view, the following steps forward are needed.
8/18

19/12/2018

As a first step, the Lebanese Government and
the LAF must take this issue very seriously and act
responsibly. It has now been more than two weeks since
the discovery of the first tunnel, so an investigation
of the alleged starting points of the tunnels on the
Lebanese side of the Blue Line is urgently needed. We
welcome the announced willingness of the Lebanese
Government to cooperate and allow access to the alleged
starting points of the tunnels. We call on the Lebanese
Government to make good on its commitment. The
inspections should be carried out as soon as possible by
the LAF, in close cooperation with UNIFIL. We look
forward to further information and a conclusion of the
investigations by UNIFIL.
The second step is the need for full respect for
resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004). Although
the current situation is relatively calm and escalation
has been prevented so far, violations on both sides of
the Blue Line remain frequent. We therefore call upon
both sides to maintain this calm by fully respecting and
implementing both resolutions.
My third point on the need for a sustainable solution
is that in our view, the current situation reaffirms the
need for such a solution. This would include, first, the
formation of a national unity Government in Lebanon
without further delay; secondly, the development of
a national defence strategy in Lebanon; and, thirdly,
a clear recommitment to the full implementation of
the dissociation policy by the Lebanese Government.
In that context, Hizbullah should end its illegal and
destabilizing activities.
This must be combined with continued international
support for Lebanon, including for the much-needed
socioeconomic reforms and in building up the Lebanese
Armed Forces.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to do its part in assisting Lebanon on this path.
My Government has engaged in a long-term partnership
with that beautiful country, and we will continue to do
our utmost to be a true friend to the Lebanese people.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
The stability of the situation in Lebanon is
conducive to promoting overall peace and stability in
the region. China calls on all relevant parties in Lebanon
to continue strengthening dialogue and cooperation and
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

enhancing unity. China commends Lebanon’s efforts to
advance the process of cabinet formation.
China is following closely developments along the
Blue Line and has taken note of the actions pertaining
to the construction of tunnels. We hope that the
countries concerned will work closely with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to conduct
a comprehensive, objective and impartial investigation.
China appreciates the rapid response by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNIFIL
in undertaking active coordination and communication
with the parties concerned, with a view to maintaining
regional stability.
Given the current situation, China calls on Lebanon
and Israel to remain calm and exercise restraint so
as to prevent any escalation of tensions. The two
sides should focus on maintaining regional peace and
stability, stop the accusatory rhetoric, abide in earnest
by the cessation-of-hostilities agreement and strictly
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The international community should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the countries concerned and continue to support
Lebanon in building its security capacity and bordercontrol capabilities.
The parties must refrain from unilateral actions so
as not to exacerbate the situation. The Security Council
should exert a positive influence aimed at promoting the
use of dialogue and consultation by Lebanon and Israel
so that they can properly address their differences.
UNIFIL continues to play an important role in
maintaining overall calm in the mission area along the
Blue Line, for which China expresses its appreciation.
UNIFIL should continue to give full play to the role
of the tripartite mechanism in promoting strengthened
dialogue between Israel and Lebanon in order to ease
the current tense situation. As one of the countries
contributing troops to UNIFIL, China will continue to
fully support the work of the mission.
China stands ready and willing to work with
the international community to continue to play a
constructive role in the maintenance of regional peace
and stability.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his insightful
briefing on developments concerning the tunnels along
the Blue Line. The tunnels identified are a clear violation

S/PV. 8432

of resolution 1701 (2006), and we are glad to hear today
they are being disabled. We are convinced that United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) technical
teams should carry out thorough inspections south of
the Blue Line in order to prevent any similar activity in
that area in future.
We appreciate the efforts of UNIFIL Force
Commander Del Col to de-escalate the situation on the
border between Lebanon and Israel. We appreciate also
the meetings held with Lebanese President Michel Aoun
and Speaker Nabih Berri in Beirut. We are pleased to
hear that the overall situation in UNIFIL’s area of
operation remains calm and that the mission is working
with all interlocutors to maintain overall stability. We
must therefore further support the efforts of United
Nations peacekeeping forces to monitor the situation
along the Blue Line. They must have full access to all
locations along that Line. We also appeal to all parties
to tone down the rhetoric.
UNIFIL peacekeepers should further increase
their patrolling along the Blue Line, together with
the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF), so as to maintain
overall stability and avoid any misunderstandings that
could lead to escalation. We request that the Force
Commander be in close liaison with both the LAF and
the Israeli Defense Forces. All parties should therefore
make use of UNIFIL’s dialogue, coordination and
tripartite mechanisms in de-escalating tensions.
We join others in urging all the parties to prevent
violations of the Blue Line under any circumstances.
The Lebanese army should continue to expand the
State’s sovereignty and control throughout the country
and try to maintain a permanent ceasefire. Both Tel
Aviv and Beirut should strictly comply with all the
relevant Security Council resolutions and assist the
United Nations peacekeeping forces with their mandate.
Kazakhstan supports Lebanon’s territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence, provided for in
the General Armistice Agreement between Israel and
Lebanon of 23 March 1949, and based on paragraph
5 of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). We
condemn Israel’s numerous and continuing violations
of Lebanon’s territorial integrity, which must cease
immediately. We reaffirm Israel’s right to protection,
but at the same time Israel must observe the established
borders and other demarcation lines.
We were pleased to learn that UNIFIL and the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for

18-446559/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

Lebanon are continuing to engage with the Lebanese
authorities in order to ensure the appropriate follow-up
to the Rome II conference, held in March, which in turn
will ensure Lebanon’s commitment to increasing the
strength and presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
the UNIFIL area of operations by deploying its model
regiment and building the Lebanese navy’s capacity.
Lastly, these noteworthy measures must continue
and be supported by the Council and the wider
international community. Kazakhstan is keen to make
a real contribution, so two months ago we deployed a
peacekeeping contingent to UNIFIL. As our term is
coming to an end, this is the last time that Kazakhstan
will address this issue as a Council member. Let me
assure the Council that our commitment to this agenda
item will be steadfast as we continue to support the
Force Commander and the mission in the future.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of today’s meeting and Mr. Lacroix’s
important briefing.
Peru is carefully monitoring the worrying events
that have resulted from the discovery of underground
tunnels, allegedly dug by Hizbullah, running beneath
the Blue Line between Israel and Lebanon. In that
regard, we must first acknowledge Israel’s legitimate
right to defend itself against threats or violations of
its security, sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
this case we believe that should entail deactivating the
tunnels, avoiding further escalations or problematic
situations and obtaining explanations and satisfaction
of the issue.
We underline how vital it is that both the Lebanese
and Israeli authorities fully respect the Blue Line, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006). We also stress how important it is that the
Lebanese Government exercise full control over its
entire territory and that no arms or authority other
than those of the Lebanese State itself be permitted, in
accordance with the Taif Agreement and the relevant
Council resolutions.
We want to highlight the important role played by
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
in preventing any potential incidents between the Israeli
and Lebanese armed forces while the destruction of all
the tunnels is in progress. We have taken note of the
UNIFIL investigations confirming the existence of
four tunnels, two of which cross under the Blue Line in
clear violation of resolution 1701 (2006). We emphasize
10/18

19/12/2018

the importance of conducting such investigations in an
independent and timely manner, as well as ensuring that
the Force has adequate resources for that purpose, in
addition to the cooperation of the authorities and armed
forces of both countries. We also underscore the need
for the parties to exercise restraint and, bearing in mind
the gravity of the matter in question, reaffirm their
commitment to strictly adhering to the Taif Agreement
and resolution 1701 (2006), among other things, as well
as to fully respecting the Blue Line.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
detailed briefing. We also welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representatives of Israel and of Lebanon
in today’s meeting.
At the outset, we would like to point out that the
Russian Federation has historically maintained friendly,
constructive and mutually respectful relations with both
Lebanon and Israel. We therefore support both States’
right to peaceful development without challenges to
their national security or violations of their sovereignty.
That is why we firmly believe that maintaining a calm
environment on the line of separation between Lebanon
and Israel is essential not only to preventing any
escalation in the area, but for ensuring stability more
broadly. One of our most exemplary missions is deployed
along the Blue Line, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL), whose peacekeepers are serving
in difficult circumstances, considering the general
security crisis in the Middle East. Russia has remained
in close contact with both the Lebanese and the Israelis,
as well as the United Nations personnel, including with
regard to the events currently taking place. With regard
to the situation that has developed around the discovery
of these tunnels, whose existence UNIFIL confirmed
in the past few days, we would chiefly like to focus on
the following points.
While we understand everyone’s alarm, for the sake
of stability we believe that all the parties should refrain
from emotional polemics. Right now, it is critical that the
parties immediately engage in constructive, professional
dialogue aimed at eliminating controversial points. In
the Israeli-Lebanon context there are opportunities for
that. The existing tripartite mechanism in Naqoura for
preventing and resolving incidents works well.
We have also taken into consideration UNIFIL’s
preliminary conclusions about the violation of
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

resolution 1701 (2006). Our view is that all violations
of the resolution’s provisions must cease, on both sides.
That means all of them. We cannot have a selective
approach to the resolution’s implementation. With
regard to the Israeli military’s launch of its Operation
Northern Shield, we naturally recognize Israel’s right to
defend its national security, including by preventing any
illegal penetration of its territory by anyone. However,
we hope that the action undertaken in that regard will
not run counter to the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006) defining the rules of conduct of the parties in the
area of the Blue Line, which is not an internationally
recognized boundary. The commitments relating to it
are mutually binding only between the two parties.
We welcome the clear messages from the leadership
of both the States involved signalling that they do not
intend to engage in direct confrontation. We heard a
similar message in the conversation between President
Vladimir Putin and Prime Minister Netanyahu. President
Aoun, speaking for the Lebanese side, reaffirmed his
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and expressed
his willingness to take all necessary measures to
resolve the problem based on the clarification of all the
circumstances. We want to emphasize the importance
of seeing both parties display a sense of responsibility
and restraint and avoid provocative steps and abrasive
statements that might further exacerbate an already
tense situation in the Middle East.
Separately, we would like to focus on the fact that
the tunnel problem should not become a reason for
hasty conclusions about the functioning of UNIFIL.
The mission should not be subjected to politicized
aspirations that have little to do with improving its
effectiveness. Any efforts to undermine UNIFIL’s
capacity would be unacceptable, considering that its
peacekeepers’ work has a stabilizing effect not only
along the Blue Line separating Lebanon and Israel but
inside Lebanon itself and in the Middle East generally.
We want to emphasize that all disagreements that arise
either in the area of the Blue Line or with regard to the
agenda item for Lebanon should be addressed through
political dialogue and consultations, as every relevant
Security Council resolution makes clear. The fact is
that what is going on in this part of the Middle East is
the result of many years of conflicts, crises and wars.
Stabilizing the situation requires the cooperation of
the States concerned with a view to increasing trust
and relaunching international efforts to achieve a
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.

S/PV. 8432

Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): I join the delegations that took the
floor before me in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and in welcoming the presence
of Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and thanking him for the
detailed information he has just given us on the most
recent developments concerning the current tense
situation near the Blue Line.
In view of the confirmation by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) of the existence
of tunnels south of the Blue Line and the launching
of a large-scale military operation announced by the
Israeli armed forces with the aim of destroying several
tunnels dug from Lebanon to Israel, the Government
of Equatorial Guinea expresses its deep concern about
overall stability in the region.
The attribution by the Israeli Defense Forces of
the excavation of the tunnels to Hizbullah has sounded
the drums of war in Upper Galilee. Tensions are
increasing and with them the risk of a miscalculation
that could turn into a confrontation between the patrols
of the Lebanese army and the Israeli Defense Forces,
which are already squaring off against one another in
those areas.
Bearing in mind that the tunnels discovered were
excavated from homes in Lebanese villages and that, if
the genuine intention of their perpetrators was allegedly
to use them to infiltrate Israel and launch offensives
against the opposing party, the tunnels clearly pose a
threat to the security of both the Israeli and Lebanese
civilian populations and constitute a flagrant violation
of resolution 1701 (2006), which calls on the parties
to uphold a permanent ceasefire along the Blue Line.
In that context, my delegation wishes to stress the
importance of ensuring stability on the border and the
region in strict compliance with resolution 1701 (2006)
and in coordination of UNIFIL.
We commend the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Stefano Del
Col, on his efforts. He has maintained contact with
both sides at the highest level to maintain clear and
credible channels of communication in order to avoid
misunderstandings on this sensitive issue. We again
urge the Lebanese and Israeli authorities to prioritize
their close cooperation with UNIFIL and to use the
latter’s liaison, coordination and tripartite mechanisms
to reduce tension.

18-4465511/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

The responsibility for the security and well-being
of the people on both sides of the Blue Line ultimately
rests with the Governments of Israel and Lebanon. That
is why we believe that, before resorting to force, the
priority must be to preserve calm and stability in the
region. As has been underscored, the ongoing relative
calm that has prevailed along the Blue Line since 2006
is a positive development. Therefore, the continued
commitment of all parties to resolution 1701 (2006)
remains essential for maintaining stability in the
region. We also understand that Israel has the right to
legitimate defence.
The message bears repeating: The Government
of Equatorial Guinea wants Council members with
the capacity to influence the parties to become even
more involved in making decisive progress towards a
permanent ceasefire. That must be done by prioritizing
not only their interests in the region but ultimately
the well-being of the people, who often live under the
shadow of war or its looming threat.
In conclusion, this is our desire not only because
we are a member of the Security Council but also
because of our firm conviction that, through political
negotiation, the parties concerned can satisfactorily
resolve all the problems, including those relating to the
Israeli-Palestinian, Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese
negotiations, in such a way that a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace can soon be achieved in the
Middle East.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing on the
developments in connection with tunnels along the
Blue Line. We have also taken note of the white notes
we received last week. We understand the seriousness
of the matter, which has enormous ramifications for the
security and stability of not only Lebanon and Israel,
but also of the wider region.
We all know the delicate situation in the region,
and it would not be in anyone’s interest if it escalated.
That is why it is absolutely vital to maintain calm and
stability along the Blue Line. It is encouraging to know
that both parties are willing to work with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and have
no intention to escalate the situation along the Blue line.
We take note of the statement issued by the UNIFIL
Head of Mission and Force Commander following
meetings with the Lebanese President and Speaker
of Parliament. The role of UNIFIL continues to be
12/18

19/12/2018

very vital and the mission needs to be supported in
effectively carrying out its mandate. It is also important
that UNIFIL continue to work in close coordination
with the parties to verify the facts and address the
developments in connection with the tunnels, in line
with resolution 1701 (2006). We hope the Council will
be informed of the outcome of the investigations in
due course.
Finally, strengthening the presence of the Lebanese
Armed Forces throughout the territory remains an
important objective, which needs to be implemented.
That is all the more significant in the light of the most
recent developments. We support the efforts of the
Government of Lebanon to extend its authority across
the whole territory.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me join
other colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his detailed briefing and in
expressing our deep appreciation for the way the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and its leadership have handled this very serious and
difficult situation.
We note with great concern the existence, as
confirmed by UNIFIL, of tunnels along the Blue Line,
which were discovered by the Israeli Defense Forces
in northern Israel. Let me echo a number of other
delegations that stressed at this meeting that the tunnels
constitute a violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The
construction of the tunnels is also a violation of Israel’s
sovereignty and a potential threat to its citizens. It also
threatens Lebanese stability.
We commend the swift action by UNIFIL in
examining the claims regarding the existence of the
tunnels. Let me emphasize UNIFIL’s special role under
the current circumstances and commend the mission’s
peacekeepers for their participation in maintaining
stability in Lebanon. We also recognize the decisive
role of the Lebanese Armed Forces in responding to
security challenges.
Poland condemns any actions that may further
undermine security and threaten peace in the region.
We urge all parties to abide by their legal obligation to
respect fully the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006)
and the mandate of UNIFIL. We urge the parties
to show restraint and maintain close contact and
cooperation with UNIFIL with a view to preserving
calm and stability. Bearing in mind the highly positive
role of the tripartite mechanism, any actions should be
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8432

consulted between the parties through that platform to
prevent an escalation of the conflict. In that context, we
call upon all sides to avoid any unilateral actions.

both parties have indicated that they have no intention
of escalating tensions along the Blue Line and will
therefore continue to work with UNIFIL to that end.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm our strong support
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon and its efforts to insulate
itself from the damaging effect of the Syrian conflict.

We also express our full support for the work of
UNIFIL, which in 2019 will continue to support all
efforts to defuse tensions through dialogue and seek
every opportunity for confidence-building. All parties
must be aware of the possibility that a relatively minor
incident could quickly become more serious, with
unintended consequences.

Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing today. We renew our support for the
work entrusted to him.
We express our full confidence in the follow-up
actions initiated by the Lebanese Government at the
request of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which has thus far confirmed the existence
of four tunnels close to the Blue Line in northern
Israel, according to its 17 December press release. We
welcome the fact that the construction of those crossborder tunnels between Israel and Lebanon is being
thoroughly investigated by UNIFIL and the Lebanese
Armed Forces. The investigation must strictly adhere
to the principles set out in paragraph 8 of resolution
1701 (2006).
Bolivia reiterates its emphatic condemnation of
any action that results in the violation of the territorial
sovereignty of Lebanon or the State of Israel. During
the two years we have occupied this seat as an elected
member of the Council, we have insisted that both
parties must base all their actions on the provisions
of resolution 1701 (2006), with full respect for the
Blue Line. That is why we reject Israel’s persistent
violations of Lebanese airspace and territory. Israel’s
presence in the northern part of Al-Ghajar village and
the adjacent area, north of the Blue Line, must cease
immediately. We also urge the Israeli Government
to refrain from the actions it has carried out since
4 December — the excessive mobilization of its defence
forces and the use of inflammatory rhetoric, both of
which are flagrant violations of resolution 1701 (2016)
and Lebanese sovereignty.
The situation on the ground remains relatively
calm; there have been no clashes or skirmishes between
the military forces on either side. On the contrary, an
investigation is ongoing and efforts are being made to
maintain clear and credible channels of communication
with both parties, so as to avoid misunderstandings that
might turn into regrettable situations. We highlight that

Therefore, we reiterate our call to the parties to
promote the establishment, between the Blue Line and
the Litani River, of a zone free of any armed personnel,
assets and weapons other than those of the Government
of Lebanon and of UNIFIL, with a view to preventing
the resumption of hostilities.
My delegation is deeply concerned that, despite
Israel’s participation in the meeting in Naqoura of the
tripartite mechanism of senior officials — together
with the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Head of
Mission and Force Commander of UNIFIL — in which
the parties expressed their willingness to honour the
provisions set out in resolution 1701 (2006), it continues
to flagrantly violate said resolution. Nevertheless, we
hope that today’s meeting will serve to ensure that calm
prevails in the coming weeks.
In conclusion, Bolivia rejects Israel’s persistent
violations of Lebanese airspace, which are a flagrant
violation of resolution 1701 (2006), and we are
convinced that the perpetuation of such illegal actions
only generates instability in the region. We urge
the Government of Israel to immediately cease its
occupation of the northern part of Al-Ghajar village and
the adjacent area, north of the Blue Line, as it violates the
resolution and, more important, Lebanese sovereignty.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
My delegation congratulates Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his excellent briefing on the situation at the
border between Israel and Lebanon.
Côte d’Ivoire remains particularly concerned about
the recent discovery of tunnels along the Blue Line,
the demarcation line between Israel and Lebanon. The
discovery of four Hizbullah tunnels could exacerbate
tensions between the two countries and hinder the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), of 11 August

18-4465513/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

19/12/2018

2006. The relative calm in that area raised hopes for
improved relations between Israel and Lebanon.

people. We continue to suffer the consequences of
those invasions.

My country condemns those Hizbullah actions,
which could endanger the lives and well-being of
millions of Lebanese citizens who aspire to live in
peace, following the trauma caused by the long civil
war in Lebanon and the 33-day war between Israel and
Lebanon in 2006.

Today we are witnessing another volatile situation
concerning the tunnels. Lebanon has taken this issue
very seriously. It has said — loudly and clearly and at
the highest level — that it is not interested in a new
conflict. Indeed, immediately after the news came
out, President Michel Aoun unequivocally reaffirmed
Lebanon’s commitment to the letter and spirit of
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety. That affirmation
was not mere rhetoric or words — it was a commitment
that is in the interests of my country and my people.
That is also why President Aoun expressed Lebanon’s
interest in preserving the security and stability of south
Lebanon, as well as its willingness to work with the
international community to address the issues raised
by the Security Council in its most recent meeting on
Lebanon (see S/PV.8338). He made it clear that Lebanon
has no aggressive intentions.

My delegation therefore welcomes the investigation
conducted by the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) regarding the construction of
those tunnels and calls on all stakeholders to exercise
restraint pending the outcome of the investigation. In
that context, my delegation congratulates Major General
Del Col and his troops for their professionalism in the
face of this difficult situation. Côte d’Ivoire encourages
the Lebanese authorities to provide all the necessary
assistance to UNIFIL, including access to private
property that might house those tunnels.
In conclusion, my country urges the parties
concerned to prioritize dialogue in order to resolve this
incident, as a new conflict between Israel and Hizbullah
would have dramatic consequences in a region that is,
unfortunately, beset by many crises.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to start
by thanking Mr. Lacroix for his briefing and for his
support — and that of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) — for peace in Lebanon.
We are meeting during a holy month that is
supposed to bring peace to all on Earth. Unfortunately,
it seems that my country, Lebanon, is condemned to
be the victim of continuous threats, conflict and pain.
While the Lebanese were busy preparing for Christmas
in order to celebrate the birth of hope and renewal, they
are today worried, concerned and fearful about the
future. When they see this organ convene to discuss
Lebanon, as it is doing today, it triggers memories of
Israeli aggression, invasions and continued occupation
of Lebanese land. They wonder if all of this is a
prelude to another aggression. No one can blame them.
Lebanon has witnessed four Israeli invasions in the last
40 years, which resulted in thousands of civilians killed
or severely injured, the destruction of the country’s
infrastructure and years of hardship for the Lebanese
14/18

That same commitment was reiterated by Prime
Minister-designate Saad Hariri in a meeting where
he told UNIFIL’s Force Commander, Major General
Del Col, that Lebanon remained committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and respect
for the Blue Line. The Prime Minister-designate has
said that the Lebanese army, the sole power responsible
for defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Lebanon, cooperates with the UNIFIL forces and
will conduct patrols to deal with any flaws in the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) from the
Lebanese side.
Following his statement, the Lebanese army is now
deployed heavily in the area of operations to make sure
that resolution 1701 (2006) is abided by strictly. The
army is continuing its patrols there at this moment.
The Foreign Ministry, on its part, in a statement today
rejected any violations of resolution 1701 (2006) of
any kind. But the President and the Prime Ministerdesignate also pointed to Israeli’s responsibility in
instigating conflict through its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty. The real issue at hand is indeed
the constant violations of our sovereignty by land, air
and sea, in full contravention of resolution 1701 (2006),
but also in full contravention of a key provision of
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The Lebanese State did not commit any violations,
while the violations on the Israeli side were committed
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

by the Israeli Government, which amount to 1,800
violations annually, and in the last four months they
have reached 150 a month, on average. Here is a sample
of the violations that we have provided to the United
Nations, every day and every week — I am sure they
are in the United Nations offices already. These are
for the month of December alone, and today is only
the nineteenth. Moreover, Israel breached Lebanese
airspace in the last four months alone by an average of
84 violations daily. All of those are documented with
UNIFIL.
That is in addition to its violation of the Lebanese
telecommunications network, sending threatening
messages to Lebanese citizens and causing fear and
panic among the population. We sent reports of those
violations to the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral, in a formal letter on 6 December. Just imagine,
if we were to call for a Security Council meeting every
time Israel had violated Lebanon’s sovereignty since
2006, the members of the Council would be here 24/7
to address them.
Lebanese officials accorded the problem of the
tunnels the utmost careful attention fearing, rightly
so, that Israel might use it as a pretext to threaten the
stability of Lebanon. The Prime Minister-designate
told the UNIFIL Force Commander that the United
Nations must shoulder its responsibilities in facing
Israel’s daily violations. He said that the escalating tone
towards Lebanon, which those present had a taste of
today outside the Council, does not serve the relative
calm that has prevailed for more than 12 years in the
south.
Prime Minister Hariri called on the international
community and all members to curb this escalation
in the interest of respecting the Blue Line and the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). We repeat
his call here again in the Council, with the hope that
it will defuse the situation for the benefit of peace and
calm on our border.
In the light of all those violations and disregard
for international legality, the Lebanese are asking a
legitimate question: for the international community,
are there aristocrats in committing violations? They are
worried about double standards: the Lebanese reports
of Israeli violations of its sovereignty are buried in the
archives, while Israel’s complaints get Security Council
meetings and its actions go unpunished.

S/PV. 8432

“We have the perfect right to pre-emptive selfdefence, survey and collect intelligence.”
Those are the words of the Prime Minister of Israel
a few days ago when addressing the Israeli breaches
of Lebanese airspace. What the Prime Minister sees as
self-defence is seen as a threat in Beirut. When Israeli
planes fly low or break the sound barrier over populated
areas, people feel the brunt of the Israeli violations.
We all know too well how the so-called Israeli right
to pre-emptive self-defence, which, by the way, has
no international legal basis, is used to justify illegal
aggressive acts and invasions.
We should not be condemned to repeating the
same situation over and over again. There is a simple
way of keeping the border calm. It is by the adherence
to resolution 1701 (2006) by both sides, not only by
Lebanon. It is by moving from the cessation of hostilities
to a permanent ceasefire. It is by the Israeli withdrawal
from the remaining occupied Lebanese territory and
territorial waters.
There is also a United Nations mechanism in south
Lebanon, as members have mentioned, the Tripartite
Committee, which can deal with all the issues that arise
from the situation in south Lebanon. That Committee
can be empowered to solve all the violations, especially
the outstanding issues of the border dispute between
Lebanon and Israel, including the maritime border.
Those issues can be resolved away from any domestic
political considerations.
The Israeli press is rife with questions about the
timing and purpose of this Israeli campaign. But,
although Lebanon is not concerned with Israel’s
domestic policy, it refuses to be used as a pawn in Israeli
power politics. Lebanon is interested in preserving calm
within its territory and living in peace and security. Is
that too much to ask for?
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Imagine a crisp fall morning in
northern Israel, in Metulla, where farmers are working
in their fields, boys and girls are walking to school,
neighbours are wishing each other a good morning and
everyone is going about their day. Metulla is surrounded
by the Lebanese border, but the town lives in calm and
quiet, until the terror starts.
Suddenly, a force of 250 Hizbullah terrorists, from
the elite Radwan Unit, emerge from the end of a cross-

18-4465515/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

border terror tunnel. That tunnel spans from Kafr Kila,
Lebanon, directly into Metulla, Israel. It was built to
enable that large group of Hizbullah terrorists to move
swiftly across the border underground. The tunnels
are wide enough for Radwan terrorists to march two
by two into Israel. Hizbullah Radwan forces will use
that tunnel to invade Israel and take over Metulla. Its
terrorists will kill civilians, including children and
the elderly. Then it will close the Route 90, which is
the highway that connects Metulla with the rest of the
Galilee, and hold Metulla under siege.
But now imagine that tragic scenario multiplied
five times over. Imagine Hizbullah’s Radwan
terrorists using five different tunnels to five other
towns in Israel — Kiryat Shmona, Avivim, Adamit,
Zar’it and Menara — and killing innocent Israeli
civilians, kidnapping them and taking over parts of
the Galilee. Hizbullah calls that strategic operational
plan “Conquering the Galilee”. It is a ground attack,
but Hizbullah does not stop there. It shoots thousands
of rockets and missiles into northern Israel. It launches
anti-tank missiles that could easily hit a bus full of
children. It seizes control of northern Israel’s major
roads and highways. It uses Shiite militias together with
the Radwan forces to cross the Blue Line into Israel,
overcome obstacles Israel that has set in their way and
launch terror attacks against Israel by sea.
What I just described is not just a figment of the
imagination. But we will never allow that to happen.
Through an extensive intelligence operation, Israel
monitored Hizbullah’s widespread terror tunnel project,
which spans from Lebanon into Israel’s sovereign
territory, underneath the Blue Line.
On 4 December, Israel initiated Operation Northern
Shield. That operation is a protective measure to prevent
the possibility of such a grave reality from ever taking
place. It is a pre-emptive logistical operation on our side
of the Blue Line. The goal remains to neutralize and
destroy Hizbullah’s terror tunnels. The Israeli Defense
Forces (IDF) has reported the existence so far of four
terror tunnels in four separate geographical locations
that begin in Lebanon and infiltrate Israel. Israel has
informed its partners about the extensive operation and
provided the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) with full information about the tunnels.
Throughout it all, Hassan Nasrallah, the SecretaryGeneral of Hizbullah, has remained silent.
16/18

19/12/2018

UNIFIL confirmed the existence of those terror
tunnels two days ago. UNIFIL stated clearly that
Hizbullah’s activities constitute a violation of resolution
1701 (2006) and are a matter of serious concern. Israel
transferred all of the information to UNIFIL. We even
provided the exact coordinates of the opening of the
tunnels on the Lebanese side. What did we expect
UNIFIL to do with that information? We expected it
would, perhaps, take control of the area, destroy the
tunnels and follow its mandate. But what did UNIFIL
do? It passed all of the information to the Lebanese
army. The Lebanese army could have worked with
UNIFIL to remove Hizbullah completely from the area
or, perhaps, destroy the tunnels and done its job to keep
its people safe. But, what did the Lebanese army do? It
sent the information directly to Hizbullah, which then
sealed the tunnels and tried to cover up the evidence.
Here is a picture we took inside one of the Hizbullah
terror-attack tunnels on our side. As Council members
can see, Hizbullah placed a fence and bricks inside the
tunnel in an attempt to hide it. We do not expect that
Hizbullah would receive information and immediately
send terrorists to block the tunnel.
UNIFIL has one primary responsibility and,
according to its mandate, that is
“to ensure that its area of operations it not utilized
for hostile activities of any kind” (resolution 1701
(2006), para. 12).
Israel has revealed to UNIFIL that Mayor Yahya
Husseini, a high-ranking member of the Lebanese
army, is using his position to advance the interests of
Hizbullah. That is not the first instance of cooperation
between the terrorist group and the Lebanese army.
Husseini is part of a liaison network between the
Lebanese army and Hizbullah. The Lebanese army has
even promoted him.
The Lebanese Armed Forces, the so-called official
military of Lebanon, is supposed to ensure calm and
stability in the region. In southern Lebanon there are
10,000 soldiers of the Lebanese Armed Forces. They,
along with more than 11,000 UNIFIL peacekeepers,
have one objective: to prevent Hizbullah from
terrorizing the area. Yet, somehow, Hizbullah, with
fewer than 10,000 terrorists, has full control of the area.
The Lebanese army has chosen to walk with Hizbullah
in two ways — by giving Hizbullah information that
helps the terror group’s efforts and by preventing
UNIFIL from carrying out its mandate in the region.
18-44655

19/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We are very concerned, but not surprised, to hear that
the Lebanese army does not give UNIFIL full access
to the coordinates provided by Israel or stop Hizbullah
from confronting UNIFIL forces on the ground.
Let me be abundantly clear. Hizbullah’s activities
are a flagrant and unacceptable violation of resolution
1701 (2006) and the Blue Line. They also violate the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. In
order for the new UNIFIL Force Commander, Major
General Del Col, to succeed — and we want him to
succeed in his role — UNIFIL cannot make the same
mistakes made under the previous Commander. Israel
has informed UNIFIL time and again of Hizbullah’s
terror activities, but they have never appeared in the 38
reports on resolution 1701 (2006). I repeat, 38 reports.
I have exposed Hizbullah’s violations here in the
Security Council. In June 2017, I visited the northern
border with Major General Beary, the former UNIFIL
Force Commander, together with IDF officials. On that
day he said,
“The region is calm. The situation is good. There is
no need for change.”
Today no one can deny the facts. In this picture Council
members can see the tunnel crossing the Blue Line,
almost directly under a UNIFIL observation point.
There is a UNIFIL observation point just metres from
the tunnel. When a terror-attack tunnel runs from a
private property and under the Blue Line, the region
is not calm. The situation is not good. There must be a
change.
UNIFIL could not even enter certain sections of its
own mandated area of operations. It must be granted
full access to its entire area of operations, including the
private properties and nature reserves that Hizbullah
is exploiting for terror. We know that it is a game. For
example, Hizbullah has conducted operations under the
guise of a mock non-governmental organization, known
as Green without Borders. Those present here today
have seen those operations with their own eyes. Israel
calls on UNIFIL to carry out its full mandate under
resolution 2433 (2017) and maintain regional security.
The world has expectations of UNIFIL that it must meet.
The Security Council must designate Hizbullah as a
terrorist organization, just as it designated the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
The international community must condemn Hizbullah
in the strongest terms and stand by Israel’s self-defence
measures. It is the expectation that Lebanon will

S/PV. 8432

eliminate the terror tunnels and prevent the building
of future attack tunnels that threaten Israel. Israel will
continue Operation Northern Shield to neutralize the
threat of the tunnels. We have the full right, like any
other nation in the world, to defend ourselves, our
sovereignty and our people.
Hizbullah’s severe violations of resolution 1701
(2006) do not end with its terror-tunnel project.
Unfortunately, the terror tunnels reflect just a small
part of Hizbullah’s illegal activities in southern
Lebanon. Hizbullah is building military capabilities
and infrastructure with the ultimate goal of using
them to attack Israel. Let us take one village, for
example — Kfar Kila, a Lebanese town of close to
15,000 people next to our border. Houses have been
turned into bunkers and schools have become weaponsstorage facilities. I told the Ambassador of Lebanon to
look at what he has allowed Hizbullah to do in southern
Lebanon. Why is he putting his own people in danger?
Not only is Hizbullah violating resolution 1701 (2006);
it is also exploiting the innocent civilians of southern
Lebanon by using them as human shields.
I will share evidence of that with the Council. We
are revealing this information for the first time. This
is Kafr Kile. In this aerial photo the Council can see
the complete transformation of this village into a terror
terminal. All the dots are bunkers storing weapons.
Here we can see where the tunnels start in the village.
These are private properties. Hizbullah has built a
terror terminal from Kafr Kile into Israel, which stores
weaponry and builds command-and-control centres.
That is the reality. Imagine what will happen to the
village in case we have to defend ourselves.
Hizbullah has also established the foundation
for launching attacks against Israel, using homes as
command-and-control centres, turning civilian and
private infrastructure into weapons armouries and
building elaborate operational capabilities inside
villages and forests. Those violations reflect just the
backdrop of Hizbullah’s illegal activities in southern
Lebanon. Hizbullah has stockpiled thousands of rockets
and missiles within those areas. That is the reality on
the ground. What does the international community
honestly expect Israel to do in the face of that grave
danger?
The Lebanese Ambassador called for condemning
Israel. We appreciate her concern for the Lebanese
people, especially in Kafr Kile. As she mentioned in

18-4465517/18

S/PV.8432

The situation in the Middle East

19/12/2018

her letter to the Council on 6 December, she represents
a Government that allows Iran and its proxies to turn
Lebanon into a launching pad for terror. The Lebanese
Government is endangering its own people by simply
doing nothing. How have they allowed Hizbullah to
build an underground city of tunnels that places the
citizens of Lebanon in constant danger? There are
no expectations from a terrorist organization to act
appropriately. But what has the Lebanese Government
done to prevent Hizbullah from triggering a regional
war? Hizbullah is hijacking the entire State of Lebanon
to attack Israel, and the Government of Lebanon has
surrendered. By closing its eyes as its people live
inside a ticking time bomb of terror tunnels, missiles
and rockets, the Government of Lebanon has failed its
people.

on growing evidence and reports, Iran is not only
transferring
game-changing
weapons
through
Lebanon’s border with Syria but, in flagrant violation
of numerous Security Council resolutions, Iran is now
transporting those weapons on commercial planes
landing in Beirut’s international airport. After the joint
campaign of killing in Syria, Iranian fighters, Shiite
militias and Hizbullah terrorists — specifically the
Radwan Unit — are joining forces once again — this
time against Israel.

Israel’s Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu,
revealed that Hizbullah has placed at least three
precision missile conversion sites directly beside
Beirut’s international airport. Hizbullah is building
its own precision missile production capabilities.
Hizbullah is now holding over 100,000 rockets and
missiles across Lebanon. One may wonder how
Hizbullah, a terrorist organization, could get away
with that. The answer is simple. First, Hizbullah is now
more than ever paralysing and eroding the pillars of the
State of Lebanon with its ever-growing grip on power.
Secondly, there is Iran. Nasrallah said himself:

If there is a war that must be fought for Israel to
defend itself against Hizbullah’s terrorism the world
would say, as it always does, how could this have been
prevented? Well, today even that future war could have
been prevented with this body acting as it is charged to
do: by calling out the flagrant violations of international
law and acting finally and decisively.

“We are open about the fact that Hizbullah’s
budget, its income, its expenses, everything it eats
and drinks, its weapons and rockets, come from the
Islamic Republic of Iran.”
Iran is the lifeblood of Hizbullah, ideologically,
financially, militarily and even culturally. Based

18/18

Let me be crystal clear before I conclude: if Hizbullah
makes the mistake of attacking Israel, opposing
our actions or violating our sovereignty — make no
mistake— Israel will act. We will act swiftly. We will
act by land, by air and by sea. We will act with our full
force and might.

Israel is protecting itself. Operation Northern
Shield ensures the safety of our people. Israel has no
intention to escalate the situation, but we are not naïve.
As the famous playwright Anton Chekhov once said, if
you place a gun in the first act, it must fire in the last.
Hizbullah’s terror tunnels and missiles were not created
without purpose. They were created for Hizbullah to
use against us. If Hizbullah will have the arrogance to
attack Israel, we will bury it in the rubble of Lebanon.
We will never let terror win.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

18-44655
