S/PV.9346

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9346th meeting

Wednesday, 14 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al Kaabi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Immongault
Mr. Afriyie
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Ms. Comoane
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
The values of human fraternity in promoting and sustaining peace
Letter dated 9 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/417)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16849 (E)
*2316849*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secretary for Relations with States of the Holy See. I
also extend a warm welcome to Latifa Ibn Ziaten, who
is providing a briefing on behalf of civil society.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The values of human fraternity in promoting
and sustaining peace
Letter dated 9 June 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/417)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, His Eminence
Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, Grand Imam of Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif, His Excellency Archbishop Paul Richard
Gallagher, the distinguished ministers and other highlevel representatives. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Eminence
Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif and Chairman of the Muslim Council of
Elders; His Excellency Archbishop Paul Richard
Gallagher, Secretary for Relations with States of the
Holy See; and Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten, Founder and
President of Association IMAD pour la jeunesse et
la paix.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/417, which contains the text of a letter
dated 9 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government of
the United Arab Emirates for convening this important
debate on the values of human fraternity in promoting
and sustaining peace. It is an immense privilege to
be joined today by His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed
Al-Tayeb, the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, and
His Excellency Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher,
2/24

14/06/2023

Faith leaders are vital allies in our shared quest
for global peace. My esteemed predecessor Dag
Hammarskjöld once observed that “The United Nations
stands outside — necessarily outside — all confessions,
but it is, nevertheless, an instrument of faith. As such it
is inspired by what unites and not by what divides the
great religions of the world.” Every great faith summons
the imperatives of human fraternity, mutual respect
and understanding. These universal values animate the
United Nations Charter and are at the core of our work
for peace, justice and human rights.
Preserving peace and preventing war is the raison
d’être of the Council. Threats to peace come in many
forms — from competition for power and resources,
to human rights violations and weak governance, and
to extreme poverty, inequalities and marginalization
that breed hopelessness and despair. But an all-toocommon denominator to the onset and escalation of
conflict is hatred of the other. Hate fuels humankind’s
worst impulses. It is a catalyst for polarization and
radicalization and a conduit for atrocity crimes. It is also
a result of those crimes, contributing to horrific cycles
of violence that can churn for decades. It greases the
wheels of violence, frays the social fabric and corrodes
the pillars of stability. It is, in short, often the bloody
heart of conflict. And that heart is pumping venom
and division throughout the bloodstream of the global
body politic. Around the world, we are witnessing a
groundswell of xenophobia, racism, intolerance, violent
misogyny, anti-Muslim hatred, virulent antisemitism
and attacks on minority Christian communities.
Neo-Nazi white supremacist movements today
represent the top and the fastest growing internal
security threat in several countries. The demonization of
the other, disdain for diversity and disregard for human
rights — those evils are not new to our time. What is
new is their speed and reach. Social media has equipped
hatemongers with a global bullhorn for bile. Today no
conspiracy is too outrageous to find a vast audience,
no falsehood too absurd to fuel an online frenzy.
Unverified assertions, or outright lies, can gain instant
credibility, placed on an equal footing with facts and
science. They are often embraced, and even promoted,
by political leaders. Hate-fuelled ideas and language
are moving from the margins to the mainstream,
coarsening the public discourse and triggering real-life
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

violence. The effects are everywhere, and they are
deadly. The perpetrators of the heinous attacks on a
mosque in Christchurch, a synagogue in Pittsburgh and
a church in Charleston were all radicalized online.
The United Nations itself is not immune to that threat.
Last year, a survey of United Nations peacekeepers
found that 75 per cent see mis- and disinformation as
a direct threat to their safety and security. From our
Resident Coordinators to our envoys, mediators and
peacekeepers — all have raised the alarm. And of
course, many challenges on the agenda of the Council
are directly affected by hate speech, supercharged by
modern technologies. From Bosnia and Herzegovina to
Libya and beyond, hate speech is exacerbating tensions
among communities and eroding trust in institutions.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic, hate speech has been used to
vilify minorities, and disinformation campaigns have
smeared and threatened United Nations peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers with lies. In Myanmar, social
media has been exploited to demean and demonize the
Rohingya minority, inciting attacks and violence. In
Iraq, the recent proliferation of hate speech targeting
Yazidis in Sinjar has stoked fears within the community
that it will once again be the target of atrocity crimes.
The list goes on, and it is growing.
Hate is a danger to everyone, and fighting
it therefore must be a job for everyone. We must
collectively strengthen our defences.
First, we must reign in the hate that is spreading
online. Earlier this week, I launched a policy brief to
promote information integrity on digital platforms.
It proposes a code of conduct to help Member States,
digital platforms and other stakeholders make the digital
space more inclusive and safer for all, while defending
the right to the freedom of opinion and expression and
the right to access information. As part of Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), we are working on a global digital
compact for an open, free, inclusive and secure digital
future for all, firmly anchored in human rights and
non-discrimination.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, as we move towards increasingly
multi-ethnic and religiously diverse societies, we must
also invest in social cohesion. We need to ensure that
every community feels respected for its unique identity,
while at the same time fully belonging to society as a
whole. We must acknowledge diversity as an asset to

S/PV.9346

any society, not a threat. Hate is rooted in ignorance and
fear. But, when we enrich the soil of knowledge with
facts, science and historical truth, hatred cannot spread
like a deadly weed. That requires guaranteeing quality
education for everyone, everywhere, including women
and girls. That requires supporting education systems
that instil respect for science and celebrate humankind
in all its diversity. And it requires increased funding for
education, peacebuilding and global solidarity.
(spoke in English)
Finally and fundamentally, we must strengthen the
values of compassion, respect and human fraternity
and secure free and safe civic spaces. They are our
best antidote to the poison of discord and division.
That demands action by all of us across international
organizations, Governments, civil society and the
private sector. And it requires the intervention of faith
leaders everywhere. The fact is that we see examples
of intolerance in all societies and among all faiths
today. It is the duty of religious leaders to prevent the
instrumentalization of hatred among their followers.
The declaration “Human Fraternity for World Peace
and Living Together”, by His Holiness Pope Francis and
His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, Grand Imam
of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, is a model for compassion and
human solidarity. It urges religious and political leaders
to end wars, conflicts and environmental degradation.
It calls on people of faith to recognize and respect one
another, join hands and work together for the good
of humankind.
At this time of strife, let us all take inspiration from
the declaration and renew our commitment to stand
together as one human family. Together, let us forge
an alliance of peace, rooted in the values of human
fraternity, rich in diversity, equal in dignity and rights
and united in solidarity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Eminence Sheikh
Ahmed Al-Tayeb.
Sheikh Al-Tayeb (spoke in Arabic): I am addressing
the Security Council from Egypt — the oasis of peace,
the meeting point of religions, the cradle of civilization
and history and the home to peace and security. It is with
pleasure that I am speaking before Security Council
members at the gracious invitation by the United Arab
Emirates, which is an elected member and President

23-168493/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Security Council for this month. This Arab and
Islamic nation is sparing no effort in promoting peace
among peoples and strengthening the principles of
human fraternity, tolerance and coexistence. I would
like also to commend the wisdom in the statement I
listened to by Secretary-General António Guterres and
his clear belief in the importance of the role of religions
and principles of human fraternity in achieving
global peace.
At the outset, let me present myself as a humble
Muslim man who does not belong to any political
streams, regardless of their origins or affiliations,
and who does not belong to any right-winged or leftwinged ideologies. I am a fervent advocate for peace,
which I actively pursue and desire for all people. I feel
a deep sense of human fraternity that connects me to
all human beings regardless of their ethnicity, religion,
belief or language. I have learned that from the Islamic
religion that I follow and from the divine books that
God sent to His prophets and messengers, including the
last of them, the Holy Qur’an, which was revealed to
Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, peace be upon him.
All divine scriptures teach us that God has honoured
humankind and favoured people over many of his
other creatures, and that God has created differences
among humankind in their languages, races, religions
and beliefs. God teaches us that humankind will live
with those differences until the end of time. The divine
scriptures teach us that all attempts to align peoples
behind one religion, culture or civilization are bound
to fail because they are contrary to the will of the
creator of all beings, who knows what is best and most
beneficial for them.
God has given us information about himself in the
Qur’an, saying that God has full power and control over
his affairs, but most among humankind know it not. The
law of differences among human beings is a cornerstone
of the concept of divine creation for humankind and
involves a set of rights and obligations that are defined
in the Qur’an with great clarity. At the forefront is the
right to freedom of belief and opinion, together with
individual, familial and communal responsibilities and
obligations. The Qur’an prohibits anything that violates
those rights or undermines their sanctity, even going
as far as to forbid any attempt to force believers to
change their beliefs, religions or cultures. Those who
read the Qur’an with objectivity can see that it clearly
states such precepts as the absence of compulsion in
religion — whoever desires to believe, let them believe,
4/24

14/06/2023

and whoever does not, let them disbelieve. It is not for
you to compel them. Whoever delves into the traditions
of the Prophet Muhammad will encounter his clear
message emphasizing freedom of belief. Those who
choose to reject Islam, as Jews or Christians, will not
be coerced to abandon their faith.
It is logical that relationships among individuals
with different religions, languages, cultures and
civilizations should be built on peace and security.
The Qur’an expresses that relationship as one of
encountering one another. God Almighty says in the
Qur’an,
“We created you from a single (pair) of a male
and a female, and made you into nations and tribes,
that ye may know each other” (The Holy Qur’an,
XLIX:13).
Under that Qur’anic theory of international relations
there is no place for theories of conflict and
confrontation, racial discrimination, white supremacy
or dominance over the rest of God’s creation. The only
relationship that is deemed acceptable among people
is rather one of peace, which is the core principle of
Islam and the other divine religions that preceded it.
Claims that Islam is a religion of the sword or of wars
are therefore based neither on justice nor knowledge. If
we look at history, we will find that war in Islam is an
exceptional circumstance, a necessity for self-defence
and the protection of land, honour and dignity. It is not
correct that Islam is responsible for the phenomenon
of terrorism. The correct assertion would be that the
phenomenon of terrorism — for which Islam and other
religions are not to blame — is driven primarily by
global hegemonic policies, material philosophies and
economic doctrines that disregard moral principles.
In my briefing today, my intention is not to
enlighten members about Islam but to urge them to
end the senseless wars that have erupted over recent
decades and that are still flaring in our region and our
countries today. I am speaking of the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan and the tragedies, pain and sorrow they
have wrought over the past 20 years. I am also speaking
of Syria, Libya and Yemen and the destruction of their
ancient civilizations, rooted for thousands of years
in the records of history. Those lands have become
battlegrounds for armed conflicts that have forced their
men, women and children to flee from horrors of wars
that have left them utterly powerless.
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

I am speaking of our and your sacred places in
Palestine, and the immense suffering endured by
the Palestinian people under the arrogance of power
and the cruelty of tyranny. I lament the international
community’s silence in the face of the violation of that
noble people’s rights. However, I appreciated the United
Nations’ commemoration on 15 May of the seventyfifth anniversary of Palestine’s Nakba, reminding the
world and the human conscience of the 75 years that
have passed since the tragic mass displacement of
Palestinians. From this platform, I urge the Security
Council and the international community to expedite,
without delay, the recognition of an independent
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital, and to
protect the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound
from the ongoing violations it faces every day.
I am speaking of the ongoing war that is unfolding
today on Europe’s eastern borders, with the terror it
instils, the fear it evokes and the concern that it may
push humankind backwards into a primitive era. I urge
the international community to immediately halt that
catastrophe and protect the innocent from the bloodshed
and the destruction of cities and villages.
I am speaking of the crisis of refugees fleeing
the horrors of war and their right to be rescued and
hosted — a right they are guaranteed by divine law and
religion, regardless of their religious beliefs and even
if they are not religious at all. I am speaking of the
destruction of the family and the erasure of the right of
children to delight in the embrace of the mothers who
gave birth to them. I am speaking of the devastation of
the environment, of pollution, of the surging tides of
seas and the rampant fires that ravage our forests.
I have absolutely no doubt that the crises menacing
humankind today, and which are prevalent in the East
and insidiously tightening their grip in the West, could
have been entirely avoided if our civilization and
culture had not excessively repudiated religion and
casually tossed aside religious teachings, and if we had
learned from divine guidance about the sanctity of life
and the value of justice and its pivotal role in individual
and societal stability.
In the face of those crises and as believers in
God, we are compelled to continue advocating a
message of peace and love among people to the best
of our ability. We should remain resolute in opposing
the discourse of hate that has spread among people,
the manipulations of religions and doctrines that

S/PV.9346

have ignited wars among nations and the instilling of
fear and terror in people’s hearts. That is the mission
pursued by Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, in partnership with the
Catholic Church, other Western and Eastern churches
and other religious institutions, in our collective effort
to revive a culture of dialogue among the followers of
religions and consolidate the principles of peace and
harmonious coexistence.
On 4 February 2019 from Abu Dhabi, together
with our dear brother Pope Francis — may God grant
him health and wellness — we presented to the world
the Document on Human Fraternity for World Peace
and Living Together. We have repeatedly emphasized
the importance of asserting the principles of human
fraternity as the foundation of international peace and
security at various global events, such as the Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions in
Kazakhstan, the Bahrain Forum for Dialogue: East and
West for Human Coexistence and other conferences
held in Africa, Asia and Europe. Moreover, Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif is working in cooperation with the Muslim
Council of Elders, the Catholic Church, the Church
of England and other diverse religious institutions to
organize a gathering of religious leaders to consult
on those crises and identify shared responsibilities in
addressing them, especially in relation to climate change
and the escalating pace of wars and conflicts. I trust
that the Council will agree that those efforts require the
support of political leaders and decision-makers in the
international community if we are to actually achieve
the shared goal we desire — that is, actual international
peace and security on the ground and in people’s
lives — rather than being left with mere decisions and
recommendations that go unheeded or disregarded.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that our gathering
here today is not a luxury but a necessity, dictated by
concern for the future of humankind. We are seeking
a solution to its complex crisis, which has begun to
expand and penetrate, presaging severe consequences
if it is allowed to continue along its disastrous path. The
choice made by the presidency of the Security Council
to address human fraternity is indeed commendable,
and I believe that there is no better way to address our
current crises than by embracing human fraternity,
which can be likened to our lost paradise.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank His
Eminence Grand Imam Al-Tayeb for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Archbishop Gallagher.

23-168495/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

Archbishop Gallagher: I have the honour to
read an address by His Holiness Pope Francis to the
Security Council.
“I thank the Council for this kind invitation
to address it, which I willingly accepted because
we are living at a crucial moment for humankind
in which peace seems to be giving way to war.
Conflicts are growing and stability is increasingly
at risk. We are experiencing a third world war
fought piecemeal that as time passes seems to
become ever more widespread.
“The Council, whose mandate is to safeguard
the world’s peace and security, has at times seemed
in people’s eyes to be powerless and paralysed.
Yet its work, much appreciated by the Holy See, is
essential to promoting peace. For that very reason,
I want to offer the Council a heartfelt invitation
to tackle our common problems, setting aside
ideologies, narrow visions, partisan ideas and
interests, and to cultivate a single purpose — to
work for the good of all humankind. The Council
is of course expected to respect and apply the
Charter of the United Nations with transparency
and sincerity, and without ulterior motives, as an
obligatory reference point of justice and not as a
means of masking spurious intentions.
“Today’s globalized world has brought all of us
closer together, yet it has not made us any more
fraternal. Indeed, we are suffering from a famine
of fraternity arising from the many situations of
injustice, poverty and inequality around the world,
as well as from the lack of a culture of solidarity.
New ideologies, characterized by widespread
individualism, egocentrism and materialistic
consumerism, weaken social bonds, fuelling a
throwaway mentality that leads to contempt for
the weakest and those considered useless and to
their abandonment. In that way, human coexistence
increasingly tends to resemble a mere do ut des that
is both pragmatic and selfish. Yet the worst effect
of this famine of fraternity is armed conflict and
war, which make enemies not just of individuals but
entire peoples, and whose negative consequences
reverberate for generations.
“With the founding of the United Nations, it
seemed that after two terrible world wars the world
had learned to move towards a more stable peace,
and to become at last a family of nations. Today,
6/24

14/06/2023

though, we seem to be going backwards in history,
with the rise of myopic, extremist, resentful and
aggressive nationalisms that have kindled conflicts
that are not only anachronistic and outdated but
even more violent than those of the past.
“As a man of faith, I believe that peace is
God’s dream for humankind. Yet sadly, I note that
because of war, that wonderful dream is changing
into a nightmare. To be sure, from an economic
point of view war is often more enticing than peace,
inasmuch as it promotes profit. But that is always
for a few and at the expense of the well-being of
entire populations. The money earned from arms
sales is therefore soiled with innocent blood. It
takes more courage to renounce easy profits for
the sake of keeping peace than to sell ever more
sophisticated and powerful weapons. It takes more
courage to seek peace than to wage war. It takes
more courage to promote encounters rather than
confrontations, and to sit at the negotiating table
rather than continue hostilities.
“In order to make peace a reality, we must
move away from the logic of the legitimacy of
war. If that was more valid in earlier times when
wars were more limited in scope, in our day, with
nuclear weapons and others of mass destruction,
the battlefield has become practically unlimited
and the effects potentially catastrophic. The time
has come to say an emphatic no to war and to state
that wars are not just. Only peace is just — stable,
lasting peace, built not on the precarious balance of
deterrence but on the fraternity that unites us. We
are indeed all brothers and sisters, journeying on
the same Earth, dwelling in a single common home.
We cannot darken the heaven under which we live
with the clouds of nationalisms. Where will we end
up if we all think only of ourselves?
“Those who strive to build peace must
promote fraternity. Building peace is a craft
that requires passion and patience, experience
and farsightedness, tenacity and dedication and
dialogue and diplomacy. They must listen, too,
to the cries of those who are suffering because of
wars, especially children. Their tear-stained eyes
judge us. The future we prepare for them will be
the court of our present choices.
“Peace is possible if it is truly desired. Peace
should find in the Security Council its fundamental
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9346

characteristics, which a wrong idea of peace easily
makes us forget. Peace must be based on reason, not
passion. It must be magnanimous, not selfish. Peace
must not be inert and passive but dynamic, active
and progressive, according as the just demands of
the declared and equitable rights of humankind
require new and better expressions of peace. Peace
must not be weak, inefficient or servile, but strong
in the moral reasons that justify it and in the solid
support of the nations that must uphold it.

Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher, Secretary for
Relations with States of the Holy See.

“There is still time to write a new chapter
of peace in history. We can do so in such a way
that war will belong to the past, not to the future.
The discussions in the Security Council are
aimed at and serve that end. I want to emphasize
again a word that I like to repeat, for I consider
it decisive — fraternity. Fraternity cannot remain
an abstract idea but must become a real point of
departure. Indeed, it is an essential dimension of
humankind, because we are relational beings. A
living awareness of that relationality leads us to
see and treat each person as a true sister or brother.
Without that, it becomes impossible to build a just
society or a solid and lasting peace.

I therefore wondered how it was possible for
young people today to fall into the trap of terrorism,
and how it happened. As a woman who has been on
the ground for 11 years, I realized that education was
important. Without fathers or mothers to guide them,
without schools or society, all those young people are
experiencing a crisis today. I can see that because I am
on the ground three times a week. I support France and
the world, and I see what is happening. I am not an
expert, but I have a great deal of experience today.

“I assure the Council of my support, my prayers
and the prayers of all the faithful of the Catholic
Church on behalf of peace and every peace process
and initiative. I wholeheartedly wish that not only
the Security Council but the entire United Nations
Organization, its Member States and each of its
officials may always render effective service to
humankind, taking responsibility for preserving
not only their own future but that of all, with the
boldness to increase now, without fear, what is
needed to promote fraternity and peace for the
entire planet.
“Blessed are the peacemakers.”
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Archbishop Gallagher for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Ibn Ziaten.
Ms. Ibn Ziaten (spoke in French): I am truly
honoured to participate today in this open debate. I
am very moved to speak before the Security Council;
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres; His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, the
Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif; and His Excellency

I would like to introduce myself as a woman and
a mother. I was hit hard by terrorism. My son was
killed on 11 March 2012. I did not want to drown in my
suffering. I wanted to know who the person who killed
my son was and why. I took steps myself to find out
who that young person was. When I retraced that young
person’s journey, I realized that he had no education, no
love and no one to support him.

Those young people are completely in the dark.
They are suffering and are a bit lost. However, every
child is born to be happy and have a place in society.
But if we do not give them that chance, the situation
becomes complicated. That is what happened with the
person who killed my child. I see it today in detention
centres, in homes and in neighbourhoods where young
people who have dropped out of school and are on their
own and experiencing tremendous difficulties. I am
very sad to see what is happening today and what has
brought us to this point.
That is why peace is so important. If we all work
together and with support, then perhaps peace will
overcome hatred, because hatred is easier, but peace is
something we have to work towards. That is something
that I have been observing when I work with young
people on tolerance, coexistence and love. I see their
strength to carry on and move towards what they
themselves want and dream of. However, it is a joint
effort. It is the work of families, schools, society and
the State.
Today some parents have, unfortunately, given up
on education. If the parents are not present, it is difficult
for schools to support those children. When children are
left to their own devices, they arrive at middle school,
and we say, “Those children have not succeeded. What
should do with them? We will send them to vocational
schools.” We send them to vocational schools without

23-168497/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

them knowing how to read or to write fluently. They
are given a chance: either they work, or they can leave.
Those children stay for six months, and we turn them
into a ticking time bomb for society. That is what I have
seen with young people. They are lost.
As for the parents, I do not judge them. It is not
easy to be a parent today. It is very difficult. We also
have to work with parents on education and respect for
values, and we have to pay attention to our children. If
we pay attention to and support our children and give
them affection and love, if we are present, if we share
a meal with them once a day, if we talk to them and
understand what is happening with them, then perhaps
we may be able to save today’s young people. But it is
a joint effort among schools, parents and society. It is
very important.
Today I ask every young person I speak with at
school, “Is there any hope here?” Many young people
tell me, “No, ma’am, we do not have hope.” I ask them,
“Do you dream?” They say, “No, we do not dream.” It
worries me that a 14-year-old child has no dreams or
hope. So I ask them, “Why?” And they say, “We do
not have opportunities.” And so I say to them, “Young
men, if you really have the opportunity and the desire
to do this, then you must start your engine. If you start
your engine, I am sure you will achieve your dream.
But if you do not start your engine, you will not make
it. Look at this mother in front of you. This is a mother
and a woman who has been torn apart by the death of
her 30-year-old son while he was serving the Republic.
I did not want to drown in my suffering. I wanted to
keep standing. Just as my son refused to get down on
his knees, I am standing up for you. So, try to make an
effort, because if you do not start your engines, nobody
will start them for you. So, have faith in yourselves,
believe in yourselves, move forward and do not give up.”
As long as I am healthy, I will continue to work for
peace, humankind, coexistence and tolerance, because
if we do not work together, we will not succeed.
This woman in front of the Council members is just
a mother of five, a woman on the ground. But today
I can tell Council members that I have seen millions
upon millions of young people. I have prevented quite
a few people from going to Syria. I am working on the
problem of terrorism. It concerns me enormously. I go to
detention facilities and closed homes. I have prevented
young people from leaving. I work with young people
who have returned from Syria. I work with mothers
8/24

14/06/2023

who have returned from Syria. So, I think we really
need to talk to each other and find solutions together.
I need the Security Council’s help. I will not give
up. I will continue my fight to the very end.
I started my engine when I was nine years old, and
it is still running. I want to start every engine on Earth
so that we can all live in peace, fraternity and love. The
world is beautiful, and we must make it more beautiful
for others.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Ibn
Ziaten for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates.
I would like first to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed
Al-Tayeb, the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif
and Chairman of the Muslim Council of Elders, for
their valuable statements. I also thank Archbishop
Paul Richard Gallagher, Secretary for Relations with
States of the Holy See, for the statement he delivered
on behalf of His Holiness Pope Francis, Head of the
Catholic Church, whom we wish a speedy recovery.
Additionally, I thank Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten for her
statement in which she highlighted the role of young
people in combating extremism.
We are meeting today to discuss an issue that has a
significant impact on international peace and security.
Our world is suffering from the highest number of
armed conflicts since the Second World War, with more
than 2 billion people living in places affected by the
scourge of conflicts.
That reality has grown increasingly dangerous and
complex, especially amid the continued rise in levels
of division, hate speech, racism and extremism in all
their forms and manifestations. Extremism has become
a means for deepening differences, inciting violence
and fuelling conflicts. As a result, places of worship
have become targets, and the killing and persecution
of people — whether on the basis of identity, race or
religion — have become unjustifiably legitimized and
commonplace. Hate speech and extremism against
women and girls in particular further entrench
inequality and create obstacles for their participation
in public life.
We have learned tough lessons from history, which
is recognized in the resolutions of the Security Council,
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

in which conflicts stemming from extremism have led
to the loss of lives, the destruction of communities and
the erasure of our human history. In its worst forms,
hate speech can incite acts that may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity, as witnessed in
the events that occurred in former Yugoslavia and in
the genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda. In addition
to causing and perpetuating conflicts, hate speech,
racism and all forms of extremism can hamper postconflict reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts even
after arms have been laid down, as in the case of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The exploitation of advanced technology that
transcends national borders has facilitated the spread
of hate speech, misinformation and disinformation
among societies worldwide. No country or region is
safe from those growing threats. The Security Council
must acknowledge that addressing and preventing hate
speech, racism and all forms of extremism in conflict
situations is an integral part of its mandate to maintain
international peace and security. This is in line with
our obligations set forth in the United Nations Charter,
namely, to save future generations from the scourge
of war, to practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another.
We cannot overlook the obvious challenges posed
by hate speech and extremism in many of the items on
the Security Council’s agenda. Although the Council
has addressed those challenges in certain conflict
situations, it has become clear that addressing those
issues effectively requires the Council to adopt a
proactive and comprehensive approach that would
cover all stages of conflict, from the prevention and
resolution of conflicts to efforts aimed at building and
sustaining peace. The United Arab Emirates therefore
convened today’s meeting to urgently reiterate our
joint commitments to promoting peace, tolerance and
peaceful coexistence, as they provide the basis for
achieving sustainable peace and realizing peaceful and
prosperous societies.
The threats posed by extremism, racism and hate
speech in cases of conflict require the participation of all
relevant stakeholders in developing and implementing a
diverse set of solutions that span several policy areas.
For example, Governments, civil society and the private
sector have important roles to play in building bridges,
developing policies and creating solutions to address
those threats. Their approaches must include the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women as key

S/PV.9346

stakeholders who can drive sustainable action towards
the achievement of reconciliation and peace.
To complement our efforts towards promoting
societal resilience and achieving peace, religious and
community leaders also have an important role to play.
Through their engagement with local communities,
they can raise awareness on the importance of
promoting tolerance and peaceful coexistence, and on
strengthening intercultural and interreligious dialogue.
We commend the valuable contributions made by the
Grand Imam and His Holiness Pope Francis in promoting
the values of human fraternity and coexistence and in
correcting misconceptions.
As for education, this essential prevention tool
equips youth and future generations with the knowledge
and skills needed to refute extremist ideology and
play a positive role in building their societies and
promoting peace.
We can benefit from the critical work made by
the United Nations system to address hate speech,
racism and intolerance, including the United Nations
Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech, which is
a testament of the Organization’s efforts in the areas of
conflict prevention and sustained peace. Accordingly,
the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom
have submitted a draft resolution to the Security
Council that seeks to address the threats of hate speech,
racism and all forms of extremism in conflict situations
and to promote tolerance and peaceful coexistence in a
proactive and cross-cutting manner (S/2023/427).
Our approach and initiatives are based on the
difficult experience of our Arab region, including
the spread of hate speech and its role in inciting,
exacerbating and prolonging conflicts. Against this
reality, the United Arab Emirates has managed to
welcome more than 200 nationalities to live in peace
and harmony within its borders through strengthening
the values of tolerance, peaceful coexistence and
mutual understanding. We will continue to work by all
possible means — at local, regional and international
levels — to encourage a culture of peace and refute
extremist discourse.
In conclusion, today’s meeting represents a critical
step towards strengthening prevention as a fundamental
pillar in our international efforts aimed at maintaining
peace and security. Yet a great deal remains to be done
in this direction. We must ensure that we respond to
threats before it is too late by following proactive and

23-168499/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

pragmatic approaches. That is the vision of the United
Arab Emirates. Our goal is to save generations from
conflicts and enable them to actively participate in
building a better, more secure and stable future.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Mr. Immongault (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
congratulate the United Arab Emirates for initiating
this important public debate and thank the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. António Guterres,
for defining its scope. I also thank the Grand Imam
of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed
Al-Tayeb, Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher and
Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten for their inspiring briefings.
More than four years have passed since the signing
of the historic Document on Human Fraternity for
World Peace and Living Together, on 4 February 2019,
in Abu Dhabi, by Pope Francis and the Grand Imam
of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed
Al-Tayeb. Beyond the religious significance of this
document for relations between Christianity and
Islam, it is a truly solemn appeal to put an end to wars,
condemn terrorism and violent extremism, and engage
in ongoing dialogue in a sincere and frank manner.
The concept of human brotherhood understands
humanity as a constellation of individuals belonging
to the same family, naturally bound together by bonds
of solidarity and animated by a sense of belonging to
a community of destiny that makes their security and
prosperity indivisible. It is certainly this perception
that led Pope Francis to say, on 4 February 2021:
“Fraternity is the new frontier of humanity ... We
are siblings, or we destroy each other”.
By proclaiming, on 21 December 2020, 4 February
the International Day of Human Fraternity, the General
Assembly responded to the need for action based on
unity, solidarity and multilateral cooperation in the
face of
“acts that advocate religious hatred and thereby
undermine the spirit of tolerance and respect for
diversity” (General Assembly resolution 75/200,
fifth preambular paragraph).
10/24

14/06/2023

As Gabon supports the text submitted by the United
Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom (S/2023/427),
my country sees in it a commitment to promoting the
values on which the United Nations is founded, notably
tolerance, mutual understanding and respect for
diversity and human rights — all human rights.
At a time when the world is more than ever in the
grip of multiple crises, including solidarity, security,
humanitarian and health crises, our help lies in
this transcendent value of fraternity, solidarity and
friendship, which leads us to share our understanding
of the problems of the contemporary world — notably
the response to the scientific and technological divide
to the immense social inequality gap to the peaceful
settlement of disputes to the fight against climate
change, terrorism and extremism.
It is through greater fraternity and solidarity among
the peoples of the world that we can emerge from the
chronic cycles of crisis in which several regions of the
world are mired. And it is through tolerance, pluralism,
mutual respect and the diversity of convictions that we
will make human brotherhood flourish.
Beyond our racial, religious or community
differences, beyond our opinions and lifestyles, we all
aspire to peace, security, dignity, freedom and respect
as individuals and as members of the international
community. Humankind is fraternal when it engages in
dialogue, which brings peoples and civilizations closer
together. Dialogue unites nations and spreads human
identities. Dialogue inspires understanding, which, in
turn, inspires tolerance. That virtuous chain leads to
peace and fraternity. To abandon the path of dialogue
is to open the door to the unknown, to confrontation, to
mistrust and to identity-based isolationism.
That is why, wherever security is disrupted or
threatened, we must, more than ever, come together
and engage in dialogue. We must engage in dialogue
wherever guns are blazing. We must engage in dialogue
wherever suffering is unbearable. We must engage in
dialogue wherever exclusion has imprisoned fragments
of humanity in the shackles and barbed wire of indignity
and enslavement.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that it
is crucial for all of us to condemn all practices and
attitudes that threaten life, both in their manifestations
and in their root causes. In that regard, I echo the words
of Pope Francis and the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif, addressed to their adherents, in the
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9346

Document on Human Fraternity for World Peace and
Living Together:

and traditions, in our religions, in a single expression in
our modus vivendi and our modus operandi.

“The first and most important aim ... is to
believe in God, to honour Him and to invite all men
and women to believe that this universe depends on
a God who governs it. He is the Creator who has
formed us with His divine wisdom and has granted
us the gift of life to protect it. It is a gift that no one
has the right to take away, threaten or manipulate to
suit oneself. Indeed, everyone must safeguard this
gift of life from its beginning up to its natural end.”

We are deeply concerned about the direction
the world is taking today with regard to intolerance,
hate speech and incitement to hatred, racism and
other manifestations of extremism, which lead to
an atmosphere of mistrust and fear that, in turn,
degenerate into conflicts, disputes and wars. We
defend the principle that places of worship such as
churches, mosques and synagogues should not be used
as incubators for religious extremists or as battlefields.
They must, instead, be used as sanctuaries of peace
and human fraternity, which are noble aspirations of
peoples and nations.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on the
Minister of State Administration and Public Service
of Mozambique.
Ms. Comoane (Mozambique) (spoke in Portuguese;
English interpretation provided by delegation):
Mozambique warmly welcomes the initiative by the
United Arab Emirates of convening this high-level
briefing under the item “Maintenance of international
peace and security” and the theme, “The values of
human fraternity in promoting and sustaining peace”.
It is undoubtedly a relevant and timely topic at a time
when maintaining peace and security in the world is
a global challenge that demands from humankind a
culture of coexistence, fraternity and harmony.
We also thank His Excellency Secretary-General
António Guterres; His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed
Al-Tayeb, the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif
and Chairman of the Muslim Council of Elders; His
Excellency Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher,
Secretary for Relations with States of the Holy See;
and Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten, Founder and President
of Association IMAD for Youth and Peace, for their
briefings to the Council on this important topic.
The rights to freedom of thought, conscience
and religion are duly enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. The universality of the values of human
fraternity are well stated in the Charter, where the
peoples of the United Nations undertake to practice
tolerance and live together in peace. Such values are
stated in the sense that all States are committed to the
promotion of universal respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion. In order to promote and sustain
peace, we must, therefore, reflect those universal values
as pillars in our governance policies, in our cultures

We think that dialogue plays a key role in reversing
that dangerous trend. That role that must not be
underestimated, considering that in the history of
humankind dialogue has always been a significant stage
towards peace. Mozambique advocates the principle
that the only alternative to peace is peace itself.
We have to promote the culture of tolerance and
living together in peace. We believe that tolerance,
pluralistic tradition, mutual respect and diversity of
religions and beliefs can promote human fraternity.
In that regard, we welcome any initiatives at the
international, regional, national or local level aimed
at promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
Such initiatives are welcome, whether promoted by
States or Governments, civil society organizations,
religious institutions or even the private sector.
That is why we positively highlight the meeting
between Pope Francis and the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar,
Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, on 4 February 2019, in Abu
Dhabi, which resulted in the signing of the Document
on Human Fraternity for World Peace and Living
Together. We consider this initiative to be an important
contribution of religious leaders in the promotion of
human fraternity, tolerance and peaceful coexistence.
Drawing from our own history, we praise
the mediation role played by the Vatican, which
culminated with the signing, in 1992, of the General
Peace Agreement for Mozambique, between the
Government of Mozambique and the Resistência
Nacional Moçambicana, putting an end to the civil
war in our country. That agreement was reinforced
in 2019 by the Maputo Accord for Peace and National
Reconciliation and, more recently, by the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, which is

23-1684911/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

expected to conclude this month and to culminate in a
peace accord and national reconciliation.
We also recognize the critical importance of
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, adopted by the General Assembly
on 13 September 1999 (see A/53/PV.107), and its
contribution to our common efforts to eliminate all
forms of discrimination and intolerance, including
those based on race, colour, sex, language, nationality,
religion, political opinion, ethnic origin or other status.
In the same vein, we commend the launch by the
then Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in July 2005, of the
Alliance of Civilizations, a milestone initiative aimed
at bridging the divide between societies exploited by
religious extremists through the promotion of dialogue
and international cooperation.
On the other hand, peacebuilding mechanisms
also have a role to play in addressing intolerance, hate
speech, racism and other manifestations of extremism.
In order to build more peaceful and tolerant societies,
the participation of communities and societies as a
whole is of paramount importance. Local communities
must be involved as active players in the promotion of
dialogue, tolerance, peaceful coexistence, inclusion
and human fraternity within and among societies.
Before I conclude, and on the subject under
discussion, we wish to indicate that Mozambique has a
clear vision and experience in addressing intolerance and
promoting coexistence in peace and human fraternity,
inspired by the fundamental law of our country. As per
the Mozambican Constitution, one of the objectives of
the Republic of Mozambique is “the promotion of a
society of pluralism, tolerance and a culture of peace”.
Guided by that objective, in Mozambique, and in line
with United Nations frameworks and initiatives, we
have been promoting the culture of peace and tolerance
by advancing the unity in diversity agenda throughout
the country.
In that regard, I would like to conclude by
reiterating that in order to promote and sustain peace,
the values of human fraternity must respect the
beliefs and aspirations of people from different ethnic
groups, cultural backgrounds and social and economic
conditions, as that is the culture of peace that we desire.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
Minister of Environment, Science, Technology and
Innovation of Ghana.
12/24

14/06/2023

Mr. Afriyie (Ghana): I thank the United Arab
Emirates for organizing today’s open debate, which
contributes to our collective efforts to promote and
sustain global peace. We thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing. We are also
grateful to His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, the
Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif and Chairman of the
Muslim Council of Elders; His Excellency Archbishop
Paul Richard Gallagher, Secretary for Relations with
States of the Holy See; and Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten,
Founder and President of Association IMAD pour la
jeunesse et la paix for their insightful perspectives.
Celebrating human fraternity and the ideals it
upholds reminds us of the shared principles that
bind all of humankind together. Undeniably, some of
humankind’s greatest advancements may not have been
possible without intense peaceful cultural cooperation.
Even to date, diversity in perspectives, cultures, beliefs
and ways of life remains the driving force in human
advancement. For that reason, we commend the United
Arab Emirates and its partners for putting the values
of compassion, religious understanding, tolerance
and mutual respect high on the agenda of the United
Nations. That is particularly important in a context
in which many people of different faiths and cultures
now coexist. The proclamation of International Day of
Human Fraternity and World Interfaith Harmony Week
by General Assembly resolutions 75/200 of 2020 and
65/5 of 2010, respectively, reminds us of our common
humanity and the need to live together in peace and
harmony, irrespective of our differences. We must
therefore embrace our differences and diversity and
eschew tendencies that drive a wedge between us and
our cultures, resulting in mistrust and violence.
Unfortunately, in recent times, an upsurge in
hate speech and incitement to hatred, intolerance,
racism and violent extremism is posing a threat to
peaceful coexistence among people of different faiths,
cultures and, in some cases, those of different political
persuasions. According to our compatriot and former
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, conflicts between
countries have, thankfully, become less common. But
conflicts and tensions within societies and between
cultures have become more prominent. Regrettably,
that is fuelled largely by social media, which provides
a much wider audience for disseminating such bigotry.
We remain concerned about the potential radicalizing
effects of easily accessible online violent extremist
content and its resultant resonance with segments of
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

young people. As we condemn the exploitation of such
mass communication media for bigotry, we call on
social media platforms to do more to rid their platforms
of violent extremist content.
In Africa and elsewhere, we have witnessed the
devastating consequences of hate speech pitting people
of different religions or cultures that had hitherto lived
in peace and harmony against one another. Vitriolic
statements intended to offend others and incite hatred
and discrimination based on race, nationality, religious
identity, gender or other group membership are used to
inflame tensions between different peoples and cultures.
We wholeheartedly agree with the United Nations
recognition, in the United Nations Strategy and Plan of
Action on Hate Speech, of such hateful utterances as a
precursor to atrocity crimes, including genocide.
Similarly, on the back of the Security Council’s
insightful debate on the need for strategic
communications to ensure effective peacekeeping
(see S/PV.9090), let me underscore the importance of
identifying and defeating the threat that the toxic mix
of misinformation, disinformation and fake news poses
to our collective peace and security. Nowhere is that
threat more potent than in the Sahel, where the latter are
being deployed by malign forces to facilitate terrorism
and violent extremism, including through recruitment
and radicalization.
In reaffirming Ghana’s commitment to the
protection of the legitimate exercise of freedom of
expression, it is important to hold to account those who
disregard sacred symbols and practices or speech that
offends religious sensibilities or display intolerance in
order to preserve societal peace and security. It is no
secret that such conduct has been known to provoke or
incite violence.
At this juncture, let me speak about what we have
done in Ghana to promote human fraternity, which has
given rise to peaceful coexistence among people of
different ethnicities and faiths and made our country a
model of interfaith tolerance and cooperation in Africa.
In Ghana, different ethnic groups — Christians, Muslims
and adherents of African traditional religions — have
lived in comparative peace and harmony since our
nation’s founding. That journey begins at the basic
level of education, whereby the curricula expose school
children to the cultures of the more than 40 ethnic groups
in Ghana and the teachings of religions by inculcating
in them the spirit of tolerance, non-discrimination

S/PV.9346

and peaceful coexistence. Similar to the Abrahamic
Family House in the United Arab Emirates, which
houses a mosque, a church and a synagogue, in Ghana,
it is not uncommon to find a mosque within striking
distance of a church or a shrine. Even with this feat,
our National Peace Council continues to develop and
enhance national mechanisms for conflict prevention
and sustainable peacebuilding. The National Peace
Council, established by an act of Parliament in 2011 as
an interfaith and multi-ethnic body, has in place a robust
conflict early-warning system across the 16 regions of
Ghana, which works to prevent conflict and adjudicate
on tensions between ethnic and religious groups.
In conclusion, maintaining global peace and
security in today’s interconnected and interdependent
world requires regard for international norms, dialogue,
mutual respect, tolerance and understanding among
communities and countries. Instead of revolting against
globalization by advocating isolationism, nationalism
and protectionism, we must embrace it and work to
address its associated challenges. Minorities, people
of different colours and faiths, migrants and refugees
deserve to be treated with empathy and compassion for
the sake of our common humanity.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
want to thank today’s briefers, His Eminence Sheikh
Ahmed Al-Tayeb, His Excellency Archbishop Paul
Richard Gallagher and Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten. I would
also like to thank you, Madam Minister, for convening
this meeting to further the protection of universal
human rights, religious coexistence and tolerance and
to counter religious intolerance and hatred.
It is important for the Security Council to have
conversations on human rights protections in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
It is necessary for us to speak with one another in
open dialogue to promote tolerance, inclusion and
understanding. And upholding universal human rights
must be the very foundation of our efforts. Our work
is hard. We live in a multicultural and pluralistic
world. We have to work together to advance our shared
humanity and the human dignity of all people. We have
seen time and again that disregard for those common
principles and a breakdown in tolerance give way to
violence. Our challenge here in this Chamber — to
prevent violence and foster peace — must be done in
a way that encourages dialogue and upholds human
rights for all. But we cannot allow abuse of human
rights or repression of political opposition under the

23-1684913/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

pretext of countering terrorism or preventing violent
extremism. Peace and security are strengthened by
upholding human rights and fundamental freedoms,
not by suppressing those rights and freedoms. As the
Security Council has long reaffirmed, every individual
has the right to have a religion, change one’s religion or
have no religion at all and to manifest one’s religion or
belief publicly or privately.
The Security Council has been equally clear that
women’s human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including taking part in the conduct of public affairs,
must be protected. It is well established that women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in peace processes
as leaders, negotiators, peacekeepers and peacebuilders
increases the likelihood of a just and lasting peace.
Like members of other marginalized communities,
LGBTIQ+ persons also face discrimination, threats
to their lives and livelihoods and violence for just
being themselves. The persistent criminalization of
LGBTIQ+ status or conduct and their enduring violence
and discrimination further undermine the ability of
LGBTIQ+ persons to participate fully and safely as
their authentic selves in societies in every region of the
world. If we want to live in a more peaceful world, we
must stand up for and protect the essential role of civil
society, including activists, journalists and opposition
politicians who are critical of our Governments and do
not always agree with our policies. Peaceful political
dissent is equally vital to averting conflict, and States
must not misconstrue citizens exercising their freedom
of expression or engaging in civic discourse to justify
repression or State-approved acts of violence.
As President Biden said on the International Day of
Human Fraternity in 2022, human fraternity can build
“a better world that upholds universal human rights, lifts
every human being and advances peace and security
for all.” Under no circumstances will the United States
support misinterpretations of this concept to justify
the repression of human rights defenders, women, girls
or LGBTIQ+ persons, or any violations or abuses of
human rights.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the information provided by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres; the Grand Imam
of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, Sheikh Ahmad Muhammad
Al-Tayeb; Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher; and
Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten, Founder of Association IMAD
pour la jeunesse et la paix.
14/24

14/06/2023

My delegation agrees with Secretary-General
Guterres in his affirmation that peaceful coexistence
and inclusive development are threatened by the
persistence of conflicts, the unprecedented number of
displaced persons, the devastation caused by natural
disasters, impunity and the resurgence of hate speech,
among other factors. The universal premise of achieving
a sustainable culture of peace and non-violence seems
increasingly distant in the face of new threats that
exacerbate the causes of conflicts and are manifested
in intolerance, discrimination and disinformation.
Focusing on the root causes of conflicts, the adoption
of timely measures to prevent them, funding operations
on the ground and the effective work of the special
envoys and their teams are key to sustaining the
peacebuilding agenda.
In that context, my delegation would like to reflect
on three concepts, which, when they have been applied
in specific historical situations, have contributed to
the restoration and maintenance of international peace
and security.
First, I would like to mention the potential of
preventive diplomacy for creating early-warning
systems that, through exercising their sovereignty and
with the support of the international community, enable
States to deploy all necessary diplomatic measures to
avoid the escalation of violence and rein in the impact
of conflicts, with a view to exposing innocent civilians
to the least harm possible. We note with concern how
some conflicts are exacerbated by the dissemination
of narratives that incite hatred and intolerance against
States, against communities made up of different ethnic,
religious, cultural or belief groups and even against
United Nations personnel. We reject that practice,
which runs contrary to international norms.
As one of the proponents of the so-called linguistic
turn in modern philosophy — I am referring to English
thinker John Austin — pointed out, the ultimate purpose
of language is not to merely depict reality. Narratives
build realities and make us responsible for their
consequences. Through words, lives and identities have
been destroyed, roads to serfdom have been paved and
prisons of terror have been built. The use of discourse
and propaganda to incite hatred proved its destructive
capacity in the years leading up to the Second World
War, and it is therefore imperative to banish that once
and for all. It is no coincidence that the dictatorships
and autocracies of the twenty-first century are based
on the suppression of discursive pluralism and the
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

one-dimensional accumulation of nationalist and
paranoid narratives.
Secondly, we believe it is important to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations, regional
organizations and States in order to establish normative
frameworks and institutions that enable accountability
and ensure that those who violate human rights and
international humanitarian law are investigated and
prosecuted in transparent processes, with a focus on
reparations for the victims. There can be no peace
without justice. We believe that is an essential step
towards re-establishing democratic values, national
reconciliation and lasting and definitive peace.
Thirdly, it is essential to invest in education for
solidarity and tolerance, as well as to explore tools
that strengthen young people’s awareness in the face
of radicalization and violent extremism. We know
that is a far-reaching challenge and that meeting it is
more difficult in some States than in others, but it is a
universal ethical imperative.
Hate speech cannot be countered through criminal
law or laws that muzzle the press, persecute journalists
or impose censorship. Hate speech is countered with
reasoning, education and science. A society that
restricts its population’s access and right to education
has no chance of overcoming conflict and achieving
peace. Ecuador therefore reiterates its rejection of the
institutionalized gender-based discrimination used by
the Taliban and other regimes, which is contrary to
the provisions established by the Security Council in
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions.
In the face of new threats to international peace
and security, I would like to conclude by recognizing
that the implementation of the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping
is an opportunity to explore new ways to counter
disinformation and the spread of hate through digital
technologies. We agree with Secretary-General
Guterres when he says that peaceful coexistence and
inclusive development are threatened by a number
of factors that must be addressed with new creative,
innovative and coordinated strategies, with the ultimate
goal of building peaceful and inclusive societies.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General, the Grand Imam of
Al-Azhar, Archbishop Gallagher and Ms. Ibn Ziaten
for their briefings.

S/PV.9346

Fraternity and tolerance are essential values that
we all share. But we should also remember, on the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, that there is a normative framework
and international obligations, as defined by treaties.
Fraternity is of particular importance to France. It is part
of our Republic’s motto, alongside — and this is very
important — liberty and equality. For the one cannot
exist without the other two, and together they form
the bedrock of our republican values. In that respect,
I commend the work of the Association IMAD pour
la Jeunesse et la Paix, founded by Ms. Ibn Ziaten, in
promoting those values and preventing radicalization.
We should not be selective. How can we speak of
tolerance if we suggest that only certain people are
worthy of tolerance and others are not? Respect for
international law, and especially for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, is the sine
qua non of lasting peace and therefore has a rightful
place in the Security Council. The rights of women,
children and persons belonging to minorities in all their
diversity, as well as of all individuals under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
must be fully respected. All forms of discrimination
and incitement to violence must be condemned. And I
mean all. All people, in all their diversity, must be able
to benefit from the same protection. For that reason,
France, which embodies feminist diplomacy and the
defence of human rights, calls on all Member States
to sign, ratify and uphold all international conventions
guaranteeing all forms of human rights, without
exception. Tolerance and fraternity are not enough.
Yazidis, the Rohingya, women in Afghanistan and
LGBTIQ+ persons are simply asking for their rights to be
respected. Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law harm civilian populations and fuel
conflict. Impunity breeds violence.
Respect for human rights is the essential foundation
on which dialogue must be built. Recognition of the
exercise of freedom of religion and belief, in all its
dimensions, including the right to change one’s religion
and the right not to have one, is an essential component.
Dialogue also requires the ability to hear divergent
opinions and criticism. Acknowledging the right to
express oneself freely and accepting divergent opinions
are essential elements of dialogue. The exercise of
freedom of religion or belief is unthinkable without
the exercise of freedom of expression — a freedom
that I stress is limited only by boundaries strictly

23-1684915/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

defined by international law. Hate speech, which
promotes or justifies hate, violence or discrimination,
is clearly unacceptable, and is therefore prohibited by
international law.
In France, under the principle of secularism, the
State does not interfere in religious affairs. Faith is an
individual choice, and the State respects everyone’s
freedom of belief. It ensures that all believers can
practice their religion. It is not intended to ignore the
diversity of opinions, cultures and beliefs that exist
throughout the world. But it seems to us that the best
way to limit the clashes that occur between them is for
public authorities, while taking great care to ensure
that the conditions for dialogue among the followers of
various beliefs are met and preserved, to never interfere
in what is above all the exercise of an individual
freedom. We commend the peacemaking role played
by certain religious leaders and organizations and
condemn any rhetoric from other religious leaders and
organizations that stirs up hatred and violence. Women,
men, young and old, believers and non-believers alike,
we all have a role to play in promoting reconciliation
and peace. And it is civil society first and foremost,
including human rights advocates, that has an essential
role to play in preserving peace.
The role of the Council is to work for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Respect for
international law is the first and essential condition for
that, and should guide us as we work concretely, crisis
by crisis, region by region, to devise political solutions.
The settlement of disputes requires political solutions
that bring together all stakeholders. Today we heard
talk of peaceful coexistence. Let us be more ambitious.
Let us choose to live together — all people, as they
are, respecting and tolerating one another and our
individual rights. Let us not be satisfied with peaceful
coexistence. Let us aspire to live together.
Rest assured that France will always stand by
those who fight for freedom, equality and fraternity.
Those ideals are enshrined in our history and in our
institutions, as are human rights, which provide, as
I have said, the most comprehensive and protective
framework for all people. In accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, France will continue to promote that universal
approach in the Security Council and all other organs
of the United Nations.
16/24

14/06/2023

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this meeting. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his intervention and His Eminence Grand
Imam Al-Tayeb, His Excellency Archbishop Gallagher
and Ms. Ibn Ziaten for their powerful calls for tolerance
and peace.
Today we find ourselves in a world that is more
troubled by violent conflict than at any time since the
Second World War, with a staggering 2 billion people
living in conflict zones. Intolerance, violent extremism
and discrimination are serious factors that fuel the
emergence, intensification and repetitive nature of
conflicts. Given that undeniable reality, it is befitting
for the international community, including the United
Nations system and in particular the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Economic
and Social Council, to now employ a perspective of
tolerance as a means to address those issues and thereby
advance sustainable development and international
peace and security.
Diversity can lead to violence if it drives a wedge
in a society. Conversely, when paired with tolerance,
diversity can serve as a catalyst for promoting the
formation of an inclusive society enriched with colourful
cultural values. In the light of the diverse nature of
our present world, the need to cultivate tolerance
and strengthen our resilience against intolerance and
violent extremism is evident from that perspective, too.
Japan recognizes the significant role that
community and religious leaders can play to meet
that need. Since 2018, Japan has been organizing the
Dialogue on Countering Violent Extremism in the
Middle East, inviting influential religious figures and
Government officials from the region. That Dialogue
serves as a platform for participants to explore crucial
aspects of combating violent extremism, including
recent discussions on developing counter-narratives
against it. In the most recent forum, the participants
also exchanged views with the Asia and Far East
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders and the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research. In the Middle East, Japan has
undertaken various initiatives to support economic
and social development for Palestinians and build
confidence among the relevant parties. Those include
the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, the Corridor for Peace
and Prosperity flagship project and the Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development. Those frameworks can help
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

lay the groundwork for promoting tolerance in the
region through economic and social stability.
Giving priority to safeguarding and empowering
individuals and communities is crucial in the fight
against violent extremism, with the ultimate goal of
fostering lives characterized by freedom and dignity.
Embracing a human security approach therefore
emerges as an effective means to do so. Japan has
consistently leveraged such an approach, including
through the United Nations trust fund for human
security. For example, our recent efforts in East Java,
a province in Indonesia known to have suffered from
acts of violent extremism, took an integrated approach
based on human security among vulnerable individuals
and groups. Specific measures included campaigns
at the village level to counter violent extremism,
preventing recruitment through violent extremism
via the Internet, social networking services and other
modern technologies and addressing its harmful
trap. The project was also aimed at strengthening the
education and judicial systems — a key measure in
addressing the issues of intolerance, violent extremism
and discrimination to build peace.
It is imperative that the international community,
including the Council, undertake effective measures
aimed at addressing intolerance and promoting
reconciliation and peacebuilding in societies marred
by conflicts. In the light of that, the draft resolution
on tolerance and international peace and security put
forth by the United Arab Emirates and the United
Kingdom may serve as a catalyst to encourage and
support those endeavours. In that vein, Japan supports
the draft resolution.
Japan steadfastly reaffirms its commitment to
conflict prevention and the establishment of longlasting peace. The core of those efforts is grounded in
the principles of tolerance, peaceful coexistence and
ensuring human security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the United Arab Emirates
for having organized a meeting on such an important
topic as the values of human fraternity in promoting
and sustaining peace. We thank Secretary-General
Guterres, Grand Imam Al-Tayeb, Archbishop Gallagher
and Ms. Ibn Ziaten for their comprehensive briefings.
Discussing this topic in these challenging times
allows us to shed light on the importance of the values
of human fraternity, tolerance, the culture of peace and

S/PV.9346

peaceful coexistence among different peoples. It also
enables us to recall the origins and fundamental pillars
of our Organization as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Today more than ever before, States
Members of the United Nations are called upon to
reaffirm their willingness to demonstrate tolerance and
live in peace with one another as good neighbours, as
well as to promote international cooperation, including
with the aim of resolving international issues of an
economic, social, cultural and humanitarian nature.
The very principles of the Charter of the United Nations
must form the basis of a truly multipolar world, which
takes into account the values of human fraternity.
Today’s topic is also in line with Article 1 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, according
to which:
“All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason
and conscience and should act towards one another
in a spirit of brotherhood.”
We fully embrace that important principle. We
firmly believe that the diversity of traditions and
specificities of historical development — everything
that underpins the values of human fraternity — should
serve to unify the international community. Regardless
of the contradictions may arise between States, the
universal values shared by all major religions of the
world and rooted in cultural and historical traditions
can be a reliable basis for dialogue and partnership.
The Russian Federation, as a multi-ethnic and
multiconfessional State, endeavours to promote
dialogue and partnership between representatives
of different cultures, religions and civilizations and
consistently pursues that policy within international
and regional forums.
Pride of place in international cooperation in that
context is held by the United Nations and its Alliance
of Civilizations, which plays a leading role in fostering
full-fledged inter-civilizational dialogue aimed at
achieving harmony among the representatives of
various religions, faiths and cultures. We trust that the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations will continue
its constructive efforts to facilitate the inculcation of a
spirit of peace and global citizenship in order to deepen
understanding among people — in particular, young
people — of such values as peace, tolerance, openness
and mutual respect, which are essential in shaping a
culture of peace.

23-1684917/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

We are very concerned about the increasing number
of cases of discrimination, intolerance and extremism
based on racial or ethnic grounds or other hatred,
Islamophobia, antisemitism and Christianophobia,
primarily in European countries. Enjoying impunity,
digital platforms and social media often spread
disinformation and hate speech, disrespect the religious
and spiritual values of various faiths, provide platforms
for extremists and undermine tolerance and diversity.
One of the clearest manifestations of intolerance is
Russophobia, which we addressed during a special
meeting of the Security Council, held on our initiative
on 14 March (see S/PV.9280).
We all say that it is unacceptable to target places of
worship. In this regard, we would like to draw particular
attention to the flagrant violations of the universal
human and constitutional rights of the followers of
canonical Orthodox Christianity in Ukraine. That is
happening with the tacit consent of the sponsors of the
Kyiv regime. Discriminatory legislation continues to
enable the seizure of churches of the canonical Ukrainian
Orthodox Church and the forced, illegal liquidation of
their communities. Such measures are compounded
by violence against worshippers. Numerous cases of
arson and vandalism in churches have been recorded.
The hierarchy and followers of the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church are subjected to discrimination and physical
and moral violence. Over the course of several months,
the entire world has borne witness to people who are
devoted to their faith protect the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra
and courageously resist extremists and pressure by the
Kyiv authorities.

14/06/2023

guaranteed under international law and national
legislation and by religion and the norms of human
morality. Examples of the faith-based persecution of
worshippers, as well as persecution based on national,
ethnic and linguistic affiliation, are quite numerous.
We are convinced that representatives of the world’s
traditional religions can — and should — engage more
actively in efforts to sustain peace and resolve armed
conflicts. We commend the activities of religious
leaders aimed at strengthening and developing interfaith
dialogue and achieving understanding and awareness of
shared human values, as well as respect for the beliefs
of those who follow other religious traditions.
We welcome the signing of documents reflecting
those goals, such as the joint declaration by His Holiness
Pope Francis and His Eminence the Grand Imam of
Al-Azhar, Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, entitled “Human
Fraternity for World Peace and Living Together”, in
February 2019 and the joint statement by His Holiness
Pope Francis and His Holiness Patriarch Kirill in
February 2016.
We agree that State and religious leaders must
understand the exceptional importance of working
to achieve inter-ethnic and interfaith unity and
fraternity, while seeking paths to dialogue and
compromise in order to ensure an equitable world
order and prosperity. There is always an alternative to
confrontation. That alternative is mutually respectful
dialogue aimed at resolving international friction and
creating an atmosphere that is conducive to peace
and understanding.

The Ukrainian media has launched an unbridled
defamation campaign against the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church, calling for a complete ban on its activities.
Against that backdrop, particularly cynical is the lack
of response from international rights advocates to the
violence against, and the persecution of, worshippers, as
well as to the destruction and appropriation of religious
sites. In turn, we drew the attention of the international
community to that situation and convened a special
meeting of the Security Council on the persecution of
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church by the Kyiv authorities
on 17 January (see S/PV.9245). We also held an Arria
Formula meeting on the matter. We can also see that, at
the instigation of the leaders of the Kyiv regime, there
has been an increase in Islamophobia in Ukraine.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I am grateful to the
United Arab Emirates for convening today’s important
meeting. I thank the Secretary-General, His Eminence
Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, Archbishop Gallagher and
Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten for their briefings.

Protecting places of worship, including mosques,
synagogues and churches, is an obligation of States

From the Yazidis in Iraq to the Rohingya in
Myanmar and the recent case of the Baha’i in Houthi-

18/24

Respect for all human rights is — and must be — an
essential beacon for our work in the Security Council.
The freedom of religion or belief, including the freedom
not to have a religion, is a fundamental human right.
And yet religious minorities have time and again been
specifically targeted, including in conflict. That was
a key finding of the report commissioned in 2019 by
former United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Jeremy
Hunt from the Bishop of Truro.

23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

controlled areas of Yemen, minorities are too often
targeted on the grounds of religion or belief. There is
also evidence that those minorities may avoid seeking
humanitarian aid due to fear of intolerance, including
Sunni Muslims in Syria, Shi’a Hazara communities in
Afghanistan and Christian communities in Nigeria.
When communities come under attack in situations
of conflict, it is the role of the Council to address it.
There is more we and the United Nations system can do
to monitor incitement to violence against all minority
communities in conflict. We should ensure that we
have the tools in place for horizon scanning to address
incitement and extremist rhetoric before it tips over
into violence.
Community and religious leaders have a
responsibility to reject hate and extremism in their name,
which can fuel violence and conflict. They can also
play a unique role in conflict prevention, reconciliation
and peacebuilding initiatives. At the grassroots level,
interreligious and intercultural dialogue can help build
trust and understanding between communities and
combat intolerance. The Archbishop of Canterbury,
Justin Welby, who sits on the Secretary-General’s
High-Level Advisory Board on Mediation, addressed
the Council in 2018 on the role religious institutions can
play in mediation and reconciliation in fragile States
(see S/PV.8334).
This year is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland — a peace
deal that Catholic and Protestant clergy helped deliver
through mediation between adversaries. In Sierra
Leone, the Inter-Religious Council was crucial to the
signing of the Lomé Peace Accord, which brought peace
in 1999 after a decade of war. And in Mali, a country
threatened by violent extremism, some Islamic figures
have been working tirelessly in support of peace.
Women leaders are of course a crucial part of that
process. The full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in conflict prevention and resolution means
that negotiations are more likely to succeed, and
peace agreements sustained. The Ecumenical Women
Peacebuilders Network is a powerful example — a
nationally recognized group of Catholic and Protestant
women church leaders in Colombia who helped
drive the 2016 peace accords. They now help foster
reconciliation as former combatants return home. As
a Council, we should ensure that United Nations peace

S/PV.9346

efforts are making use of the leadership of women,
religious leaders, youth and wider civil society.
Human rights and the freedom of expression
underpin our work. They must be at the heart of any
attempt to advance the freedom of religion and belief.
Attempts to tackle intolerance will not be successful
if they do not prioritize inclusivity and equality and
safeguard the freedom of expression and opinion.
Those principles are reflected in the draft resolution
(S/2023/427) we presented with our partners, the
United Arab Emirates, which we hope will be adopted
later today.
The United Kingdom is a proud champion of the
rights of members of marginalized groups, including
women and girls, and is committed to defending them.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks the
United Arab Emirates for organizing today’s important
high-level meeting. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and our three briefers for their valuable
contributions and wisdom.
Today’s briefing is in line with the importance that
Brazil accords to combating the root causes of conflict,
to which promoting a culture of peace, tolerance
and mutual understanding is key. That is especially
true for our common efforts on conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
As recalled in the concept note for this briefing
(S/2023/417, annex), almost 30 years ago, hate speech
was one of the main drivers of the genocide in Rwanda.
While then the radicalization of individuals was
stimulated by radio broadcasts and printed propaganda,
today we witness an alarming increase in the use of hate
speech on social media with the potential to exacerbate
armed conflicts and threaten stability around the world.
The situations in Mali, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are concrete
instances of that worrisome trend. The social dimension
of that phenomenon must be taken into account.
Inequalities, marginalization, racism and the feeling
of not belonging can drive individuals to engaging in
hate speech, either online or offline, which creates a
fertile environment for the outbreak, escalation and
recurrence of conflicts.
The spread of disinformation, misinformation and
hate speech has a direct and detrimental effect on the
work of the United Nations, especially on peacekeeping
missions and on the safety and security of peacekeepers.

23-1684919/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

In that connection, we highlight the central importance
of the use of strategic communications. As stated by the
Council in last year’s presidential statement on the issue
(S/PRST/2022/5), strategic communications contribute
to promoting the women and peace and security agenda,
building trust with local communities and creating a
protective environment for civilians in areas affected
by armed conflicts. The role of civil society, including
religious leaders, in building an environment of trust,
tolerance and understanding should be acknowledged
and strengthened.
The legitimacy, first-hand knowledge and cultural
understanding of the root causes of contentious issues in
conflicts are important assets in setting the conditions
conducive to dialogue and sustainable peace. Cultivating
a culture of peace and tolerance entails inclusivity.
The promotion of a culture of peace and tolerance,
which in many contexts involves interreligious
dialogue, can effectively contribute to advancing our
peacebuilding efforts in societies affected by conflict.
Tackling discrimination, as well as protecting the most
vulnerable groups, including victims and minorities, is
key to strengthening the social fabric in post-conflict
situations. A strong investment in education is also
needed in order to build an environment of tolerance.
It is our view that sustainable peace will not
be achieved as long as the root causes of conflict
are not addressed. That includes ethnic, religious,
cultural and ideological intolerance, but also social
injustice and the scourge of hunger. For all of us, in
our respective societies, there is a necessity to better
understand one another, both in our differences and in
our shared humanity, which is the only path to be taken
towards peace.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United Arab Emirates as
President of the Security Council to convene today’s
meeting. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
statement, and I thank Grand Imam Al-Tayeb and
Archbishop Gallagher for their briefings at the start
of this meeting. I also listened carefully to Ms. Ibn
Ziaten’s statement.
Our world is at a crossroads in history where the
peace, development, security and governance deficits
are deepening. Various forms of intolerance and
extremism are eroding mutual trust between fellow
human beings and among nations. As a result, the
international community’s collective ability to address
20/24

14/06/2023

global challenges in solidarity is severely hampered.
In that context, it is highly relevant to discuss the
value of the spirit of fraternity in promoting and
sustaining peace.
I would like to share some of our observations
and reflections.
First, with regard to respect for civilizational
diversity, diversity is a hallmark of our world and the
fountainhead from which human progress springs.
Civilizations differ only geographically and in terms
of their distinctive characteristics. There is no such
thing as a superior or an inferior civilization. To believe
that one’s own civilization is a cut about the rest and
to be hell-bent on transforming, or even replacing,
other civilizations is sheer folly on an epistemological
level and disastrous when applied in practice. In
history, colonial conquests and plundering driven
by civilizational superiority and white supremacy
wreaked devastation in Asia, Africa and Latin America
as never before seen. Today interference, intervention,
provocation and incitement, under the banner of socalled universal values, are creating new conflicts and
new confrontations.
China believes and advocates that, in this world
of interdependence, while we should have the pride,
confidence and ambition to promote our respective
civilizations so they can shine with vibrant brilliance,
we must also open our hearts and minds in order to
embrace the development of other civilizations and the
vision to promote exchanges of mutual appreciation and
learning. Speaking of mutual learning and harmony
among civilizations, the United Nations, including
its Alliance of Civilizations, has a big part to play.
It is incumbent upon all countries to work to that
end together.
In March, the President of China, His Excellency
Mr. Xi Jinping, unveiled the Global Civilization
initiative, which advocates respecting civilizational
diversity, promoting the common values of humankind,
valuing civilizational heritage and innovation and
strengthening international cultural exchanges and
cooperation. China is ready to work with the rest of
the international community to refresh the landscape
of cultural exchanges and to promote the convergence
of different cultures and people-to-people engagement
among all nations in the world so that our collective
garden of diverse civilizations will teem with vitality
in a riot of colour.
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, enhanced mutual trust and respect,
treating one another as equals and promoting mutual
trust are a sine qua non for consistent and healthy
interactions among nations. Recently, we have seen
some encouraging developments in the Middle East,
with Saudi Arabia and Iran announcing the resumption
of diplomatic ties between them as an outcome of the
Beijing dialogue, thereby setting off a rising tide of
reconciliation in the region. Syria has returned to the
fold of the League of Arab States, marking a reunion
of the Arab family after 12 years. Those developments
have set a good example in terms of mutual respect
among countries by rising above their differences,
which has injected positive energy into unity and
cooperation among the countries of the region. The
international community should also seize that pivotal
opportunity and work with a greater sense of urgency
to resolve the Palestinian issue in a comprehensive and
just manner on the basis of the two-State solution and
to promote the peaceful coexistence of Palestine and
Israel so that their two peoples, the Arabs and the Jews,
can seek development together, hand in hand.
Under the new circumstances, members of the
Security Council should be more united, give substance
to their commitments and better discharge the mandates
of maintaining international peace and security. We
should focus on solving the root causes of the issues
on the Council’s agenda beyond a mere piecemeal
approach to crisis management and invest more energy
in our quest for lasting peace and common security. We
should remain committed to the political settlement of
disputes and devote more efforts to negotiation, good
offices and mediation. We should do our utmost to
launch dialogue to stop conflict and war. We should
bring the unique role of regional organizations into
full play and encourage them to find regional solutions
to regional issues. We must take an unequivocal stand
against any interference in the internal affairs of other
countries, against any attempt to stir up tensions to
serve one’s own interests, against drawing ideological
boundaries for the purpose of bloc politics and against
hegemonic bullying in international relations.
Thirdly, we must promote social inclusion. Social
inclusion bears on individuals’ well-being and rights,
and has an impact on the orientation of a country’s
foreign policy. Some countries are seriously troubled
by their frayed social fabric and political polarization.
It not only slows down achieving stability and
development for themselves, but also places their

S/PV.9346

foreign policies on the slippery slope of conservatism
and populism, with tangible negative spillover effects.
Those countries need to do some soul-searching and
genuinely address the chronic problems related to their
own national governance, instead of blaming their
problems on external factors and diverting attention
to scapegoats. In particular, political leaders should
shoulder the responsibilities of their time, forge social
consensus and actively promote reforms. They must not
ride on or be propelled by the wave of populism.
Hate speech exacerbates social rifts. Extremism
is running rampant. Mis- and disinformation continue
to spread unchecked. Religious intolerance and racial
discrimination against people of African and Asian
descent are on the rise. Islamophobia has reached
epidemic proportions, which should be cause for
concern and vigilance. As a matter of course, the
freedom of expression should be protected, but it
should not be a license for hate speech. Neither should
it be an excuse for Government inaction. Terrorism is
a malignant tumour ailing human civilization. It must
not be linked to any ethnicity, religion, country or
civilization. We call for the effective implementation
of General Assembly resolution 75/309 and for a strong
global momentum to counter hate speech.
Fourthly, we must focus on shared development,
which is an important indicator of civilizational progress
and a concrete manifestation of the latter. Leaving no
one or country behind is the solemn commitment of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Currently,
the global economic recovery is fraught with mounting
difficulties, and developing countries are faced by
grim challenges related to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. Many of the
hard-won development gains have even been undone.
Developing countries’ specific vulnerabilities and
fragility are ultimately rooted in the unfair, unjust and
unreasonable international economic order. Moreover,
in order to maintain their dominant position, certain
countries have indiscriminately imposed technology
and economic sanctions, while advocating decoupling
and cutting off supply chains and building small, highwalled silos. Such acts, which prevent development
and try to turn back the clock, are as immoral as they
are unsustainable. The international community must
firmly reject them.
This year, we are looking forward to the midpoint
review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
at the SDG Summit. The United Nations should take that

23-1684921/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

opportunity to increase its attention to, and investment
in, development issues in order to give tangible hope
to all peoples. The United Nations development system
should be a true partner of developing countries,
while genuinely demonstrating its concern and
care for them. Developed countries should honour
their official assistance commitments. International
financial institutions should take steps towards reform,
as soon as possible, and redress moral deficits and
must not be turned into private funds and private
banks manipulated by an individual country. It is also
important to effectively respect developing countries’
right to development, resolutely oppose making various
excuses for technological strangleholds and economic
coercion and safeguard fairness and justice.
Humankind is a community with a shared future of
shared joys and sorrows. Whether or not our generation
will be able to replace division with unity, confrontation
with cooperation and exclusion with tolerance will
determine the future of human civilization. China
stands ready to work with the rest of the international
community to practice genuine multilateralism, achieve
common security, promote common development and
blaze a new trail together towards a better shared future.
Mr. Hauri Switzerland (spoke in French): I thank
the United Arab Emirates for convening this debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General, His Eminence
Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb, His Excellency Archbishop
Paul Richard Gallagher and Ms. Latifa Ibn Ziaten for
their briefings.
Today’s debate is part of an approach aimed at
further discussing emerging issues and threats related
to international peace and security. In that regard, it is
in consonance with the debate on futureproofing trust,
which the Security Council addressed a month ago
under Switzerland’s presidency (see S/PV.9315). At that
time, we underscored that trust is based on norms, facts
and inclusion.
I would like to emphasize three points.
First, this year we are celebrating the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It was born out of the collective experience of
total destruction and genocide rooted in hate speech,
intolerance and the vilification of minorities and
religions. The Declaration acknowledges the inherent
dignity of all individuals. Their equal and inalienable
rights are the foundation of freedom, justice and peace.
We have heard various accounts within the Security
22/24

14/06/2023

Council that demonstrate that guaranteeing human
rights is imperative at every stage of the peace process.
Ensuring the full range of norms of international
human rights law is crucial to ending conflict and
building lasting peace. The added value of data-based
monitoring and reporting on human rights during and
after conflicts is well acknowledged by the Council,
including through the 11 human rights components in
peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, discrimination, intolerance, incitement
to hatred and violent extremism present many
challenges for our societies. Switzerland condemns
them in all their forms. In countering those phenomena,
respect for human rights, in particular the freedom of
expression, must be guaranteed both online and offline.
The freedom of expression is the cornerstone of all
pluralistic and inclusive societies. Equal participation
in public life is critical to building and maintaining
trust among people and between them and the State.
An open civic space, including in particular women,
people belonging to minorities and vulnerable groups
and young people, helps build deeper and greater
trust in institutions. Trust and the rule of law are the
undeniable bedrock of stability, conflict prevention and
lasting peace.
Thirdly, in the coming weeks, the Council must
take advantage of the opportunity provided by the New
Agenda for Peace to reaffirm the vital role of existing
normative frameworks, such as the women and peace
and security, children in armed conflict and human
rights agendas. The frameworks form the anchor of our
multilateral cooperation in matters related to peace and
security. That is why we must reaffirm their importance
and renew our commitment to supporting them.
Dialogue, openness and mutual understanding, as
well as international law, international human rights law
and the rule of law, are tools for peaceful coexistence
among States, communities and individuals, without
discrimination. Furthermore, compassion and mutual
respect are universal values that unite us in our
humanity. Switzerland will continue to work to ensure
that the term “fraternity”, highlighted by today’s
debate, includes everyone, including women and girls,
regardless of their origin or sexual orientation. In that
way, we will be able to continue to build stable and
inclusive societies in order to promote and maintain
lasting peace.
23-16849

14/06/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I too thank the SecretaryGeneral, His Eminence Sheikh Ahmed Al-Tayeb,
Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, His Excellency
Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher and Ms. Latifa
Ibn Ziaten for sharing their thoughts and insights with
us today.
International human rights law provides a robust
normative framework for protecting the freedoms of
expression and religion or belief in the context of peace
and security. Those rights, which are interdependent,
interrelated and mutually reinforcing, are crucial to the
creation of pluralistic, tolerant, inclusive and democratic
societies. The right to the freedom of religion or belief
includes the freedom for everyone to have or not to
have a religion or belief of their choice, and the freedom
to practice it, either alone or in community with others
and in public or private. Protecting that right includes
protecting the rights and freedoms of those who hold
contrary or minority viewpoints. We condemn any
attempts to limit the exercise of those fundamental
freedoms. We also underscore the positive role of
quality education and a free and independent media in
preventing intolerance and prejudice and in promoting
mutual respect, understanding and solidarity.
Tolerance and inclusion are crucial for promoting
human rights and sustainable peace. In armed conflicts
around the world, people experience discrimination,
intolerance, hate speech and other forms of violence,
both online and offline, based on their sex, religion or
belief, race, ethnicity, nationality, sexual orientation,
gender identity or sex characteristics. Intersectional
and gender-transformative responses and prevention
efforts are therefore required to address those multiple
and often overlapping forms of discrimination and to
advance an inclusive and holistic approach.
We are deeply concerned about the increasing
instances of harassment, coercion and reprisals,
including by State and non-State actors, against
individuals exercising their right to free speech. We
deplore the misuse of broadly defined extremism laws
to violate human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including to target human rights defenders, civil
society, journalists and political opposition. At the same
time, Malta condemns all acts of violent extremism,
regardless of motivation or ideology, and underscores
the importance of preventing and countering such
threats in full compliance with international human
rights law. All Member States have the responsibility to
protect and uphold the full spectrum of human rights,

S/PV.9346

including the human rights of diverse women, persons
with disabilities, young women, LGBTIQ+ individuals,
older persons and members of marginalized ethnic and
religious groups.
We remain deeply concerned about the impact of
discriminatory laws, the gender-biased enforcement
and application of existing laws, harmful societal
norms and practices, structural inequalities and
discriminatory views on women or gender roles in
society. We therefore underscore the importance of
promoting gender equality by addressing the root
causes of discrimination and sexual and gender-based
violence against all women and girls as part of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
humanitarian action.
I conclude by stressing that Malta is committed to
ensuring that neither women nor the women and peace
and security agenda are instrumentalized in efforts to
counter terrorism and violent extremism. Advancing
gender equality and ensuring the full, equal, safe and
meaningful participation and leadership of diverse
women in all efforts to build peace and prevent conflicts
are goals unto themselves and must never be reduced to
national security tactics.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, and the United Arab Emirates for
convening us to discuss this important topic. I also
thank the Secretary-General and His Eminence Sheikh
Ahmed Al-Tayeb, Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif,
as well as Archbishop Gallagher and Ms. Ibn Ziaten for
their valuable insights.
Diversity is a fact of life and one of the most
amazing features of human civilization. Over
centuries, we have learned to accept it not simply as
an inevitability, but rather as an asset — a strength.
With more and better education and increased human
mobility in an increasingly interconnected world, we
believe that diversity constitutes a strong bond that
binds humans, united in our distinct cultures, histories,
religions, philosophies and orientations. Regrettably,
not everyone sees it that way. While we cherish
diversity, powerful countervailing forces, those of old
inspiration and those with new tactics, try to use — or
better, misuse — diversity as a cause to harm, hate,
discriminate against, oppress and dominate. It is one of
the major challenges of our fast-evolving times.
Where we see a paradox to be treated and cured
in the prevalence of divisions and mistrust as societies

23-1684923/24

S/PV.9346

Maintenance of international peace and security

are becoming more multi-ethnic and multi-religious,
others see an opportunity to score goals. We are deeply
concerned about the alarming increase in bigotry, hate
speech and discrimination based on religion, belief,
race, ethnicity or gender. Radical discourse and hate
speech have become mainstream as if they were the new
normal. The rise of antisemitism and Islamophobia, and
of hate-filled intolerance of diversity, including against
LGBTIQ+ people, in various forms of communication,
including through the Internet and social media,
should be a concern for all of us, not only because it
manifests an absence of compassion, humility, respect
and acceptance of the others, but also because it always
leads to tensions and violence. We are all born free and
must feel equal, despite origin, social class or ethnicity,
the colour of our skin, the God we worship, our gender
or the choices we make in life. Everyone wins when we
see diversity as a richness and not as a threat.
If unattended, hatred can have detrimental effects
in a society, but it becomes deadly when it is weaponized
to gain, exercise or retain power. Da’esh, to name
the most brutal and despicable form of intolerance,
has been defeated, but its ideology and appeal have
not disappeared. The political weaponization of
diversity, the us-versus-them mentality, neo-Nazis or
supremacists and the singling out of people, including
migrants, by their ethnicity, create deep social fractures
and undermine trust between different groups. They
may serve to justify attacks, and in the worst case, as
during the Holocaust, to annihilate those unwanted.
What may be social, economic or political grievances
could be quickly and easily turned into religious or
inter-ethnic conflicts, which most often result in
bloodshed. If anything, the genocides in Srebrenica
and Rwanda have taught us how easy and quickly
hate and propaganda can turn people, neighbours and
friends of different origin into enemies. We know now
that the biggest mistake we can make is to take things
for granted.
The task before us is to build a common front against
hatred, xenophobia, racism and genocide deniers and
to sanction all those who undermine social cohesion,
foment violence or endanger peace. It is not easy, and
there are no quick fixes. We just need to be alert, stand
up and respond to all forms of disinformation and act

24/24

14/06/2023

quickly, because misinformation, distorted reality
and conspiracy theories always fly faster. We need to
create an environment that is conducive to a vibrant
civil society and an independent media to scrutinize
and dismiss falsehoods and strategies of hatred and
those who benefit from using them. The recognition
of diversity requires vigorous citizenship education.
Citizens who understand the unity-diversity nexus and
act accordingly do not materialize out of thin air; they
are educated. That is why we need to invest in quality
education and critical thinking as a shield against
hatred, violence and extremism in all its forms.
A successful approach also requires good and
transparent governance, development, the rule of law,
human rights, equality, accountable institutions and
justice for all. It requires genuine effort and dedication.
It is a society-wide challenge in every country. It
requires an inclusive approach that includes religious
and community leaders playing a critical role.
Let us not forget and let us be clear: fighting
intolerance cannot and must never be used as an excuse
for curbing freedoms and justifying repression. No
matter where we live, it requires that we never deviate
from our shared norms as solemnly enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
There are many good examples to recognize and
follow. I will take the one I know the best: the situation
in my own country, Albania. Home to various religious
communities, including Muslims, Orthodox, Catholics
and Jews, it is a place where living in mutual respect has
been a significant aspect of the society for centuries.
It has embraced and cherishes a culture of acceptance
and respect for different religions, with interactions
that take place in a spirit of harmony, with shared
cultural celebrations, intermarriages and cooperative
community efforts. We are proud to offer a living
example of how religious diversity can thrive within
a society where there is a commitment to tolerance,
respect and dialogue.
We profoundly believe that it is only by ensuring
equal rights for all that we can hope to eradicate hatred
and extremism and enable every human being to
flourish and live in peace with one another.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

23-16849
