A /73/PV.55

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

55th plenary meeting

Monday, 17 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will consider the reports of the Third
Committee on agenda items 28, 29, 65, 69 to 74, 109,
110, 123 and 137.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Ms. Katharina Konzett-Stoffl of Austria, to introduce
the reports of the Committee in one intervention.
Ms. Konzett-Stoffl (Austria), Rapporteur of the
Third Committee: It is a great privilege for me to
introduce to the General Assembly the reports of the
Third Committee submitted under the agenda items
allocated to it by the Assembly, namely, items 28, 29,
65, 69, 70 to 73, 74, 109, 110, 123 and 137.
The reports, contained in documents A/73/581 to
A/73/593, include the texts of draft resolutions and
decisions recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption. For the convenience of delegations, the
Secretariat has issued document A/C.3/73/INF/1,
which contains a checklist of actions taken on the draft
proposals contained in the reports before the Assembly.
Under agenda item 28, entitled “Social
development”, including sub-items (a), (b) and (c), the
Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 31 of its
report contained in document A/73/581, the adoption of
six draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 29, entitled “Advancement
of women”, the Third Committee recommends, in

paragraph 37 its report contained in of document
A/73/582, the adoption of four draft resolutions and, in
paragraph 38, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 65, entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 16 of its report
contained in document A/73/583, the adoption of two
draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 69, entitled “Report of the Human
Rights Council”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 11 of its report contained in document
A/73/584, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 70, entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 56 of its report
contained in document A/73/585, the adoption of three
draft resolutions and, in paragraph 57, the adoption of
one draft decision.
Under agenda item 71, entitled “Rights of
indigenous peoples”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 8 of its report contained in document
A/73/586, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 72, entitled “Elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 26 of its report contained in document
A/73/587, the adoption of two draft resolutions.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44315 (E)

*1844315*

A/73/PV.55

Under agenda item 73, entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 24 of its report contained in document
A/73/588, the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 74, entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 9 of document A/73/589, the
adoption of one draft resolution and, in paragraph 10,
the adoption of one draft decision.
Under sub-item (a), entitled “Implementation of
human rights instruments”, of agenda item 74, entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 21 of its report
contained in document A/73/589/Add.1, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (b), entitled “Human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”, of agenda item 74, entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 162 of its report
contained in document A/73/589/Add.2, the adoption of
17 draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (c), entitled “Human rights situations
and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives”,
of agenda item 74, entitled “Promotion and protection
of human rights”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 88 of its report contained in document
A/73/589/Add.3, the adoption of five draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (d), entitled “Comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action”, of agenda item
74, entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”,
the Third Committee wishes to advise the Assembly
that no action was required under that sub-item.
Under agenda item 109, entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 45 of its report contained
in document A/73/590, the adoption of nine draft
resolutions and, in paragraph 46, the adoption of one
draft decision.
Under agenda item 110, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 10 of its report contained in document
A/73/591, the adoption of one draft resolution.
2/35

17/12/2018

Under agenda item 123, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/73/592, the adoption of one
draft decision.
Finally, under agenda item 137, entitled “Programme
planning”, the Third Committee wishes to advise the
Assembly that no action was required under that item.
I would like to thank my fellow Bureau members — the
Chair of the Committee, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan; and the
Vice-Chairs, Ms. Lahya Itedhimbwa Shikongo of
Namibia, Mr. Martin Kováčik of Slovakia and Mr. Edgar
Andrés Molina Linares of Guatemala, as well as the
Secretary of the Committee, Mr. Moncef Khane, and
his able team, for their unwavering support and sound
advice in the management of the proceedings of the
Third Committee. Finally, I am grateful to all Third
Committee experts for their support to the Bureau and
for their friendship.
In conclusion, I would like to respectfully commend
the reports of the Third Committee before the plenary
of the General Assembly for its consideration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Rapporteur of the Third Committee.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. Therefore, if there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Third Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote or position.
I would like to remind members that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, a delegation
should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once,
that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting,
unless that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee. I would also
like to remind members that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
18-44315

17/12/2018

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I would like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That means
that, where separate or recorded votes were taken, we
will do the same. I would also hope that we may proceed
to adopt without a vote those recommendations that
were adopted without a vote in the Third Committee.
The results of the votes will be uploaded and available
on the PaperSmart portal.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw the
attention of members to a note by the Secretariat, in
English only, entitled “List of proposals contained in
the reports of the Third Committee”, which has been
circulated as document A/C.3/73/INF/1. The note has
been distributed desk-to-desk in the General Assembly
Hall as a reference guide for action on draft resolutions
and decisions recommended by the Third Committee
in its reports.
Members will find in column 4 of the note the
symbols of the draft resolutions and decisions of the
Third Committee, with the corresponding symbols
of the reports for action in the plenary in column
2 of the same note. For reports containing multiple
recommendations, the draft resolution or decision
number is contained in column 3 of the note.
Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and
decisions have been adopted in the Committee. Any
clarification about sponsorship in the Committee reports
should be addressed to the Secretary of the Committee.
Furthermore, members are reminded that any
corrections to the voting intention of delegations after
the voting has concluded on a proposal should be made
directly to the Secretariat after the meeting. I would seek
members’ cooperation in avoiding any interruptions to
our proceedings in that regard.
Agenda item 28
Social development
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the

A/73/PV.55

twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(c) Literacy for life: shaping future agendas
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/581)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it six draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 39 of its report.
We shall now take decisions on draft resolutions I to
VI, one by one. After all the decisions have been taken,
representatives will have an opportunity to explain their
vote or position on any or all of the draft resolutions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Volunteering for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/140).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit
for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special
session of the General Assembly”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,

18-443153/35

A/73/PV.55

Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Papua New Guinea, United States of America
Abstaining:
None
Draft resolution II was adopted by 188 votes to 3
(resolution 73/141).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
III is entitled “Inclusive development for and with
persons with disabilities”. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 73/142).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
IV is entitled “Follow-up to the Second World Assembly
on Ageing”. The Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
4/35

17/12/2018

Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 73/143).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
V is entitled “Follow-up to the twentieth anniversary of
the International Year of the Family and beyond”. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 73/144).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
VI is entitled “Literacy for life: shaping future agendas”.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 73/145).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 28 and its sub-items
(a), (b) and (c)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 29
Advancement of women
(a) Advancement of women
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth
World Conference on Women and of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/582)
Draft amendment (A/73.L.56)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it four draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 37 of its report, as well
as one draft decision recommended in paragraph 38 of
the same report. In connection with draft resolution I,
the General Assembly has before it a draft amendment
circulated in document A/73/L.56.
I shall first give the floor to representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): I would like to commend
your work, Madam President, during this session, and
the tireless efforts of the Chair of the Third Committee
and his Bureau in pursuit of multilateralism and in
bringing differing opinions in the Third Committee
to the degree of consensus that multilateralism allows
and to the degree that we can adhere to that principle,
18-44315

17/12/2018

the embodiment of world peace. In that context, we
have tried our best to do away with paragraphs and
concepts that might affect or compromise our general
quest for the greatest possible level of consensus and
for enhancing multilateralism. Taking that principled
position into account, we would like to make the
following statement. I will now speak with regard to
the draft amendment we are requesting.
(spoke in Arabic)
Through draft amendment A/73/L.56, my delegation
requests the deletion of the sixteenth preambular
paragraph of draft resolution I, entitled “Trafficking in
women and girls”, recommended in the report of the
Third Committee (A/73/582). The paragraph mentions
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and we request
the draft amendment for the following reasons.
First, we asked for the paragraph to be rejected
during the informal consultations on the draft resolution
because it gives the untrue impression that the ICC is
the only authority that has the jurisdiction to try certain
crimes. Furthermore, it ignores the fact that not all
countries are party to the Rome Statute, under which
the ICC was established, and that the ICC is a standalone organ that has nothing to do with the United
Nations except through their Relationship Agreement.
Secondly, my delegation believes that a draft
resolution containing a paragraph that references the
ICC in isolation from other international mechanisms
ignores the fact that there are many national, regional
and international mechanisms that are achieving
considerable success with regard to the issues
under consideration. That is why we proposed some
amendments to the paragraph during the informal
consultations with a view to striking a balance, and
suggested alternative language and options with a
view to ultimately achieving consensus on the draft
resolution. In fact, we spared no effort in that regard.
Unfortunately, however, those efforts were fruitless and
our position fell on deaf ears. Despite the fact that the
topic of the draft resolution is a very important one, the
selective methods used really left us with no choice but
to propose an amendment, because it is unacceptable to
impose a specific legal system as a main reference and
benchmark for all.
My delegation would also like to stress that fighting
impunity has been and remains a priority for the Sudan,
within the framework of the principle of respect for
international law, which ensures justice and equality

A/73/PV.55

among countries and preserves national sovereignty.
In that regard, my country is concerned about attempts
to globalize the ICC and the Rome Statute as a legal
system and benchmark that must be imposed on all
Member States, despite the sovereign right of States to
voluntarily accede or not accede to a given agreement.
Thirdly, we have an established and clear position
on the reference to the ICC, since it helps to politicize
the language of Third Committee draft resolutions
and undermines the Committee’s objectives and
fundamental principles. Such references can also
be used as a platform to promote the ICC while
undermining the consensus, or the unanimity, on those
draft resolutions in every instance.
I would like to thank those who will vote in
favour of our amendment. We request the deletion of
the sixteenth preambular paragraph and urge Member
States to support our position and vote in favour of the
proposed amendment.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Australia, Canada,
Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland and my
own country, Liechtenstein.
We are once again deeply disturbed by one
delegation’s attempts to challenge references to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in draft resolutions
of the Third Committee that have been agreed language
for many years.
The ICC is an independent organization with a
strong institutional connection to the United Nations.
It is the world’s first and only permanent international
independent court with criminal law jurisdiction, and it
has a key role to play in ending impunity where national
courts are unwilling or unable to exercise jurisdiction
over the most serious crimes under international law
and in the protection of human rights. The ICC’s work
is therefore vitally important within the scope of
various Third Committee draft resolutions that will be
adopted by the General Assembly today, including on
trafficking in women and girls, the rights of the child,
extrajudicial summary or arbitrary executions, and the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
We regret that once again we are confronted
with draft amendments that undermine the important
role of the ICC in ending impunity for grave human
rights violations, and thereby upholding human rights,

18-443155/35

A/73/PV.55

which is one of the Assembly’s core mandates, and
that challenge language that has been included in the
relevant texts for many years. We therefore call on all
States to vote against all draft amendments that ask for
the deletion of references to the ICC.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
In all brevity, and so as not to duplicate the
deliberations we already held in the Third Committee,
I would just like to state that we deeply regret that the
Sudan has once again introduced a draft amendment
to draft resolution I, seeking to delete references to the
International Criminal Court. That issue has already
been considered in the Third Committee, and the
outcome was a clear rejection of the draft amendment.
As in the Third Committee, the 28 member States of the
European Union will vote against the draft amendment,
which is a deletion, and we call on all other States,
particularly States parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, to also vote no.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
take decisions on draft resolutions I to IV and on the
draft amendment, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Trafficking in women and girls”. In connection with
draft resolution I, the General Assembly has before it
a draft amendment circulated in document A/73/L.56.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly shall first take a decision on the draft
amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Bahrain, Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, China,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Eritrea, Iraq, Oman, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
6/35

17/12/2018

Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahamas, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia,
Israel, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Malaysia,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe,
Singapore, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Togo, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of
America, Viet Nam
The draft amendment was rejected by 17 votes to
112, with 32 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/146).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
II is entitled “Intensification of efforts to end obstetric
fistula”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/147).
The President (spoke in Spanish): We turn next to
draft resolution III, entitled “Intensification of efforts
18-44315

17/12/2018

to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against
women and girls: sexual harassment”, on which a
separate recorded vote has been requested on operative
paragraphs 8 (d) and 11.
I now call on the representative of the Netherlands
on a point of order.
Mr. Oppenheimer (Netherlands): We are a little
surprised by what is going on because we have not been
informed about a vote. There is now suddenly a vote on
draft resolution III, and we do not really know what we
are voting on.
If we are voting on keeping the text as we agreed
in the Third Committee, by all means let us go ahead.
However, it is very unclear. I am looking at the screen
and I am quite certain about the outcome of the voting,
so I do not necessarily want to stop it, given that it
looks positive. But we are confused about what is going
on. Let us continue the voting, but we would like to
understand what we are voting on.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The delegation
of the United States has requested a vote on operative
paragraphs 8 (d) and 11. The representative of the
Netherlands is correct in saying that draft resolution III
was adopted in the Third Committee without a vote.
We will now proceed to take action on draft
resolution III. The Assembly will first take a decision
on the proposal to delete paragraphs 8 (d) and 11. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,

A/73/PV.55

Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Burundi,
Cambodia, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Iraq,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Philippines,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Togo
Operative paragraphs 8 (d) and 11 were retained
by 130 votes to 1, with 31 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 73/148).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
IV is entitled “Intensifying global efforts for the
elimination of female genital mutilation”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 73/149).
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
turn to paragraph 38 of the report to take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Documents considered
by the General Assembly in connection with the item
‘Advancement of women’”. The Third Committee

18-443157/35

A/73/PV.55

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/523).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 65
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions

17/12/2018

help us deliver a more effective response, putting the
rights and potential of refugees and their hosts at the
heart of a more comprehensive approach.
We look forward to assessing our common progress
at the first Global Refugee Forum, to be held in one year’s
time. We commend UNHCR for the comprehensive and
transparent process of consultation it conducted with
Member States in Geneva to develop the global compact
on refugees, and we underline the importance of its
implementation. Once implemented and supported, it
has the potential to strengthen international solidarity
and responsibility, sharing and paving the way for a
more effective, collective response to one of the central
global challenges of our time.

I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to speak in explanation of vote or position before action
is taken on draft resolutions I and II.

The UNHCR omnibus resolution has to date always
been adopted by consensus in the General Assembly
and has never been adopted by vote. Our colleagues
in Geneva worked hard for over a month to agree on
important changes and additions to this year’s draft
resolution. At its adoption in the Third Committee
some weeks ago, an overwhelming majority of Member
States expressed their support for it and the work of
UNHCR.

Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I am honoured to
make this statement today on behalf of the five Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my
own country, Sweden.

As a facilitator of this year’s draft resolution and
on behalf of the Nordic countries, I today encourage
all Member States to support it and vote in favour of its
adoption by the General Assembly.

The work on draft resolution II, on the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the so-called UNHCR omnibus resolution, is
traditionally facilitated by one of the Nordic countries.
This year it has been our privilege to facilitate the draft
resolution in Geneva and to present it to the General
Assembly in New York.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of France, the Netherlands and
my own country, Germany.

Report of the Third Committee (A/73/583)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 16 of its report.

The subject matter of the draft resolution is the
mandate and work of the United Nations refugee
agency, UNHCR. It is a humanitarian, non-political
text, dealing with the common ground that will enable
UNHCR to continue to work in the interests of us all
and, most essentially, for the benefit of refugees and
other persons of concern under its mandate.
This year, as delegations are aware, is an especially
important one for the UNHCR omnibus draft resolution.
The New York Declaration stipulates that the global
compact on refugees is to be presented to the Assembly
for its consideration in conjunction with the UNHCR
draft resolution. The compact is the tool kit that will
8/35

Two years ago we adopted the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, recognizing
that more equitable burden- and responsibility-sharing
is indispensable if we want to provide sustainable
solutions for the world’s refugees and those who host
them. The global compact on refugees is a major step
in that direction. It is, however, not only a historical
necessity but also a great opportunity to modernize
and enhance refugee responses. It will serve as a
toolbox to address and respond effectively to various
situations that may arise and as a platform to build new
partnerships. Its real added value will be its capacity to
mobilize more States and stakeholders around common
objectives, with mutual commitments to address needs
at national and regional levels.
The development of the global compact on refugees
was guided and inspired by the practical application of
18-44315

17/12/2018

the comprehensive refugee response framework over
the past two years. The framework has been a catalyst
for change and has generated positive, concrete results
for refugees and host communities in a number of
countries. Its roll-out in Central America and the Horn
of Africa are great examples of what such broad-based
processes can deliver on the ground.
By affirming the compact, we demonstrate once more
our shared conviction that solidarity and cooperation
are the only way to effectively address today’s refugee
movements. Germany, France and the Netherlands have
contributed their share and will continue to do so. We
strongly commend the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for its
leadership in the significant and sometimes difficult
process it was tasked with, culminating in the firstever global compact on refugees. We sincerely thank
the Swedish facilitation team for its relentless efforts,
which led to the successful completion of this year’s
draft resolution on the UNHCR (draft resolution II.)
Germany, France and the Netherlands stand firmly
behind the global compact on refugees and look forward
to starting its implementation through the adoption of
the UNHCR omnibus draft resolution by the General
Assembly. That will signal a tangible shift towards a new,
comprehensive way of approaching refugee protection
and solutions. It will also confirm the political will and
ambition of the international community in addressing
forced displacements worldwide.
Germany, France and the Netherlands will vote in
favour of the adoption of the draft resolution before us.
We urge all Member States to do the same. Let us seize
this unique, probably once-in-a-generation, opportunity
to open a new chapter in our joint endeavour: to provide
support and solutions to the millions of refugees around
the world and those who generously host them.
Mr. Al-Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The global compact on refugees is the outcome
of consultations, and not negotiations. It is therefore not
binding on Member States.
My delegation reiterates that there is a need for
commitment to the principles of professionalism,
neutrality and non-politicization , while respecting the
Charter of the United Nations. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees should
increase its efforts to facilitate the voluntary return
of refugees, including Syrian refugees, and to support
the relevant efforts of the Syrian Government. Racist

A/73/PV.55

practices, discrimination and xenophobia against
refugees, including Syrians, must also be eliminated.
Ms. González (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Venezuela recognizes the importance
of draft resolution II in the context of implementing the
commitments of the 2016 New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants. We appreciate the efforts of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) in proposing a global compact
for refugees, which could be implemented voluntarily
according to the guiding principles.
Much work remains to be done to ensure that
the concerns of developing countries and the main
host countries are taken into account during the
implementation of the compact. We welcome the support
in the text for the voluntary return and repatriation, as it
fully recognizes the rights of citizens to remain in their
countries of origin if they so wish. We wish to highlight
that this right must never be prevented or affected by
the implementation of coercive unilateral measures or
other forms of neocolonialism, blockades or foreign
intervention aimed at paralysing the economic and
social development of States.
Venezuela recognizes the positive contributions
of the global compact. However, we must warn that
its implementation must strictly adhere to its guiding
principles and to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. We urge against any effort to convert it
into a tool for intervention that could be used by some
States. No manipulation or selective interpretation of its
objectives should be accepted, nor should its provisions
be made more flexible.
We therefore urge that due respect be paid to
UNHCR’s mandate, established by the statute of
resolution 428 (V), of 1950, and resolution 46/182, on
strengthening coordination for emergency humanitarian
relief and humanitarian principles. Humanitarian
principles are fundamental and must guarantee the
non-politicization of its implementation, in particular
when linked to mechanisms for the distribution of
burden and responsibilities, such as support platforms
or forums on refugees.
For those reasons Venezuela will vote in favour of
this draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We will now
take decisions on draft resolutions I and II one by one.

18-443159/35

A/73/PV.55

Draft resolution I is entitled “Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/150).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
II is entitled “Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
10/35

17/12/2018

Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Hungary, United States of America
Abstaining:
Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Libya
Draft resolution II was adopted by 181 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 73/151).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote on the
resolutions just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary is a strong, longtime supporter of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and its mandate.
We reaffirm our commitment to the full implementation
of the 1951 United Nations Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. We are
grateful to UNHCR and humanitarian personnel for
their tireless work to deliver a humanitarian response
to the needs of refugees, internally displaced persons
and other persons of concern.
Budapest hosts the UNHCR regional office
and shared service centre for Central Europe, with
generous long-term support from the Hungarian
Government, which is, again, a token of Hungary’s
commitment to UNHCR and the cause it represents.
However, the Hungarian Government has decided not
to join the global compact on refugees. As Hungary
indicated during the negotiations on the document in
Geneva, the Government considers that the existing
international legal framework adequately addresses
refugee and asylum matters; consequently, the
Government considers that there is no necessity for a
new instrument in that regard. It is also concerned that
the differentiation between refugees and migrants, as
well as the voluntary nature of responsibility-sharing,
are not adequately reflected in the compact.
18-44315

17/12/2018

For those reasons, the Hungarian Government
is not in a position to agree with paragraphs 23 and
24 of resolution 73/151, which affirm and call for the
implementation of the global compact on refugees.
Therefore, Hungry voted against resolution 73/151.
Mr. Kashaev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We voted in favour of resolution 73/151. We
thank the sponsors and the delegation of Sweden for
preparing the draft. We believe that the effect of the work
of Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) on strengthening international
protection for refugees, internally displaced persons
and stateless persons is relevant and necessary. We will
continue to provide comprehensive support to UNHCR.
Regarding the global compact on refugees, we
would like to note the following. We believe that the
compact will facilitate the protection of the rights
and improvement of the situation of refugees and will
strengthen the effectiveness of the work of UNHCR
within its existing mandate. We would once again like
to reiterate our position on the use of responsibilitysharing. We interpret that term, under the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol, as the solidarity of the global community
in addressing the problem of refugees.
We also believe that a decision to host refugees
can be taken only by the host country, in accordance
with its national legislation and its international
obligations. The rights of refugees do not extend to
persons who have committed crimes against peace, war
crimes or crimes against humanity. We believe that the
responsibility of States to grant labour rights, social
support and Government assistance to refugees applies
only to refugees who are legally present in the territory
of that country. We also believe that climate change,
environmental degradation and natural disasters
cannot be construed under international law as reasons
for refugee displacement.
Given those considerations, we believe the
provisions in the global compact on refugees are not
legally binding and do not place any obligations,
including legal and financial obligations, on the
Russian Federation.
Ms. Shoman Khot (Jordan): I would like to
reiterate my country’s support for resolution 73/151.
In that regard, we would like to explain the following
points with regard to the global compact on refugees.

A/73/PV.55

Throughout the process, the delegation of Jordan
indicated clearly its position with regard to the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, the
comprehensive refugee response framework and the
global compact on refugees. As a major traditional
host country, we believe in the importance of
operationalizing the principles of solidarity and
burden- and responsibility-sharing and of establishing
the necessary mechanisms or arrangements to
implement them.
The New York Declaration committed to more
equitable burden- and responsibility-sharing, as well as
to support for host countries and communities. There
was also a commitment to strengthen the resilience of
host countries and communities and of communitybased development programmes that benefit both
refugees and host communities. It is our understanding
that the compact does not alter that. That understanding
and the points that follow from it guide our position on
the New York Declaration, the comprehensive refugee
response framework and the compact.
Nothing in the text or the context of implementation
of the compact, the comprehensive refugee response
framework and the New York Declaration may be
interpreted as altering what is stipulated in the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, which
clearly states that the Convention shall not apply to
persons who are at present receiving protection or
assistance from organs or agencies of the United
Nations other than the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
Nothing in the New York Declaration, the compact
or the comprehensive refugee response framework may
be interpreted in a way that would extend the scope
or change the definition of the term refugee, confirm
rights or expand the scope of protection to subjects
that do not enjoy them, or redefine the principle of
non-refoulement and/or extend its scope of application
to categories that this principle had not intended to
cover in the 1951 Convention, when State security is at
risk or we rightly interpret the sovereign right of a State
to control its border.
Jordan does not consider itself bound or committed
to regional or international instruments listed to which
it is not party, or to guidelines or other international
decisions, conclusions or resolutions on which we
made clear our position, or to reports and outcomes
of non-intergovernmental processes that we have not

18-4431511/35

A/73/PV.55

participated in or endorsed. That is true, for example,
with respect to the instruments on statelessness and
migration. The same position also applies to references
and footnotes.
Refugee status ceases once the reason that had
led to identifying the status as stipulated in the 1951
Convention ceases to exist. Countries of origin should
receive their nationals upon that eventuality. States
must readmit their returning nationals and ensure that
they are received without undue delay.
On solutions, our understanding is that other local
solutions referred to are temporary and are interim
solutions that are subject to international cooperation
and solidarity and burden-sharing. The root causes of
flight in countries of origin should be addressed and
relevant solutions in those countries should be found to
prevent movement in the first place or, should movement
take place, to create the conditions for return.
Mr. Iglesias Mori (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile welcomes resolution 73/151 in line with our
national legislation, in particular the provisions of Law
No. 20430, which regulates the matter in our country.
We reaffirm Chile’s long-standing contribution to the
international community with respect to refugees,
which we will always continue. Chile considers the
needs of asylum seekers in the light of our country’s
available means and resources.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote on this item.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 65.
Agenda item 69
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/584)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 11 of its report, entitled
“Report of the Human Rights Council”. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
12/35

17/12/2018

Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Israel, Myanmar, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan
18-44315

17/12/2018

The draft resolution was adopted by 121 votes to 4,
with 60 abstentions (resolution 73/152).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to those representatives who wish to speak
in explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 73/152, on
the basis of a position of principle. We reaffirm the
importance of this subsidiary body of the General
Assembly as the supreme body on this very important
matter with regard to cooperation and dialogue
with States.
However, Venezuela affirms its condemnation of
the adoption of resolutions and special procedures or
any other mechanism on the human rights situation
in specific countries. Furthermore, we reject the
selective manner in which this process is handled and
its politically motivated objectives, which constitute a
violation of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Therefore, Venezuela disassociates itself from
document HRC/39/1.
The continued practice of the selective adoption
of resolutions regarding human rights situations in
specific countries goes beyond the competencies of
the Human Rights Council and violates the principles
of universality, objectivity and non-selectivity with
which all human rights topics should be approached.
Cooperation and dialogue are the appropriate means,
as well as essential principles, for achieving the
effective promotion and protection of human rights. In
that regard, we support the positions reiterated by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in this area.
Venezuela calls for strengthening the positive
progress made since the establishment of the Human
Rights Council. We wish to see the Universal Periodic
Review adopted as the preferred formula for cooperation
when addressing human rights matters. We also call
for the practice of selective adoption of resolutions
by countries to be eliminated, as it undermines the
mandate of the Human Rights Council.
Ms. Ndayishimiye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
would like to make the following statement following
the adoption of resolution 73/152.

A/73/PV.55

While we support the report in its entirety, my
delegation would like to reiterate its position of
principle. We are concerned by certain aspects of the
report, especially as concerns the resolution, which
targets and singles out specific countries, including
Burundi. Burundi remains convinced that any progress
in the area of human rights must come through
dialogue, cooperation and the Universal Periodic
Review mechanism.
Without repeating what we already stated at
the Third Committee, my delegation would like to
dissociate itself from the section of the report that
targets Burundi, in particular all passages pertaining to
the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote on the resolution
just adopted.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/585)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.59)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it three draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 56 of its report, as well
as one draft decision recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 57 of the same report. In connection with
draft resolution III, the Assembly has before it a draft
amendment circulated in document A/73/L.59.
Before giving the floor to representatives who wish
to speak in explanations of vote before the voting, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Ahmed (Sudan): As previously and clearly
stated, my delegation has serious reservations regarding
the inclusion in draft resolution III of any references

18-4431513/35

A/73/PV.55

17/12/2018

to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the gratuitous use of the draft resolution to
call for, propagate and exert unacceptable pressure on
Member States to include such references and language,
which jeopardize the ongoing peacebuilding efforts in
my country aimed at safeguarding the rights of children
in the Sudan.

law, and to ensure that they receive timely, effective
humanitarian assistance, while noting the efforts
taken to end impunity by ensuring accountability and
punishing perpetrators, and calls upon the international
community to hold those responsible for violations
accountable, inter alia, through the International
Criminal Court.

As Member States are aware, the delisting of the
Sudan from the group of States in which the rights of
children are violated, in the context of the currently
de-escalating conflict in Darfur, is a milestone
achievement. Since the year 2003 and throughout the
long period during which we addressed the conflict
in Darfur, the International Criminal Court has been
an impediment to peace. All efforts towards lasting
peace were hampered by the ICC simply because of its
interference, which has always been malignant since its
entry into force in 2002. At best, the ICC is a threat to
stability and peace in my country.

The Court is the main permanent court established
to end impunity for the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes against individuals and their rights that are of
concern to the international community, as a whole.
Such crimes include violations of the rights of the
child. It represents an important achievement of the
international community in its effort to create a rulesbased world order and a key instrument for ensuring
that those accused of committing serious crimes, under
the principle of complementarity, are tried before the
Court in full respect of their rights and international law,
thereby promoting the global fight against impunity.

The ICC is not an organ of the United Nations,
in spite of the repeated attempts by some parties to
maintain otherwise at meetings of the Main Committees
of the General Assembly. Since 2008, at consecutive
African Union Summits, Heads of State have decided
not to cooperate with the ICC until pending issues
regarding the questions related to articles 13, 17 and
98 of the Rome Statute are answered and the targeting
of African leaders as a way of showing that the ICC is
functional has ceased. At its ministerial conference in
April 2018, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
supported that position.
My delegation distances itself from the Court and,
as such, kindly refers the Assembly to the amendment
contained in document A/73/L.59, with regard to
paragraph 51 of the draft resolution on the rights of the
child. We request that it be put to the vote and call upon
Member States to support our amendment by deleting
the following words at the end of the paragraph:
“and calls upon the international community to hold
those responsible for violations accountable, inter
alia, through the International Criminal Court”.
Mr. Paolino Laborde (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Paragraph 51 of the draft resolution includes
the agreed language on children and armed conflict that
has been adopted every year for more than 10 years.
The paragraph calls upon States to protect children
affected by armed conflict, in particular from violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
14/35

The role of the Court in protecting children in
situations of armed conflict is clearly stipulated in the
various provisions of the Rome Statute, in particular in
articles 6, 7, 8, 36, 42, 54 and 68. In that regard, a clear
reference to the Court in the draft resolution is vital
and all the more relevant given the case Prosecutor
v. Thomas Lubanga and his sentencing for recruiting
and enlisting children under 15 to engage in hostile
activities, as well as other cases now before the Court.
For those reasons, the main sponsors of the draft
resolution understand that the language of paragraph
51 pertaining to the International Criminal Court is not
only accurate in terms of rights but also very relevant
and timely. We must therefore retain it as part of the
text, as has been agreed for several years now. For those
reasons, we cannot accept the draft amendment. The
main sponsors of the draft resolution call for it to be put
to the vote. We will vote against the draft amendment
and urge other delegations to do the same.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III and the draft
decision, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Child,
early and forced marriage”.
(spoke in English)
A single, separate recorded vote has been requested
by the United States on the twenty-third preambular
18-44315

17/12/2018

paragraph and operative paragraphs 14, 17 and 18 of
draft resolution I.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining
Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan,

A/73/PV.55

Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Yemen
The twenty-third preambular paragraph and
operative paragraphs 14, 17 and 18 were retained
by 134 votes to 2, with 32 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution I, as a whole,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 73/153).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
II is entitled “Protecting children from bullying”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/154).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
III is entitled “Rights of the child”. The Assembly has
before it a draft amendment, which was circulated as
document A/73/L.59. In accordance with article 90 of
the rules of the procedure, the Assembly will first take
a decision on the draft amendment. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Bahrain, Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, China,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Eritrea, Iraq, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Seychelles, South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic
Against
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,

18-4431515/35

A/73/PV.55

Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Yemen, Zambia
Abstaining
Algeria, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Ethiopia,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nepal, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Togo, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of
America, Viet Nam
Draft amendment A/73/L.59 was rejected by 15
votes to 116, with 30 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution III, as a whole,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
73/155).
The President (spoke in Spanish): We will now
turn to paragraph 57 of the report to take action on the
draft decision entitled “Document considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the promotion
and protection of the rights of children”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/524).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to those representatives who wish to speak in
16/35

17/12/2018

explanation of vote or position on the resolutions and
decision just adopted.
Ms. Korac (United States of America): We regret
that we were unable to deliver this statement at the time
of adoption in the Third Committee, but wish to take
this opportunity to provide clarification of the United
States position regarding elements of this important
resolution, entitled “Child, early and forced marriage”
(resolution 73/153).
We regret that the United States proposal to delete
preambular paragraph 23 and paragraphs 14, 17 and 18
was not adopted. The United States disassociates itself
from preambular paragraph 23 and paragraphs 14,
17, and 18 because of its concerns about wording that
exceeds prior international consensus on issues related
to reproductive health care.
The United States believes that women should
have equal access to reproductive health care. We
remain committed to the commitments set out in the
Beijing Declaration and the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development. As has been made clear over many years,
there is international consensus that the Declaration and
Programme of Action do not create new international
rights, including any right to abortion. The United
States fully supports the principle of voluntary choice
regarding maternal and child health and family
planning. We do not recognize abortion as a method of
family planning or support abortion in our reproductive
health assistance. We also note that the United States
is the largest bilateral donor of reproductive health and
family planning assistance.
With regard to this resolution’s references to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we note
that we addressed our concerns during the Third
Committee session. The United States understands that
General Assembly resolutions do not change the current
state of conventional or customary international law, or
does the Universal Declaration of Human Rights itself
create legal obligations. We do not read this resolution
to imply that States must join or implement obligations
under international instruments to which they are
not party, and the United States understands that any
reaffirmation of prior documents applies only to those
States that affirmed them initially and, in the case of
international treaties or conventions, to those States
that are party to them.
18-44315

17/12/2018

A/73/PV.55

We note that in the United States decisions
regarding education funding and curricular and other
education policies, materials and programmes are
made as appropriate and consistent with our respective
federal, state or local authorities. We also note that any
potential actions to address school-related violence,
including sexual and gender-based violence, should be
consistent with applicable due process protections.

Mr. Iglesias Mori (Chile): The delegation of Chile
wishes to express its reservations with regard to the
seventh preambular paragraph of resolution 73/156.

Mr. Iglesias Mori (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile wishes to express its reservations
concerning the eighth preambular paragraph and
paragraphs 35, 36, 37 and 38 of resolution 73/155, on
rights of the child.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 71 and its sub-item (a).

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 70?

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 70 and its sub-item (a).
Mr. Ten-Pow (Guyana), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Agenda item 71
Rights of indigenous peoples
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples
(b) Follow-up to the outcome document of the
high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples.
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/586)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution, entitled “Rights of indigenous
peoples”, recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
73/156).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Chile, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of Agenda item 71?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 72

(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/587)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
two draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 26 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled “A
global call for concrete action for the total elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation
of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action” is postponed to a later date to
allow time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution II as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution I. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cabo Verde,

18-4431517/35

A/73/PV.55

Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Ukraine, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 129 votes to 2,
with 54 abstentions (resolution 73/157).
18/35

17/12/2018

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 72 and its sub-item (b).
Agenda item 73
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/588)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 24 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “The
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
18-44315

17/12/2018

Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Honduras,
Kiribati, Liberia, Palau, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution I was adopted by 172 votes to 6,
with 11 abstentions (resolution 73/158).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Use of mercenaries as a means of violating
human rights and impeding the exercise of the right
of peoples to self-determination”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,

A/73/PV.55

Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Colombia, Fiji, Liberia, Mexico, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Sao Tome and Principe, Solomon Islands,
Switzerland, Tonga
Draft resolution II was adopted by 129 votes to 53,
with 10 abstentions (resolution 73/159).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution III, entitled “Universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination”. The Third

18-4431519/35

A/73/PV.55

Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
73/160).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Omurzakov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
The Kyrgyz Republic is firmly committed to the
norms and principles of international law, one of
which is the right of peoples to self-determination. We
note with satisfaction that the States Members of the
United Nations unanimously supported the adoption
of resolution 73/160, thereby demonstrating their
commitment to the ideals of freedom, independence
and the equality of all States and peoples of the world.
The delegation of Kyrgyzstan would like to express its
thanks to the delegation of Pakistan for its work on the
resolution.
Kyrgyzstan has consistently expressed its support
for the resolution and is a sponsor of it. We believe it is
a significant symbolic document that demonstrates the
importance of the right of peoples to determine their
own destiny. However, we also want to point out that
the principle of the self-determination of peoples should
not be interpreted as permitting or encouraging any
action that partially or wholly violates or undermines
the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign
independent States, as expressed in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, adopted on
24 October 1970.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 74
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/589)
The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that we will take action on sub-items (a) to (d)
of agenda item 74 immediately after taking action on
the main agenda item.
20/35

17/12/2018

The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 9
of its report, as well as a draft decision recommended
by the Committee in paragraph 10 of the same report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
and on the draft decision, one by one.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled “World
Braille Day”. The Third Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/161).
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question of
the promotion and protection of human rights”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/525).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 74.
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 21 of its report. We shall now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Human rights
treaty body system”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/162).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
18-44315

17/12/2018

enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it 17 draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 162 of its report.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan to introduce draft amendments A/73/L.57 and
A/73/L.58.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for giving me the floor for the
third time today.
My country’s delegation would like to submit two
draft amendments, contained in documents A/73/L.57
and A/73/L.58, to draft resolution X, recommended in
the report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/Add.2)
and entitled “Extrajudicial summary or arbitrary
executions”. The first amendment is to delete the
fifteenth preambular paragraph, and the second
amendment is to delete paragraph 13, which both refer
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). After it was
completely impossible to achieve consensus in that
regard with the facilitators of the draft resolution, we
have a reservation on the reference to the ICC for the
following reasons.
First, not all Member States are party to the Rome
Statute, and no specific legal system may be imposed
as a basic benchmark or reference through all or any
attempt to globalize the ICC system. On 14 December,
we indicated in the Security Council the structural
deformities in the Statute of the ICC when we were
deliberating the twenty-eighth report submitted by
the Prosecutor of the ICC (see S/PV.8425). We also
mentioned the gaps and loopholes that became apparent
after the Statute entered into force, in 2001, and
categorically demonstrated that corruption is not related
to only one or two persons in the ICC. The corruption
of the Court discourages us from taking it seriously.
We also stated that such corruption is institutional and
integral to the ICC, the Rome Statute and the practices
thereof. During the past 13 years the ICC has proven
itself to be notorious, given its corruption, which States
and the media are aware of. In that regard, I would
like to refer to the article in Der Spiegel magazine few
months ago with regard to the corruption of the ICC.
As a result of that, confidence in the ICC is
dwindling and weakening. We respect those that have

A/73/PV.55

chosen to be party to the ICC, but we do not agree on
imposing it as the single legal system throughout the
world. We insist on reconsidering the international
criminal system so that it is commensurate with the
hopes and aspirations of the founders of the United
Nations in 1945 when they began thinking of building
an international criminal system. Nobody at that time
thought that the results would be so deplorable.
Given the fact that the international criminal system
is related to the criminal responsibility of individuals
and natural persons, we must bear in mind that 60 per
cent of human beings are outside the legal jurisdiction
of the ICC. We say 60 per cent of human beings because
the jurisdiction of the ICC applies to natural persons.
Therefore, it is totally unacceptable for such persons
to be subjected to a jurisdiction that does not apply
to them, in accordance with the peremptory principle
of international law, which states that no crime can
be established without a text. Those structural flaws
in the current Statute must be reconsidered sooner
or later. We are confident that will take place. Also,
we know that the Rome Statute lacks integrity and
neutrality. That can be seen in its practice, because the
ICC has exercised its jurisdiction only over the African
continent and its leaders.
Secondly, the ICC is considered a political
instrument for the achievement of specific and narrow
interests. The lack of credibility and neutrality of the
ICC was evident in the successive withdrawals by
countries from its Statute. Given the fact that we are
not party to the Rome Statute, we have reservation with
regard to any reference contained in the draft resolution
before us to the Rome Statute, which established the
ICC. In that connection, my delegation would like to
assert that no liabilities may be imposed on any country
beyond its sovereign right to be party or not to be party
to a Treaty.
There is another point that has been raised: that the
Sudan requested a recorded vote on these paragraphs
in various draft resolutions of the Committees and
the General Assembly recently. Actually, the Sudan,
from the very beginning, has been very consistent with
regard to its reservations to the ICC and any attempts to
include it in United Nations resolutions, because doing
so causes clear division and shameful polarization
among Member States, which we want to avoid.
The Sudan has never changed its objection against
the ICC, we changed only the way in which we object

18-4431521/35

A/73/PV.55

to the Rome Statute. As a State Member of the United
Nations, we are totally free to choose the method by
which we object to the jurisdiction of the Court.
Therefore, my delegation urges other countries
to support the two draft amendments that we are
introducing now, which we previously introduced in the
Third Committee, and to vote in favour of them.
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to delegations wishing to speak in explanation of vote
or position on any or all of the 17 draft resolutions
contained in document A/73/589/Add.2 and on the two
draft amendments to draft resolution X.
Ms. Ferry (Monaco) (spoke in French) Under
sub-item (b), entitled “Human rights questions,
including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms”, of agenda item 74, entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights”, Monaco intended to
co-sponsor draft resolution XII, entitled “Terrorism
and human rights”.
Mr. Tanner (Finland): It is with deep regret that
my delegation notes draft amendments A/73/L.57
and A/73/L.58, proposed by the delegation of the
Sudan, to the fifteenth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 13 of draft resolution X, entitled
“Extrajudicial summary or arbitrary executions”, which
refer to the Rome Statute. The draft amendments were
defeated by clear numbers in the Third Committee.
On behalf of the Nordic countries, Finland reiterates
its unwavering support for the International Criminal
Court (ICC) as an important tool of the international
community for fighting impunity and contributing to
peaceful societies. The gross violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law that we
witness worldwide, especially extrajudicial summary
and arbitrary executions, are a sharp reminder of the
increasing relevance of the Court, the role of which
is to complement rather than replace national justice
systems. The primary responsibility for investigating
and prosecuting the most serious crimes remains with
individual States. All perpetrators of such crimes must
be held accountable for their actions.
A key element in the Rome Statute is its equal
application. In that respect, the creation of the ICC
gave millions of victims of atrocity crimes new hope
that justice would be done. States from all over the
world have joined efforts to make that possible, which
22/35

17/12/2018

is especially important to remember this year as we
celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Rome Statute. As we look back on the history
of its existence, the impact that the Court has had in
addressing impunity is clear.
The President returned to the Chair.
For those reasons, Finland and the co-sponsors
of draft resolution X will vote against those draft
amendments. We call on all other States, in particular
States parties to the Rome Statute, to also vote “no”.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I take the floor to
provide an explanation of our vote before the voting on
draft resolution XIII, entitled “Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty”.
While the death penalty has remained a prescribed
form of punishment in the Maldives for decades, we
are proud of the fact that an informal moratorium on
its use has been in existence since 1954, for more than
60 years. It was only in 2014 that the Maldives enacted
its new penal code, which specifically prescribes the
use of the death penalty for premeditated murder and
deliberate manslaughter, which states that punishments
for crimes for which retribution or the restoration of
justice is required must be carried out according to
the principles of Islamic sharia. Article 10 of the
Constitution of Maldives stipulates that Islam should be
the basis of all laws in the country. We fully maintain
that legal measures in Islamic sharia relating to the use
of this punishment must be rigorously and meticulously
examined within the judicial framework to ensure that
the enforcement of sentences is not arbitrary.
However, we also agree that the Maldives must
undertake a thorough process in which the judicial
framework, especially the criminal justice system
in its entirety, must be reformed, strengthened
and institutionalized. It is the intention of the new
Government to ensure that the process of reform is
carried out without delay and with the deliberate
purpose of having an independent and impartial
judiciary in the Maldives that commands the trust and
confidence of the general public.
The reality is that the death penalty remains on
the books. To favour its abolition without wider public
consultation and referendums, and without preceeding
domestic legislation to nullify its implementation,
would be both unconstitutional and undemocratic. It is
18-44315

17/12/2018

against that backdrop that we must take measures with
a view to the task ahead.
The Maldives will uphold its existing informal
moratorium on the use of the death penalty. We will also
work in tandem with our international and domestic
partners to bring about positive and meaningful changes
to the judiciary so that it can function independently
and impartially in its administration of justice.
During the deliberations at the Third Committee
in November, the Maldives voted against the draft
resolution that is before us. While the Government
is committed to maintaining the moratorium, for the
legal reasons I just outlined the Maldives will maintain
its position in the plenary and vote “no” on the draft
resolution entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death
penalty”.
Ms. Wagner (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to explain its vote on draft
resolution III, entitled “United Nations Declaration on
the Rights of Peasants and Other People Working in
Rural Areas”. The draft resolution was adopted by the
Third Committee on 19 November under sub-item (b)
of agenda item 74. It is being addressed today in the
report contained in document A/73/589/Add.2.
Although peasants produce the majority of food
products in the world, they are at the same time
disproportionately affected by poverty. Switzerland is
committed at the national and international levels to
maintaining and developing small-scale agricultural
systems. For that reason, Switzerland has in recent
years supported the development of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other People
Working in Rural Areas. We are co-sponsors of the
draft resolution for the mandate of the working group
in Geneva.
The Declaration contained in the annex to the
draft resolution seeks to summarize the rights of
peasants in a single document in order to better raise
awareness about their situation. It is a very important
political signal. Moreover, the new instrument is not
legally binding; existing norms are therefore not called
into question by the Declaration. Switzerland took
part in the negotiations on the Declaration in an open
and constructive spirit. We welcome the fact that the
majority of our concerns were taken into account. From
our point of view, the process led to a positive and
largely balanced results.

A/73/PV.55

For the reasons I mentioned, Switzerland voted
in favour at the Human Rights Council and the Third
Committee, but we did so with an explanation of vote
to underscore the fact that the content and wording that
Switzerland would have preferred was not reflected
throughout the entire text of the Declaration and that
the Declaration contains certain provisions that are
problematic for Switzerland. We will today once again
vote in favour of the draft resolution and the new
Declaration contained in the annex while repeating the
following points.
First, we would like to underscore that the agrarian
reforms mentioned in article 17, paragraph 6, would
require a legal procedure with the necessary legal
safeguards, and that the expropriation of lands with a
view to their redistribution should be accompanied by
fair compensation.
Secondly, in our view, article 19, on the right to
seeds, contains problematic provisions, in particular
with regard to intellectual property, which Switzerland
will interpret in line with its national laws and
international law. We refer specifically to paragraphs
1 (a), 1 (d), 4 and 8.
Finally, we would like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to the fact that the Declaration does not
adequately reference the existing international
environmental regime and no longer incorporates
sustainable development. While such an approach is
necessary to ensure the rights of future generations of
peasants, we regret the fact that the Declaration does
not sufficiently mention the obligations tied to the rights
of various stakeholders, for example, the obligation to
implement environmental conventions. It is with those
clarifications that Switzerland will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to refer to the statement made by
my colleague His Excellency the Ambassador of the
Republic of the Sudan with regard to draft amendments
A/73/L.57 and A/73/L.58 to draft resolution X, as
recommended in the report of the Third Committee
(A/73/589/Add.2).
I note that my delegation supports the draft
amendments put forward by the representative of the
Sudan with regard to voting on the fifteenth preambular
paragraph and paragraph 13 of draft resolution X with
a view to deleting them. We support putting those two

18-4431523/35

A/73/PV.55

paragraphs to the vote for the reasons explained by the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Gebru (Ethiopia): In explanation of vote
before the voting on draft declaration III, entitled
“United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas”, I would like
to make the following points.
First, I would like to express Ethiopia’s appreciation
to the facilitators of the draft Declaration for their hard
work and the consultations they facilitated.
Secondly, the Constitution of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia recognizes the rights
of peasants and pastoralists, including the right to
obtain land without payment and protection against
eviction from their possessions. It also recognized
the right of pastoralists to have access to free land
for grazing and cultivation. It is in that context that
Ethiopia constructively engaged in the negotiations on
the draft United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas.
Thirdly, we have, however, noted the expanded
scope and application of the rights of peasants and other
people working in rural areas, particularly in the context
of articles 7 and 21 of the draft Declaration, relating
to transboundary tenure and water-related issues,
respectively. Ethiopia cannot accept the expanded the
scope of articles 7 and 21 of the draft Declaration. We
recognize article 7 and 21 of the draft Declaration to be
limited to issues under the jurisdiction of States and not
apply to transboundary issues.
Fourthly, for Ethiopia, the draft Declaration is a
non-legally binding instrument. In international law
and customary practice, the rights and duties of a State
and its people are limited to the State’s territory and are
subject to its jurisdiction. That principle is explicitly
prescribed in article 2, sub-article 1, of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and implicitly
prescribed in all other international instruments. In line
with that principle, Ethiopia understands and would
like to underscore that the applicability and scope of the
current draft United Nations Declaration on the Rights
of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas
are limited to the territory of each State and subject to
its jurisdiction only.
Fifthly, Ethiopia appreciates the inclusion of
article 28 in the Declaration. We believe the article is
appropriate because of the non-legally binding nature
24/35

17/12/2018

of the draft Declaration. In keeping the aspirational
nature of the draft Declaration and our collective will
to work for its realization, Ethiopia would like to put on
record and reaffirm that the current and future national
laws of Ethiopia and its international obligations prevail
over the Declaration.
It is with that interpretation and understanding that
Ethiopia will abstain in the voting on draft resolution
III. It is our sincere hope that our concerns will be
properly addressed in future negotiations so that we can
align ourselves with the entire Declaration in future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take decisions on draft resolutions I to XVII
one by one. After all the decisions have been taken,
representatives will again have an opportunity to
explain their votes or positions.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Human
rights and extreme poverty”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/163).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
II is entitled “Combating intolerance, negative
stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement
to violence and violence against persons, based on
religion or belief”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/164).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
III is entitled “United Nations Declaration on the Rights
of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
18-44315

17/12/2018

Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
Australia, Guatemala, Hungary, Israel, New
Zealand, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Samoa, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, Vanuatu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 121 votes to 8,
with 54 abstentions (resolution 73/165).
[Subsequently the delegation of China informed the
Secretariat it had intended to vote in favour. ]

A/73/PV.55

The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
IV is entitled “The right to development”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Re-public
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Israel, Netherlands, Sweden, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

18-4431525/35

A/73/PV.55

Abstaining
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Estonia, Georgia,
Hungary,
Iceland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Montenegro,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 148 votes to 11,
with 32 abstentions (resolution 73/166).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
V is entitled “Human rights and unilateral coercive
measures”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
26/35

17/12/2018

Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining
Brazil, Kiribati, Palau
Draft resolution V was adopted by 133 votes to 53,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 73/167).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
VI is entitled “Enhancement of international
cooperation in the field of human rights”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 73/168).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
VII is entitled “Promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
18-44315

17/12/2018

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicara-gua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining
Armenia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Mexico, Peru
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 131 votes to
53, with 7 abstentions (resolution 73/169).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
VIII is entitled “Promotion of peace as a vital

A/73/PV.55

requirement for the full enjoyment of all human rights
by all”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,

18-4431527/35

A/73/PV.55

Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining
Tonga
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 135 votes to
53, with 1 abstention (resolution 73/170).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
IX is entitled “The right to food”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Re-public of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
28/35

17/12/2018

Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Is-lands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thai-land,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining
none
Draft resolution IX was adopted by 188 votes to 2,
with no abstentions (resolution 73/171).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Draft resolution
X is entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions”. The Assembly has before it two draft
amendments, which have been circulated as documents
A/73/L.57 and A/73/L.58.
In accordance with article 90 of the rules of
procedure, the Assembly will take a decision on draft
amendment A/73/L.57.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States on a point of order
Ms. Korac (United States of America): For
clarification purposes, would it be possible for the
beginning of the draft amendment to be read out?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Draft amendment
A/73/L.57 begins with the following:
“Delete the fifteenth preambular paragraph,
which reads “Acknowledging that extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions may under certain
18-44315

17/12/2018

circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against
humanity ...”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested on the draft amendment circulated
as document A/73/L.57.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Bahrain, Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Guyana, Iraq,
Libya, Maldives, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles,
South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechten-stein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Zambia
Abstaining
Algeria, Angola, Barbados, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Comoros, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s

A/73/PV.55

Democratic Republic, Liberia, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Papua
New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Sri Lanka, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet
Nam
Draft amendment A/73/L.57 was rejected by 25
votes to 100, with 37 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested on the draft amendment circulated
as document A/73/L.58.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Bahrain, Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Eritrea, Guyana, Iraq, Libya, Myanmar,
Oman, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia

18-4431529/35

A/73/PV.55

Abstaining
Algeria, Angola, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Ethiopia, Guinea, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritius,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Nepal,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Sao Tome
and Principe, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam
Draft amendment A/73/L.58 was rejected by 22
votes to 99, with 35 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We will now
proceed to take action on draft resolution X, as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
30/35

17/12/2018

States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Against
none
Abstaining
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Botswana,
Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad,
China, Comoros, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tonga, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution X, as a whole, was adopted
by 125 votes to none, with 60 abstentions
(resolution 73/172).
Mr. Ten-Pow (Guyana), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The Acting President: Draft resolution XI is
entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the rights to peaceful
assembly and freedom of association”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
18-44315

17/12/2018

Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Nor-way, Oman,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against
none
Abstaining
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Palau, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution XI was adopted by 154 votes to
none, with 35 abstentions (resolution 73/173).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XII is
entitled “Terrorism and human rights”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

A/73/PV.55

Draft resolution XII was adopted (resolution
73/174).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIII is
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Against:
Afghanistan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait,
Maldives, Nauru, Oman, Papua New Guinea, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,

18-4431531/35

A/73/PV.55

17/12/2018

Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago,
United States of America, Yemen, Zimbabwe

entitled “Terrorism and human rights”. We take the
floor today to fully state our understanding of the text.

Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Belarus, Cameroon,
Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana,
Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Mauritania,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nigeria, Philippines, Republic
of Korea, South Sudan, Thailand, Tonga, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia

We understand paragraph 8 of the resolution to
refer to the importance of ensuring access to justice
and accountability in accordance with applicable
international law. We also understand the reference in
paragraph 9 to States acting in accordance with their
obligations under international law to mean that, if a
State carries out the stated actions within its criminal
justice system, it should do so in a manner consistent
with its applicable international obligations; it should
not be understood to suggest the existence of particular
obligations to implement the actions described.

Draft resolution XIII was adopted by 121 votes to
35, with 32 abstentions (resolution 73/175).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIV is
entitled “Freedom of religion or belief”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution
73/176).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XV is
entitled “Human rights in the administration of justice”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution 73/177).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVI is
entitled “Missing persons”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution
73/178).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVII is
entitled “The right to privacy in the digital age”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVII was adopted (resolution
73/179).
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
delegations wishing to speak in explanation of vote or
position after the adoption of the resolutions.
Ms. Simpson (United States of America): We are
pleased to maintain consensus on resolution 73/174,
32/35

Nothing in the resolution requesting States
to take certain actions to counter terrorism alters
States’ obligations under applicable international law,
including the decisions of the Security Council. We
understand paragraph 13 to mean that States must
comply with their international obligations, including
the non-discrimination provisions of international
human rights treaties to which they are party, as
applicable, when taking measures to counter terrorism
and violent extremism.
With respect to paragraph 14, we reject and dissociate
from it as it is an unfair and thinly veiled attack against
United States material support law. We reject its overly
broad call on States to ensure that counter-terrorism
legislation does not impede humanitarian aid, even if
terrorists benefit from such activities. That could be
read as exempting humanitarian activities from counterterrorism legislation and other measures designed to
prevent the provision of material support and resources
to terrorist groups and individual terrorists for any
reason. While we support the role humanitarian actors
should continue to have in alleviating the suffering of
those who are displaced and otherwise victimized by
terrorism, we stress that there is no obligation under
international law that countries allow the unrestricted
delivery of humanitarian or other assistance to terrorist
groups or individual terrorists, or that countries
allow the provision of support to terrorist groups or
individual terrorists for any purported humanitarian or
other activities they may pursue. That language has no
impact upon the binding obligation of Member States to
prohibit their nationals or those within their territories
from providing funds or other economic resources for
the benefit of terrorist organizations or to individual
terrorists for any purpose, even in the absence of a
link to a specific terrorist act, regardless of whether
18-44315

17/12/2018

or not such support is meant to further the terrorist,
humanitarian or any other goals or activities of a
terrorist or terrorist organization. It is unfortunate that
the misleading and damaging language of paragraph 14
appears in the resolution.
To all those who may seek to rely on such language
in future, we urge them to understand it as calling on
States to ensure only that their counter-terrorism efforts
are implemented appropriately in a manner consistent
with their international obligations and to use future
opportunities to correct that language accordingly. We
are also concerned about the fact that the call on States
not to hinder the work of civil society organizations
in paragraph 28 can be similarly misconstrued. We
understand it to mean only that States must comply
with international obligations in that respect.
Furthermore, we disassociate from paragraph 30,
given its calls to prevent speech that goes beyond the
narrow exceptions to freedom of expression permitted
by our Constitution and article 19 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. We are
committed to cooperating to counter violent extremist
propaganda and incitement to violence on the Internet
and social media. But we believe the new language in
the paragraph goes too far and could be used to support
excessive restrictions on speech, in particular online.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to reiterate that we support the overall
objective of resolution 73/172, entitled “Extrajudicial
summary or arbitrary executions”, the draft form of
which the Third Committee recommended in its report
(A/73/589/Add.2). We abstained in the voting on the
draft resolution because some of its provisions address
contentious issues, concepts and ideas that have no
international legal basis or consensus.
In that regard, I refer to concepts concerning sexual
orientation and sexual identity that are not included in
any international human rights treaty. That contradicts
international rules and benchmarks on human rights
that enjoy unanimity, and contradicts as well the basic
principles that underpin many societies.
As members know, the resolution also contains
references to the International Criminal Court, which
we asked members to vote against.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 74.

A/73/PV.55

(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/
Add.3)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.60)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 88 of its report. In connection
with draft resolution I, the General Assembly has before
it a draft amendment circulated in document A/73/L.60.
Before proceeding, I should like to inform members
that action on draft resolution III, entitled “The
situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol (Ukraine)”, and
draft resolution V, entitled “The situation of human
rights in Myanmar”, is postponed to a later date to allow
time for a review of its programme budget implications
by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action
on draft resolutions III and V as soon as the reports
of the Fifth Committee on their programme budget
implications are available.
I shall now give the floor to delegations wishing to
speak in explanation of vote or position.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): My delegation strongly and totally rejects
draft resolution I, as contained in document A/73/589/
Add.3 and entitled “Situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”, which was
submitted by the European Union and the Japan. The
draft resolution has nothing to do with genuine human
rights, as it is the product of a political plot by hostile
forces that try to disgrace the image of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and overthrow its political
and social system. As we have made clear on several
occasions, the human rights issues mentioned in the
draft resolution have never existed and cannot be
allowed to exist in my country, where we greatly value
the dignity and rights of the human being.
With regard to the material contained in the draft
resolution, those despicable false words were fabricated
by a handful of defectors who escaped after having
committed crimes in my country to sustain their dirty
lives. Therefore, my delegation does not feel any need
to even vote on the draft resolution, which is consistent
with the lying and the plots and distorts the real human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.

18-4431533/35

A/73/PV.55

My delegation expresses its deep concern and
surprise about the fact that the criminal State of Japan,
which in the past committed class-A crimes against
humanity — such as kidnapping, forced enlistment
and sexual slavery — is talking about human rights
issues in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
instead of assuming responsibility for its dirty human
rights record and officially apologizing and offering
compensation to victims. Furthermore, we will not look
on idly at the fact that the European Union and Japan
are provoking confrontation by submitting the draft
resolution against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea by going against the prevailing trend on the
Korean peninsula, at a time when the international
community is making diplomatic efforts to achieve a
peaceful environment to promote our people’s wellbeing.
Although the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea remains ready to attach great importance
to dialogue and cooperation for the promotion and
protection of human rights, it will strongly respond to
put an end to provocative action, such as the adoption
of the anti-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
human rights draft resolution under the pretext of
non-existent human rights issues. My delegation will
neither recognize nor accept the forcibly railroaded
anti-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea human
rights draft resolution. We also never feel any need to
call for a vote.
In conclusion, my delegation categorically rejects all
the draft resolutions against the Russian Federation, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Syrian Arab Republic,
based on our principled position against politicization,
selectivity and double standards on human rights.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation renews its full rejection of
draft resolution IV, entitled “The situation of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic”, in both form and
content. Procedurally, we stress that the key delegation
that submitted the draft resolution, namely, the Saudi
delegation, has no legal or ethical grounds to submit
any draft resolution that deals with the situation of
human rights anywhere in the world.
We confidently and sincerely believe that it is
necessary for Member States to reflect on the shameful
situation that we are currently experiencing, especially
when we see that the representatives of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia — the most dangerous and violent
34/35

17/12/2018

religious dictatorship in the world — are submitting
draft resolutions on the human rights situation in Syria,
which preceded the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by many
light years in promoting and protecting human rights.
On its content, my country in principle opposes
the politicization of this issue and the fact that certain
permanent Member States resort to submitting draft
resolutions targeting specific States for political
reasons, which everyone is aware of, especially given
that the draft resolution is imbalanced and aims to
distort facts and tarnish the image of my country’s
Government and its legitimate institutions.
That is a reflection of the position of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and its destructive policies towards my
country, which is based on its military and political
investments in Wahhabi extremist terrorism with
a view to spreading chaos, toppling the legitimate
Government, undermining the political process and
negatively impacting it, in violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions that underscore that the
political process is exclusively Syrian-owned, without
any foreign intervention.
The royal family rules the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia with a sword, which is evident on the Kingdom’s
flag, using the ascendency of religion while Islam
has nothing to do with that. The royal family strives
to use the surplus in oil revenues to exercise political
pressure and achieve financial polarization within
the Organization. It seeks to destroy the principles
and well-established rules of the work of the United
Nations, as well as undermine the credibility, sincerity
and balance of the Organization.
More clearly, the representatives of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia want members of the Assembly today to
become accomplices and bear false witness to a draft
resolution that calls for measures and well-established
traditions in Syria that have been applied for decades
and centuries, namely, holding elections, possessing
a Constitution and electing a Parliament, while also
giving a role to women, protecting journalists and
ensuring the freedom of press. They are demanding
all that while the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, since its
establishment until present, has not had a parliament,
a constitution or elections. Rather, it oppresses citizens
and persecutes women, religious and ethnic minorities
and expatriates. Recently, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
discovered a new way to enjoy human rights, which was
18-44315

17/12/2018

to use its diplomatic offices to kill and dismember a
dissident Saudi journalist who opposed the royal family.
That raises the following question: Where is Saudi
Arabia on implementing those rightful demands as
its people languish under the yoke of sheikhdoms,
which have nothing to do with either parliaments
or constitutions? Those sheikhdoms are ashamed
of women in their communities, as was the case in
the pre-Islamic era when the population of those
sheikhdoms used to bury baby girls alive because they
were ashamed of them.
We are not naïve, and we know fully well that
the delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
always been a tool in the hands of those who support
terrorism in my country, Syria. But whoever pushed
the Saudi delegation to submit that draft resolution is
a hypocrite and a liar. For eight years, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia has been at the forefront of targeting
stability and security in my country, Syria, within the
General Assembly by submitting a draft resolution on
the human rights situation and democracy in Syria.
We urge the majority of the States Members of
the Organization to not engage in such a farce, which
history will prove is one of the setbacks of the United
Nations. How could it not be so when we are witnessing
the representatives of a State beheading people in its
streets under the pretext of religion while calling for
democracy in a State with a well-established tradition
and history of thousands of years, namely, Syria?
Speaking of hypocrisy and lying, many of the
countries that co-sponsored the draft resolution — and
here we single out those Governments that are members
of the so-called global coalition — also partook in
the perpetration of the most abominable crimes that
violated human rights in Syria when they engaged in the
illegitimate military operations under the leadership of
the United States of America and destroyed the city of
Raqqa, killing thousands of its population. To date, their
bodies are still buried under the rubble of the city. They
also participated in destroying bridges, infrastructure,
gas stations, energy plants, agricultural land and
factories, as well as public and private properties, in the
Syrian Arab Republic. In addition, they pillaged Syrian
artefacts and cultural heritage and traded it, under the
false pretext of combating Da’esh.

A/73/PV.55

The adoption of this Saudi draft resolution will set
a serious precedent that will be used on any Member
State when Governments that practice politicization
and financial polarization target those who oppose
their policies, hegemony and influence.
Again, I call on those present to be cautious as to the
abnormal practices that some Member States are using
to politicize human rights mechanisms and leverage
them as pressure on some Member States. The Syrian
Arab Republic considers voting in favour of this socalled Saudi draft resolution to be an act of aggression
against Syria. We will spare no effort to exercise our
sovereign national rights and take all measures against
the co-sponsors and those who vote in favour of it, so
as to isolate them from any contribution or role in the
Syrian-owned political process. Furthermore, we will
ensure their exclusion from any reconstruction efforts.
We believe that there are Governments that
have to appease the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
political reasons or financial considerations, but those
Governments should do so either by being silent with
regard to the Kingdom’s record, which is replete with
human rights violations, or situations that are related to
them, and not at the expense of my country, Syria, and
the fate and freely expressed independent aspirations
of its people. Again, my country’s delegation requests
a recorded vote on this draft resolution, and urges
Member States to vote against it.
In conclusion, I congratulate Saudi Arabia and the
other Arab States that co-sponsored this draft resolution
on the inclusion of Israel on the list of co-sponsors. That
demonstrates the nature and motives of Saudi Arabia,
while the Saudi-Israeli coalition exposes the nature of
such a draft resolution.
The Acting President: I thank the interpreters for
their forbearance. We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote for this meeting. We shall hear the
remaining speakers at 3 p.m. here in the Hall, followed
by consideration of the remaining reports of the Third
Committee. The Assembly will then consider sub-item
(b) of agenda items 3, sub-item (a) of agenda item 34
and sub-item (b) of agenda item 116.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

18-4431535/35
