S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4327th meeting
Wednesday, 13 June 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Cooney
Mr. Ward
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Kuchinsky
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Hume

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Eighth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2001/572).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-40971 (E)

*0140971*

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Uganda in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Beyendeza
(Uganda) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation, too, is
grateful for the briefings that we heard this morning.
We note the consistency of the assessments made
by the Secretary-General in his report and by the recent
Security Council mission in its report. The Council
members’ increasingly common analysis of and
approach to the Great Lakes region is indeed a good
basis for our deliberations this week on extending the
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
The progress made in the peace process during
the past few months is encouraging. At the same time,
the challenges at hand as we prepare for the third phase
of MONUC are enormous, as illustrated in the
Secretary-General’s report. The risk requires a
carefully balanced approach which would allow us to
play our part in maintaining the momentum of the
peace process while minimizing, to the extent possible,
the scope for mission creep. It is important that the new
MONUC mandate be given, to the greatest extent
possible,
in
conformity
with
the
relevant
recommendations in the Brahimi report.
Norway is supportive of the recommendation in
the Secretary-General’s report to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for 12 months, until
15 June 2002. We share his assessment that MONUC
and the United Nations will be engaged in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for a considerable
time. We believe that, by extending the mandate for
one year, the international community is showing its

2

commitment to supporting peace and security and to
helping alleviate the sufferings of the people of the
region.
We are supportive of the Secretary-General’s
request for additional personnel for MONUC. We are
especially happy to see the proposed strengthening of
the civilian component and we see the necessity of
strengthening the operation’s logistical capacity.
However, we would have preferred to see a more
detailed plan for the use of additional personnel.
Norway also shares the Secretary-General’s
concern about reports of eastward movements of armed
groups and their incursion into Rwanda, Burundi and
Tanzania. This concern underlines the necessity of
establishing a viable programme of disarmament,
demobilization,
resettlement,
reintegration
and
repatriation for armed groups, as identified in the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. I note, however, the
Secretary-General’s assessment that the plans provided
to date by the parties are not a sufficient basis for
further United Nations action in this regard. Pressure
on the parties must thus be maintained in order to have
a proper plan for disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement, reintegration and repatriation devised.
Likewise, pressure must be applied vis-à-vis the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its allies to end any support for the negative forces
operating in the region. We also share the view
expressed by the Secretary-General that there can be no
lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without a comprehensive settlement of the situation in
Burundi.
The problem of assuring effective civilian
administration, including the security and safety of the
civilian population, remains a serious challenge to
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We agree with the notion that this is the
responsibility of the parties with de facto control and
we urge those in control to address this problem in a
serious manner. We share the view that human rights,
child protection and civil affairs officers will help to
protect the safety of the civilian population.
We remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation and the use of child soldiers
throughout the region. Special Representative Olara
Otunnu’s statement today on the exploitation of
children provided an extremely grim picture. Concerted
and urgent efforts are called for by the government

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

forces, as well as the rebel groups. We look forward to
working with Olara Otunnu on his five-point plan. The
international community must relentlessly address the
aspects relating to the humanitarian situation.
Norway would like to reiterate its support for
regional initiatives to bring peace to the Great Lakes
region.
Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank you, Sir, for having convened this public
meeting pursuant to the issuance of the eighth report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), which we commend.
My delegation welcomes the presence here today
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu. We thank him for his
statement and commend the initiative of his
Government to initiate direct, high-level negotiations
with its neighbours and its decision to prohibit the
recruitment of child soldiers and to order the
demobilization of those already recruited.
Our thanks also go to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, for his introduction of the report and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for
his oral briefing this morning. We entirely subscribe to
the recommendations and programme of action on
child soldiers that have been put forward.
The report before us today follows that which we
considered here only a few days ago in the wake of the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region. It
allows us, as did the other, to continue to entertain
optimism — cautious optimism, of course — with
regard to the Lusaka peace process. My delegation
agrees with the observations and conclusions of the
report and would like to make the following comments.
First, despite important progress made on various
aspects of the Lusaka process, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that there can be no lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without a
comprehensive settlement of the situation, particularly
that which prevails in Burundi. In that connection, we
strongly urge the continuation of bilateral summit
meetings to achieve agreements based, inter alia, on
common interests and mutual respect for the territorial

integrity, national sovereignty and security of the
States of the region.
Secondly, we are also of the view that the future
of the Lusaka process depends on the commitment and
cooperation of the parties. In that connection, we take
due note of the significant progress achieved in the
disengagement of forces and of the withdrawal and
announced withdrawal of certain foreign forces from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are still greatly concerned, however, over the
reluctance and manifest lack of zeal shown by the
Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie and the
Front de libération du Congo towards, respectively, the
demilitarization of Kisangani and disengagement in
Equateur Province. This situation, which is
dangerously hampering the process, should no longer
be tolerated by the Security Council. The Council’s
resolutions and the instruments of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement must be implemented.
Thirdly, we subscribe to the idea of a transition to
phase III deployment of MONUC. Such a transition
should be brief and allow for the completion of
planning for all the components of phase III. In that
connection, we support the idea of a meeting in the
context of the partnership between the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement and the Security
Council next September.
Fourthly, with respect to the economic and
humanitarian situation, we reiterate the appeal made to
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
We have already welcomed the opening of the
Congo River to navigation. We support the process of
establishing a Congo River Basin commission and are
prepared to endorse the concept of opening a
humanitarian corridor to ease a situation that needs no
description, since the figures speak for themselves.
Lastly, we support the extension of the mandate
of MONUC for another 12 months and will vote in
favour of the draft resolution authorizing that
extension.
I cannot conclude without paying a vibrant to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ambassador
Kamel Morjane, and, through him, to his entire team
and to all the agencies on the ground for their efforts to
restore peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

3

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to welcome Mr. Léonard She
Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to express
appreciation for the informative presentations of
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu,
as well as for the presence of Mr. Annabi.

operate on Congolese territory. We are concerned about
recent reports on cross-border moves of contingents of
the so-called negative forces; these movements
constitute a kind of repatriation without disarmament
and with serious consequences. In this regard, we
underscore the upcoming meeting to be held between
President Joseph Kabila and President Paul Kagame in
the capital of Tanzania.

The broad consensus in the Security Council on
the goals and purposes that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) must achieve in implementing
the Lusaka Agreement makes it unnecessary for me to
speak at length at this meeting.

The second point is that my delegation wishes to
express its deep concern about the humanitarian
situation that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
experiencing, particularly caused by the massive
displacement of people who are fleeing violence, the
interruption of traditional sources of food supplies, the
systematic plundering of the country’s natural
resources and the impact of the war on children’s lives,
as was eloquently presented by Mr. Olara Otunnu.

The Council members who have preceded me
have highlighted various aspects of the important
commitment to peace that we have with regard to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbouring countries. I had the opportunity to
express that commitment personally to various
interlocutors during our recent visit to the Great Lakes
region. Therefore, allow me to make just a few
comments on three points.
First, my delegation shares the view put forward
by the Secretariat in its report that the insufficient
information from the parties to the Lusaka Agreement
prevents, at this time, the formulation of a broad
strategy for the next phase of MONUC operations. In
this regard, non-compliance with the deadlines for the
presentation of timetables for the withdrawal of foreign
troops and the total demobilization of armed groups, as
well as certain delays in separating forces, is naturally
somewhat disconcerting to us. However, this does not
mean a loss of confidence in the process, because we
also see positive signs. We urge the members of the
Political Committee to deliver the information
necessary to move to the next phase of MONUC
operations.
Peace is an asset for which we must continue to
strive, even in the face of strong resistance. Therefore,
through this Council we will persist in peace activities
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but our
commitment will inevitably depend on the degree of
fulfilment of obligations shown by our partners.
We attach great importance to bilateral meetings
between the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, with a view
to ending the support provided to the armed groups that

4

We find totally unacceptable the figure of 16
million people who have acute food needs and
difficulty in gaining access to humanitarian
organizations. We must promote an agreement between
authorities and rebel groups to establish a human
corridor for food delivery, as proposed by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
The question of the protection of the civilian
population in areas that have been or will be evacuated
by rebel groups causes us concern. If protection is the
fundamental responsibility of the de facto occupiers of
each region, the reports that are reaching us on respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law
are cause for anxiety. We support the prompt
deployment of human rights monitors in sufficient
numbers to accomplish this monitoring task.
We also note that the situation of the population
has worsened as a result of the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the widespread sale of arms to violent
countries and groups involved in the conflict,
particularly small arms, which cause the majority of
deaths and injuries among the population. We urge
arms suppliers to exercise greater control over arms
sales to this region of Africa.
With regard to the situation of children in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we support the
five-point
plan
presented
by
the
Special
Representative, Mr. Otunnu, and we will contribute so
that its recommendations will be reflected in the draft
resolution to be adopted at the end of this week.

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly and lastly, my delegation wishes to pay
an admiring tribute and to express its appreciation to
the personnel of MONUC and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the excellent
work they are doing. We are prepared to authorize the
extension of the Mission mandate, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, with a view to a subsequent third
phase. Therefore, we will support the text of the draft
resolution, to be submitted by the French delegation,
which is now in the negotiating phase and which will
seek the progressive strengthening of the Mission
through the expansion of its civilian staff component.
The President: Bangladesh was supposed to take
the floor and I was supposed to make a statement in my
national capacity, but as a gesture to the non-Council
members, I will take the floor after they have spoken.
I invite the representative of Sweden to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Norström (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central
and Eastern European Countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.
First of all, I would like to express our
appreciation here for the presence of the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. She Okitundu. We are also very grateful for the
briefings by Mr. Guéhenno and Mr. Otunnu that we
heard this morning. I would also like to welcome and
recognize the presence of Mr. Hédi Annabi.
For several months developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have inspired
increasing hope. In his report of 8 June, the SecretaryGeneral describes a situation not merely of obstacles
and difficulties, but also of opportunities and positive
trends. The European Union notes with satisfaction the
Secretary-General’s conclusion that progress has been
made in key areas since April and his cautious
optimism regarding the immediate future of the Lusaka
peace process.

The European Union remains fully supportive of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, the consensual basis
for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Sustained advances should be ensured on all aspects of
the agreement, in particular the orderly withdrawal of
foreign troops, the national dialogue in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration,
repatriation
or
resettlement of the armed groups. Continued progress
depends, first and foremost, on the parties to the
conflict. The role of the United Nations and the
international community, including the European
Union, and the contribution they can make to peace and
development in the region is clearly defined by the
actions of the parties themselves.
We therefore urge all parties to honour their
commitments fully and in earnest, and to comply
unconditionally with their obligations, thus enabling
further progress to take place in the Lusaka peace
process.
As for the role of the United Nations, important
decisions are to be taken by the Council within the next
couple of days on the future of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). Taking into account the current
situation and both its positive and its troubling
characteristics, the European Union agrees with the
Secretary-General that the momentum generated by the
disengagement of forces and the withdrawals of foreign
forces should not be lost. The European Union thus
welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-General to
extend the mandate of MONUC and to deploy, within
the force level of 5,537, additional personnel for the
functions envisaged for a transitional period leading up
to the third phase.
The European Union welcomes the cooperation
extended to MONUC by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its allies, and
the cooperation between MONUC and the Rwandan
Patriotic Army (RPA) and the Ugandan People’s
Defence Forces (UPDF). However, the difficulties and
delays caused by the Front de libération du Congo
(FLC) and the Rassemblement congolais pour la
démocratie (RCD) are unacceptable. The European
Union considers particularly serious the detainment of
MONUC observers by the FLC and the targeting of
MONUC in disinformation campaigns. While
welcoming the fact that disengagement and verification
are near completion in three of the four sectors, we also

5

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

note with concern that obstructions have occurred, in
particular by the FLC. All parties should finalize their
disengagement and respect the new defensive
positions. International humanitarian law must be
respected, including in areas from which troops have
been disengaged.
The recent Security Council mission to the region
emphasized that the Council expected to see steady,
consistent progress and strict adherence by the parties
to all agreements and timetables regarding the
withdrawal of foreign forces and the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of armed groups. The European Union
fully endorses that position. As regards that process, it
should be based primarily on voluntary reintegration
and repatriation in order to be effective. The
international community may support such a voluntary
process, but the primary responsibility for
implementation lies with the parties themselves. In
particular, the Governments of Zimbabwe and of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should cease all
support to such armed groups, and Rwanda should
honour its commitment with a view to repatriation and
reintegration. The European Union recognizes the need
to differentiate among various categories of members
of the armed groups, and to tackle urgently the
question of groups of Rwandan origin. Furthermore,
the demobilization of child soldiers should be a top
priority.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and throughout the region
remains an area of most serious concern, as reflected in
all recent reports of the Secretary-General. In order for
genuine improvement to be possible, all parties must
guarantee secure, rapid and unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance. While welcoming the fact that
access to vulnerable populations is improving, we note
that faltering security remains a constant threat to
crucial humanitarian and rehabilitation efforts, as
illustrated by the deplorable attack on six workers of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
in April.
The difficult humanitarian conditions, which
particularly affect women and children, must be given
increased international attention and financial
assistance. The European Commission has decided to
provide 35 million euros in humanitarian assistance
and 120 million euros to finance poverty alleviation
and the promotion of human rights. The European

6

Union remains willing to contribute further to the
improvement of the humanitarian situation and to the
economic regeneration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Namibia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Theron (Namibia): Let me start, Sir, by
saying how happy my delegation is to see you
presiding over the work of the Security Council. We
also want to thank you for arranging this important
meeting today. I would also like to take this
opportunity to commend Ambassador Cunningham for
the excellent manner in which he conducted the work
of the Council in May. I would further like to thank
Mr. Guéhenno for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General and Mr. Otunnu for his important
briefing this morning. My delegation welcomes His
Excellency Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
today’s meeting.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council in document S/2001/572 takes cognizance of
and plans for progress in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, although
cautiously and while recognizing that the progress is
still limited. However, my delegation welcomes the
proposed steps and confirms the positive developments
since the last Council meeting.
In that regard, while noting the present limit of
5,537 for the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), my delegation trusts that that
number will soon be appropriately increased, taking
into consideration the many functions to be performed
by MONUC.
My delegation furthermore welcomes the
progress reported with regard to the inter-Congolese
dialogue. We commend the work done by the neutral
facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, and in particular his
announcement that a preparatory meeting to the
dialogue will take place on 16 July. We note that his
associates will visit all 11 provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in preparing for the dialogue
process. It is furthermore our view that the preparatory
meeting and the dialogue can take place on Congolese
territory, and that they should be without outside
interference.

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

We note that the humanitarian situation remains
precarious and that serious human rights violations are
continuing, in particular in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We support
immediate measures aimed at stopping that tragedy. We
also hope that, along with their associates, the
murderers of the six personnel of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) will soon be
apprehended and brought to justice. We commend
Mr. Olara Otunnu for his efforts to highlight and
improve the plight of children in armed conflict, and
we welcome the positive results achieved thus far.
We continue to insist that the Council should
ensure that Kisangani be completely demilitarized in
accordance with resolution 1304 (2000). The reasons
advanced for its continued occupation by military
forces of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
démocratie (RCD) are unfounded, since MONUC
troops are perfectly capable of providing security for
the city. Moreover, the expansion of MONUC’s
presence, as proposed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, will adequately take care of any security
concerns. We agree with the Secretary-General’s
assessment of the role that Kisangani could play in the
economic and political regeneration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The economic revival of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is of extreme importance to alleviate the
suffering of the Congolese people and to improve the
disastrous economic situation in their country. We
welcome initiatives already undertaken to achieve that
goal, and in particular we note the announcement just
made by the representative of Sweden. But we also
want to stress that massive bilateral and multilateral
efforts will be required, considering the size and the
population of the country. The international community
should therefore continue to assist Congo’s economic
revival efforts.
In that regard, we recognize that the opening of
the riverine network is an important step, and we share
the view that it will have benefits not only for trade and
freedom of movement but also for confidence-building
and for the strengthening of national unity. We
therefore deplore the recent threat by the RCD that the
Uruguayan riverine unit will not be allowed to reach
Kisangani. My delegation wishes also to reiterate the
importance of the co-location of the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) with MONUC in Kinshasa to allow

the two bodies to coordinate military planning for the
next stages of their operations.
As we have stated consistently, Namibia remains
committed to the Lusaka peace process and to the full
implementation of the Kampala and Harare
disengagement plans and sub-plans. Hence, my
delegation recognizes the importance of a detailed plan
and modalities for assistance to be provided by the
United Nations. In that regard, I wish to confirm here
that on 3 May Namibia submitted to the JMC the
required information on its forces, and that our
withdrawal plans are on course, as required by relevant
Security Council resolutions. My delegation can also
confirm that, as mentioned this morning by Mr.
Guéhenno, it is the intention of the Namibian
Government to have all Namibian forces withdrawn
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the end
of August.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes all efforts
towards furthering the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We therefore support the
extension of the mandate of MONUC for 12 months,
until 15 June 2002. Furthermore, we join the SecretaryGeneral in expressing appreciation to Mr. Kamel
Morjane, to the MONUC Force Commander and to the
men and women of MONUC for their efforts to help
restore peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We wish Mr. Morjane a speedy recovery.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to extend our thanks to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate and for
affording us the opportunity to participate in this
meeting on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and on the role we expect the United
Nations to play in this important phase of the peace
process in that country. I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the Foreign Minister of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our two countries
have excellent relations that serve to unite us.
The delegation of Egypt has considered with
interest the report of the Secretary-General on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have also
followed the activities of the Security Council mission
that visited the Great Lakes region in the second half of
May this year, as well as the valuable results that were

7

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

achieved during that mission. In this regard, my
delegation would like to make a number of specific
points that we believe need to be stressed.
First, the peace process in the Congo has lately
witnessed a number of consecutive steps that have
served to maintain the current momentum aimed at
implementing the Lusaka Agreement in both its
military and political components and at reaching a
final and comprehensive settlement of the conflict,
which has been tearing the Congo apart and draining
the energies of its neighbours for almost three years.
These steps have been reflected, inter alia, in the
continued respect by the parties of the ceasefire; in the
implementation of the disengagement plans between
their forces in the field; and in their agreement on the
principal framework that will govern the processes of
withdrawing all foreign forces from the country and of
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating the armed
groups taking refuge on Congolese soil.
Secondly, and in the same vein, we now look to
the United Nations to intensify its efforts to support the
parties in implementing their commitments in
accordance with the Lusaka Agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions; to create an
environment conducive to the withdrawal of foreign
forces from the Congo and to ending the problems
posed by armed groups; and to establish the necessary
arrangements to restore the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Congo and address the security
concerns of its neighbours.
While we welcome the recommendation in the
Secretary-General’s report on the revised concept of
operations for the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
and on the deployment of additional troops, observers
and civilian personnel in the operation, we also hope
that the United Nations will proceed to prepare the
necessary plans to establish and deploy the third,
expanded phase of the Mission so that the period we
are about to enter — which we assume will be a
transitional one — will not be prolonged, and so that
the situation in the field will not become entrenched
where it currently stands, that is, lacking the
implementation of the specific steps needed to bring
the Lusaka Agreement to its desired conclusion.
Thirdly, while we are aware of the essential
prerequisites that must be met prior to the deployment
of phase III of the operation — at the forefront of

8

which is the provision by the parties of relevant
information on the numbers, locations and armaments
of their forces and those of the armed groups — we
would also like to stress that the United Nations must
be ready to address the challenges and risks it may face
in such an expanded operation, as it did in Sierra Leone
and, before that, in East Timor.
The Congo operation, like all other peacekeeping
operations, will by its nature and the nature of the
mission area be subject to a number of risks that cannot
be avoided. This, however, should not serve as a cause
for hesitation in the establishment of phase III, so long
as the two primary conditions that the SecretaryGeneral previously set for the deployment of United
Nations personnel in the Congo are met. Those
conditions are the provision of the necessary security
guarantees for MONUC personnel, and the
reaffirmation by the parties of their commitment to
respect and implement the Lusaka Agreement.
Fourthly, of course we cannot ask the United
Nations to undertake the primary role in the efforts to
resolve the conflict in the Congo without reaffirming
the responsibility that the parties themselves bear in
moving forward with the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and their responsibility to demonstrate the
necessary political will — not only to prepare detailed
plans for the withdrawal of foreign forces and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
armed groups, but also to implement what is agreed
upon in good faith and to resolve any differences that
may emerge between them within the Joint Military
Commission, the Political Committee and the interCongolese dialogue under the facilitation of former
President Masire.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
encourage the parties to intensify their diplomatic
contacts at the highest level in a manner that strongly
drives the peace process forward and contributes to the
building of trust among them at this critical time. In
this regard, we welcome the steps being taken to
organize a meeting between Presidents Kabila and
Museveni, and we express the hope that those efforts
will extend to arranging similar direct contacts between
the leaderships in Kinshasa and Kigali.
Fifthly, we have also witnessed the increasing
importance given by the Security Council and the
Secretariat to the need to enhance the international
support that must accompany the implementation of the

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

Lusaka Agreement in resuscitating the Congolese
economy, rebuilding the infrastructure that was
destroyed by the conflict and rehabilitating the social,
educational and health institutions of the country.
While we welcome the ideas and initiatives that the
international community has begun to put forward in
that regard, we also express the hope that the
international community will prove its resolve to build
a genuine peace in the Congo and to eradicate the basic
causes that may prevent permanent peace and stability
from taking root in the country. It should do so by
generously contributing to the various programmes that
may be put in place so that they do not remain a dead
letter, as well as to end the suffering of the Congolese
people, who have been deprived for many decades of
enjoying the life of dignity and prosperity that they
deserve.
Sixthly, Egypt, will continue its active role in
contributing to the restoration of permanent peace in
the Congo and in the Great Lakes region — whether
through its bilateral contacts with the parties concerned
or within the Organization of African Unity. We will
also maintain our support for the courageous efforts of
the United Nations — represented by the Security
Council and the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Kamel Morjane — as well as our
contribution to MONUC, in which Egypt is proud to be
the largest provider of military observers among the 43
countries participating in the operation.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
deep concern at the ongoing events in the Central
African Republic following the failed coup attempt that
erupted in Bangui over two weeks ago. Perhaps those
events will strengthen the conviction of the United
Nations that the security and political situation in the
Great Lakes region continues to be extremely fragile
and that any undue haste in terminating or reducing the
presence of the United Nations in the region — or a
failure to confront the inter-twined problems that
continue to threaten international peace and security —
will only result in multiple consequences of a much
more serious nature than those already afflicting this
important and strategic region in the heart of the
African continent.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Akasaka (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting as a followup to the Security Council’s recent mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. First of all, let me
welcome the presence of Mr. She Okitundu, Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
would also like to thank Mr. Otunnu for his excellent
report this morning.
My Government commends the Security Council
for its work and for its timely report. We read with
great interest the Secretary-General’s eighth report on
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which
is based on the mission’s report. We appreciate its
focus on reconstruction and development issues in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and note its
recommendation that MONUC’s mandate be extended
for one year.
Japan has been closely following the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, recognizing
that world stability and prosperity cannot prevail in the
twenty-first century unless the problems of Africa are
resolved. For this reason, my Government places great
emphasis on the need to support the African countries’
own efforts for their development, as well as conflictprevention
measures
and
refugee-assistance
programmes. Today I would like to emphasize the
following points with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
First, my Government has long emphasized that
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs
to be considered in the wider context of consolidating
peace throughout the region, and must therefore be
pursued with a comprehensive and integrated approach.
Peace-building and post-conflict reconstruction and
development, democratization and a halt to the illicit
exploitation of natural resources must likewise be
pursued from a regional perspective. Thus, my
Government has argued that, as part of its efforts to
achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Security
Council should also address the economic and security
problems in neighbouring Burundi, Rwanda and
Uganda. For this reason the recent deterioration of the
situation in Burundi is all the more worrisome to my
Government. Japan shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that there can be no lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without a
comprehensive settlement of the situation in Burundi.

9

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, my Government welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that, while
MONUC continues to complete phase II of its
operations, the Security Council authorize the
transition to phase III of MONUC deployment, which
entails the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement of armed groups. We believe this
overlapping of the activities for the completion of
phase II with the preparatory activities of phase III will
reduce the risk of losing momentum in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Thirdly, an expansion of the civilian components
of MONUC is necessary if the Security Council is to
have a longer-term commitment to the peace process in
the region.
Fourthly, Japan is greatly encouraged by Sir
Ketumile Masire’s announcement that a preparatory
meeting for the inter-Congolese dialogue is to begin on
16 July. We sincerely hope that this will advance the
democratization process, and we call upon the
international community to support the facilitation
efforts of Sir Ketumile Masire.
Finally,
my
Government
welcomed
the
announcement of the reopening of the Congo River as
well as the proposed establishment of a Congo River
Basin Commission. The revitalization of trade by
reopening the country’s main inland waterway system
would be a significant milestone on the path towards
economic reconstruction and development.
Japan has provided emergency and humanitarian
assistance as well as financial contributions to support
the activities of the Joint Military Commission and the
inter-Congolese dialogue. As the situation becomes
more stable, we look forward to considering extending
assistance to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for its nation-building efforts.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Burundi. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate you sincerely, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. The delegation of Burundi does
not have the slightest doubt that you will lead the work
of the Council with your usual flair. I also wish to
welcome to the Council the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

10

This public meeting of the Security Council on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo gives me an
opportunity to pay tribute to the Council for its
persistent efforts to restore peace to the Great Lakes
region of Africa, as reflected, inter alia, in the
Council’s most recent visit to the region.
In regard to the eighth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the report of the Security Council
mission to the Great Lakes region, Burundi would like
to recall the current threats to the security of our
country and to the inter-Burundian peace process.
First of all, the good prospects for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are, paradoxically
but intentionally, at the root of the unfortunate
evolution of the security situation in Burundi. The
Secretary-General and the Security Council have
understood this, and we are grateful to them for
affirming that there will be no lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo if it must come at
the expense of peace in Burundi.
Secondly, the countries of the region that
sponsored the peace agreements signed at Arusha on 28
August 2000 must work as a united front to bring about
an end to the war in Burundi. This is the most fervent
wish of the Government and the people of Burundi.
Peace will be regional or there will be no peace, as
those who know the socio-political realities of this part
of Africa are aware.
Every passing day points to a certain duplicity on
the part of some countries of the region — an agenda
that is no longer concealed, since some have said to the
Security Council mission that the negative forces are
negative here but not negative there, and that, in fact,
they are not negative at all. This is troubling, given the
fact that the Lusaka and Arusha agreements were
signed under the moral umbrella of the representatives
of all of the countries concerned from that same region.
The delegation of Burundi wishes to recall here
that as long as the Forces pour la défense de la
démocratie (FDD) and the Forces nationales de
libération (FNL) — Burundi armed groups — do not
put an end to the hostilities, as long as they are not
disarmed in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement
and repatriated to Burundi to be reintegrated
socially — in the case of those who are not found
guilty of crimes under the Arusha Agreement — those
groups will be considered negative forces, to be

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

combated and brought to justice in Burundi, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in any other
country. Indeed, they constitute a regional danger, just
like their allies, the Interahamwe and the former
Rwandan armed forces (ex-FAR), who became
mercenaries of genocide in Africa.
What must be done? First of all, the Government
of Burundi asks the Security Council not to allow the
Lusaka and Arusha processes to destroy each other.
The Council must find a formula that can ensure a
deterrent presence at the borders of Burundi with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Tanzania, and
avert the failure of current efforts to restore peace to
the region. It is a fact that the transfer of war from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo towards Burundi or
Rwanda will perpetuate the regional conflict and make
it even crueler.
Secondly, strong pressure must be brought to bear
by those countries that have a real influence on the
Burundian armed groups — in this case Tanzania more
than any other country — to induce those groups to put
an end to the violence and rejoin the peace process. We
are convinced that if the FDD and the FNL had no rear
bases or multifaceted external support, they would long
ago have agreed to the conclusions of the Arusha Peace
Agreement, as they had pledged to do.
We are gratified that today many members of the
Security Council appealed to all those who have
influence on those groups to induce them to take a
more positive stance. But those groups want to
continue the war, even though a political agreement
was signed nine months ago. Unfortunately, the signals
that they are sending out are not encouraging.
We read in the report of the Security Council
mission, we read that the leader of the FDD had put
forward a series of conditions before agreeing to sign
or to negotiate a ceasefire agreement. In fact, it was
political questions that were at issue, questions that are
already answered in the Arusha Agreement.
Today I can inform the Security Council that I
have seen a statement by the FDD in which it says that
it will never sign a ceasefire agreement until political
negotiations with it come to an end. It also states that it
is shocked by the double language of the Security
Council, because, according to the groups, when the
Council met with Mr. Jean Bosco there was some
degree of mutual understanding, and now they do not

understand why the Council is still asking them to put
an end to the hostilities.
The international community must also exert
some pressure. We are pleased to note that the Security
Council is doing so, in particular since its meeting with
the two armed groups, in Kinshasa and in Dar esSalaam. We urge the Council to provide for
enforcement measures, as have been used elsewhere in
similar cases, if the rebellion definitively turns its back
on a negotiated solution.
The violence in Burundi is standing in the way of
the implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
various supporters of the armed groups do not give the
impression of being interested in the implementation of
the peace agreement; they too seem to follow the logic
of military victory. Peace in Burundi must be saved,
and the Arusha Agreement must be saved, before it is
too late.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the will of
the Government of Burundi to continue bilateral
consultations, in particular with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Tanzania, in the hope that
this will yield positive results before it is too late.
I should also like once again to commend the
Security Council’s commitment to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi and
to express the hope that the United Nations will join
the efforts of Nelson Mandela, Ketumile Masire and
the heads of State of the region to give renewed hope
to those peoples of the Great Lakes region of Africa, in
particular women, children, the elderly and even
humanitarian workers, who are dying day by day or are
wandering within and outside the borders.
The Government of Burundi would like to draw
the attention of the Security Council to the fact that
delays are dangerous and action is therefore urgent.
The President: I thank the representative of
Burundi for the very kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Rwanda. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): My
country, Rwanda, would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your leadership and that of your country
as you guide the work of the Security Council during
this month of June. Rwanda would like to assure you

11

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

and all of the members of the Council of its full
cooperation.
Rwanda welcomes the fact that you have
convened a public meeting today to explain, analyse
and extend the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).
The very worst thing that the late President
Mobutu did vis-à-vis our neighbours in the Congo was
to ally himself strongly with those who planned and
committed the genocide in Rwanda. Need we recall
here that Mobutu’s Congolese army fought side by side
with the former Rwandan armed forces (ex-FAR) in
Rwanda in 1990 against Rwandan citizens who were
fighting for their right to a homeland after a forced
exile of more than 30 years?
The reunion of those two friendly armies on the
territory of the Congo has, since July 1994, led to
serious problems for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Frankly, it can only be deplored, especially
since it has caused us tremendous border security
problems with the Congo, our neighbour.
Today, intensive fighting is taking place in two
provinces of Rwanda that border the Congo, namely
the province of Gisenyi and the province of Ruhengeri.
This fighting is taking place between, on the one hand,
those who planned and implemented the genocide in
Rwanda and who found a welcome refuge in the Congo
since 1994, and the Rwandan Patriotic Army on the
other.
It is no secret to anyone that, from Mobutu’s day
to the post-Mobutu period, the Interahamwe militias
and the former Rwandan Army Forces (ex-FAR),
which perpetrated the genocide in Rwanda in 1994,
have been the spearhead of Mobutu’s army. If the
strategy of the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement today is to wage war in the rear by sending
us the Interahamwe militias and ex-Far armed to the
teeth, rather than to send them disarmed and
disengaged pursuant to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, that in itself is, in a way, a violation of the
Agreement. Rwanda vigorously denounces that
approach, which jeopardizes the entire Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement on which we found all our hopes.
It is said that history is perpetually repeating
itself. In 1996 and 1997, the United Nations
Development Programme, other United Nations

12

agencies and Western embassies in Kigali drew maps
of Rwanda, with the provinces bordering on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo coloured red to
indicate the threat of insecurity, ambushes and murder
perpetrated by the ex-FAR and Interahamwe militias
that had infiltrated the country from Congolese
territory. That was the situation in 1996 that prompted
the Rwandese Government to decide to fight them and
to chase them into the territory of the Congo, where
they received shelter and assistance. The same or a
similar scenario is being played out again today. Two
Rwandese border provinces have been designated in
red as dangerous regions where no United Nations
agency, no embassy and no non-governmental
organization can venture, just as it was in 1996-1997.
We believe that the Security Council is dutybound to assist Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the entire region, so that the
Interahamwe militias and ex-Far responsible for the
genocide in Rwanda can be disarmed and disengaged
in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
Various reports and even some statements have
highlighted what has commonly been called the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Rwanda once again reaffirms
loud and clear that it went into the Congo for security
reasons, threatened by the genocidal forces of the
Interahamwe militias and ex-FAR operating from
Congolese territory, and not in search of any natural
resources of that neighbouring country. Proof of this
can be found in the fighting taking place today, as we
speak, along the Rwanda-Congo border, which attests
to the fact that we went into the Congo for no other
reason than the security of our country.
Rwanda therefore believes that we cannot come
to the conclusion, on the basis of information
howsoever troubling, that there has been any illegal
exploitation, as yet unproved, of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel of
Experts has been asked to continue its investigation
and to seek tangible proof of the allegations it made in
its first report. Why not await the issuance of the next
report before we reaffirm anything and proclaim our
intentions?
I cannot conclude my statement without briefly
addressing the eighth report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As members of the

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

Council are aware, we received the Security Council
mission to the region. The mission met with members
of the Political Committee in Lusaka under the
chairmanship of Rwanda. The outcome of the meeting
was set out in a joint communiqué annexed to the
report before us today. It is also known that, in an
effort fully to implement the provisions of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, Rwanda has taken the initiative
to withdraw 200 kilometres from Pweto and to meet all
the deadlines for withdrawal, in conjunction with the
other components of the Agreement, taking into due
account the requirements of our country’s security. Our
head of State had occasion to refer to this in his
meeting at Kigali with the Security Council mission
and on his recent travels in the region, including to
Zimbabwe, where he met with his counterpart,
President Mugabe, and elsewhere on the continent.
We are very pleased that the Secretary-General
has spared no effort in support of the activities of the
Security Council in the region with a view to assisting
our people to re-establish peace, which everyone needs,
especially those children to whom Mr. Otunnu referred
this morning with such emotion and compassion.
We spoke earlier of the chagrin of Congolese and
Rwandese alike at having to live to this day with the
unfortunate legacies of Mobutu in the Congo and
Habyarimana in Rwanda. Following their massacres of
hundreds of thousands in Rwanda in 1994,
Habyarimana’s Interahamwe militias and the ex-FAR
crossed the Rwanda-Congo border with their war
machines and their spirit and philosophy of genocide,
which, unfortunately for us all, they have exported to
the peaceful people of the Congo. It is not my
neighbours to my left at this table who created the
Interahamwe and the ex-FAR, nor is it I myself who am
responsible; they are the legacy of poor leaders on both
sides.
The philosophy of genocide — the exclusion and
extermination of others — that has been entrenched in
the region was invoked by Rwandese civil society in
Kigali during the Security Council’s recent mission to
the Great Lakes region. This spirit and philosophy of
genocide have been propagated throughout the region
by their advocates, the Interahamwe militias and the
ex-FAR, who move freely throughout the region. The
Security Council was unable to make an appropriate,
adequate or precise response in Kigali, but it promised
to continue to reflect on the genocidal spirit that
continues to reign in the Great Lakes region. Why not

undertake a joint action, all of us together — Rwanda,
the Security Council, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — to neutralize those elements, which are
sowing the seeds of the genocidal philosophy in the
Great Lakes region?
In conclusion, I reaffirm the willingness of the
Government of Rwanda to pursue its close cooperation
with the Security Council, with MONUC on the ground
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and with any
other agency that is working for the implementation of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in its entirety.
The President: I thank the representative of
Rwanda for his kind words addressed to me and my
country.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Uganda. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda): My delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and looks
forward to an open and transparent handling of
important issues — as you promised and now have
demonstrated — such as the Democratic Republic of
the Council and others that the Council will discuss
during this month of your presidency.
The Ugandan delegation also welcomes the
participation of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo today. We particularly want to
emphasize the positive and constructive attitudes in his
presentation, not only with regard to the security
concerns of his country but also those of the
neighbours,
including
my
country,
Uganda.
Furthermore, my delegation thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report and the able manner in which it
was presented by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guéhenno. We also take
note of the five-point programme of action proposed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children in Armed Conflict, following his recent visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
For us in Uganda, the challenges raised by
Ambassador Olara Otunnu have been our painful
concerns for some time, following the continuing
abduction of children in the northern part of Uganda by
the Lord’s Resistance Army. We would therefore like to
renew our long-standing invitation to the Special
Representative to make time in his busy schedule to

13

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

visit Uganda on the same subject. Maybe it could make
a difference.
This is the second time in a relatively short period
that the Security Council is devoting yet another open
meeting to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Although this meeting focuses primarily on the report
of the Secretary-General and the draft resolution for the
renewal of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), my
delegation believes that some of the most important
issues that have been covered today have also been
covered in past Council meetings. My delegation will
therefore be brief and will mention a few of the issues
that we feel should be addressed.
First, Uganda has continued to implement the
withdrawal policy within the framework of the Lusaka
Peace Accord, as the Security Council has noted and
has been recognized in the Secretary-General’s report,
S/2001/572, now before the Council. We want to assure
the Council that this will continue.
Secondly, our country continues to cooperate with
MONUC under the planned withdrawal programme and
the
programme for demobilization, disarming,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration. Again, the
report of the Secretary-General has confirmed that
Uganda is the only country, apart from Angola, that
continues to provide information on numbers,
disposition and armaments of our forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We shall continue
to cooperate in this regard.
Thirdly, my delegation notes that the SecretaryGeneral’s report wishes to maintain the same level of
operation, at 5,537 officers and men. In our view, this
is too small a force and too large an area which is
expected to be covered. We therefore propose that this
process should be left open and be reviewed, even at
midterm, to address the concerns as troops are
withdrawn and MONUC is called upon to take more
and more areas under its observation and control.
Fourthly, Uganda wishes once again to share
some views expressed by some members of the
Security Council concerning the issue of the violation
of human rights. Our delegation believes that any
violation of human rights is wrong in any
circumstances, and therefore this matter should be
addressed in the entirety of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

14

Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm its
support for the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, for Uganda believes firmly that that
Agreement addressed two fundamental areas in the root
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and indeed the region. The first area is the
internal dimension of the conflict, which is going to be
settled through a dialogue. The second is the external
dimension, which addresses the security concerns of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo itself and of its
neighbours. My delegation would like to call upon all
the signatories to Lusaka Agreement to implement it
fully.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bangladesh. After
my statement I will give the floor to Ambassador
Otunnu and to Mr. Annabi — if he wishes to take the
floor on behalf of Mr. Guéhenno — if they have any
point to raise.
I first thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno and Special Representative Olara Otunnu for
their presentations, which have set the background for
today’s deliberations. We are engaged here in a
critically important phase of the Lusaka peace process.
The presence of Foreign Minister Leonard Okitundu
with us today testifies to his Government’s abiding
commitment to the peace process and to cooperation
with the United Nations. We have noted his
Government’s position on different aspects of the peace
process, particularly on the matter of child soldiers. I
am sure that his views will provide extremely
important inputs to the Council’s decision-making
process.
I shall limit my observations to three specific
points of special interest to Bangladesh.
First, child soldiers. I was struck by Ambassador
Otunnu’s observation that Congo is being robbed of its
future. Ambassador Otunnu, whose mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo my delegation had
pursued for the past few months, has brought us a grim,
alarming report. The children of that country represent,
as he reports, many faces of suffering: uprooted
children, street children, war orphans, those separated
from parents, child soldiers who are traumatized,
abandoned,
malnourished,
sexually
abused.
Ambassador Otunnu’s findings tell us most
unequivocally that the question of the children of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to be

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

addressed as a matter of particular concern and high
priority.
He has made some practical recommendations,
particularly the five-point programme of action, which
has the support of all political sides. We should give
serious consideration to his proposals. The subregional
dimension of which he spoke with regard to the issue
of child soldiers also needs our attention. A report
published yesterday by the Coalition to Stop the Use of
Child Soldiers says that more than 120,000 children are
currently fighting in Africa. Children are often seen as
cheap and expendable fighters. In that context, I once
again draw the attention of the Council to the proposal
made by the Prime Minister of Bangladesh at the
Security Council summit in September 2000 that of
child-soldier-free zones be declared in various parts of
the world.
The second point of interest to Bangladesh is the
inter-Congolese dialogue. The Security Council
mission considered the inter-Congolese dialogue to be
the centrepiece of the entire peace process. It would
address in a sustainable way the main source of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
welcome the decision of President Masire to convene a
preparatory meeting on 16 July. It should not be further
delayed. The parties should show pragmatism and a
constructive spirit in their negotiations on procedural
and substantive issues. Bangladesh concurs with the
view of the Council mission that the dialogue should
proceed, in all parts of the country, as speedily as
possible. It would also be symbolically important to
hold the dialogue within the territory of the Congo.
My third and final point relates to civilian
components and humanitarian need. The most
important matter before us at this stage is certainly the
preparedness of the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral has been keeping us informed about the
requirements for the third phase, starting more
elaborately with his seventh report (S/2001/373). In his
present report too he draws attention to the need for
considerable expansion of the civilian components of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). The
deployment of those components, including civilian
police, is extremely important in the context of the
need for the protection of civilians and related matters.
We believe that the Council should take the lead in
mobilizing necessary support in that regard.

The Council mission, in its report, underlined the
economic needs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and identified areas for attention, including the
opening of riverine traffic, the renovation of rail and
road networks and quick impact projects. It was
stressed that broader economic assistance should
accompany the peace process. It is time that the
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations
system mobilized economic assistance to sustain peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Bangladesh drew attention to that humanitarian
imperative in April, when the Council considered the
seventh report of the Secretary-General. We hope that
the United Nations funds and programmes, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the international community are
seriously engaged in the planning that was urged about
two months ago. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have suffered the scourge of a
protracted war. We must not fail them as they stake
everything to secure peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on Mr. Otunnu.
Mr. Otunnu: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council, and I thank
you very much for your deep interest and for your
commitment to helping the children of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I have taken note of all the
important comments made by Council members and
other delegations. I will act on them and will continue
the dialogue with the Council. My Office is at the
Council’s disposal to work with its members.
I very much hope that the Council will consider
incorporating into the draft resolution it is preparing
for subsequent adoption some of the practical
recommendations I have placed before it.
Again, I thank you, Sir; I thank the members of
the Council; and I thank all the other delegations that
participated in this discussion. The children of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo need us; we must
not let them down.
The President: Mr. Guéhenno has been unable to
remain in the Council Chamber, so in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hédi Annabi,

15

S/PV.4327 (Resumption 1)

Assistant
Secretary-General
Operations.

for

Peacekeeping

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I call on Mr. Annabi.
Mr. Annabi: I do not think there were any
specific questions addressed to Mr. Guéhenno, and I
know that members are eager to move on to their
meeting with troop-contributing countries. I would like
just to express our thanks to members of the Council
for their kind words of appreciation regarding the work
done by the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in support of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I will gladly convey those
expressions of appreciation to Mr. Morjane. I will also

16

convey to him the good wishes expressed by members
of the Council for his prompt recovery. As members
know, he was unable to be here today because he is
recovering from malaria.
The President: I would indeed ask Mr. Annabi to
convey to Ambassador Morjane our very best wishes
for a speedy recovery. The Council has already sent
him a get-well message, and we are looking forward to
his quick recovery and to his being able to join us so
that we can interact with him.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.
