A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/96
3 March 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.2)]
51/96.

Strengthening of the rule of law

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by adopting the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,1 Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation with
the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Firmly convinced that the rule of law is an essential factor in the
protection of human rights, as stressed in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and should continue to attract the attention of the international
community,
Convinced that through their own national legal and judicial systems
States must provide appropriate civil, criminal and administrative remedies
for violations of human rights,
Recognizing the importance of the role that can be played by the Centre
for Human Rights of the Secretariat in supporting national efforts to
strengthen the institutions of the rule of law,
Bearing in mind that, in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, the
General Assembly entrusted the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights with, inter alia, providing through the Centre and other appropriate
institutions advisory services and technical and financial assistance in the
field of human rights, enhancing international cooperation for the promotion

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

97-76999

/...

A/RES/51/96
Page 2

and protection of all human rights and coordinating human rights activities
throughout the United Nations system,
Recalling the recommendation of the World Conference on Human Rights
that a comprehensive programme be established within the United Nations and
under the coordination of the Centre with a view to helping States in the task
of building and strengthening adequate national structures that have a direct
impact on the overall observance of human rights and the maintenance of the
rule of law,2
Recognizing that the High Commissioner/Centre for Human Rights remains
the focal point for coordinating system-wide attention for human rights,
democracy and the rule of law,
Recalling its resolution 50/179 of 22 December 1995, and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1996/56 of 19 April 1996,3
1.
General;4

Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-

2.
Takes note with interest of the proposals contained in the report
of the Secretary-General for strengthening the programme of advisory services
and technical assistance of the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat in
order to comply fully with the recommendations of the World Conference on
Human Rights concerning assistance to States in strengthening their
institutions which uphold the rule of law;
3.
Praises the efforts made by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Centre to accomplish their ever-increasing tasks with
the limited financial and personnel resources at their disposal;
4.
Expresses its deep concern at the scarcity of means at the
disposal of the Centre for the fulfilment of its tasks;
5.
Notes that the programme of advisory services and technical
assistance does not have assistance funds sufficient to provide any
substantial financial assistance to national projects that have a direct
impact on the realization of human rights and the maintenance of the rule of
law in countries that are committed to those ends but that face economic
hardship;
6.
Welcomes the consultations and contacts initiated by the High
Commissioner with other relevant bodies and programmes of the United Nations
system aiming at the enhancement of inter-agency coordination and cooperation
in providing assistance for the strengthening of the rule of law;

2

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 69.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1996, Supplement
No. 3 (E/1996/23), chap. II, sect. A.
4

A/51/555.
/...

A/RES/51/96
Page 3

7.
Encourages the High Commissioner to pursue these consultations,
taking into account the need to explore new synergies with other organs and
agencies of the United Nations system with a view to obtaining increased
financial assistance for human rights and the rule of law;
8.
Also encourages the High Commissioner to continue to explore the
possibility of further contact with and support of financial institutions,
acting within their mandates, with a view to obtaining technical and financial
means to strengthen the capacity of the Centre to provide assistance to
national projects aiming at the realization of human rights and the
maintenance of the rule of law;
9.
Requests the High Commissioner to accord high priority to the
technical cooperation activities undertaken by the Centre with regard to the
rule of law;
10.
Takes note with appreciation of the proposal of the High
Commissioner to convene a high-level meeting of relevant United Nations
agencies and programmes, in order to analyse means, modalities, financing and
allocation of responsibilities for the implementation of a comprehensive
United Nations programme of assistance for the rule of law, taking into
account the experience of the technical cooperation programme of the Centre;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the results of the contacts
established in accordance with the present resolution, as well as on any other
developments pertaining to the implementation of the above-mentioned
recommendation of the World Conference on Human Rights.
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
