4. Requests the withdrawal without delay from the
Republic of Cyprus of foreign military personnel
present otherwise than under the authority _of international agreements, including those whose withdrawal
was requested by the President of the Republic of
Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, in his letter of 2 July
1974;~ 3
5. Calls upon Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to enter
into negotiations without delay for the restoration ?f
peace in the area and constitutional government m
Cyprus and to keep the Secretary-General informed;
6. Calls upon all parties to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus to
enable it to carry out its mandate;
7. Decides to keep the situation under constant review and asks the Secretary-General to report as appropriate with a view to adopting further measures in
order to ensure that peaceful conditions arc restored
as soon as possible.

1779th meeting~the President of Cyprus, His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios, who had cxp!·esscd the wish
to address the Council, would be received in that
capacity. Consequently, Ambassador Rossides, having
been duly accredited by the Head of State of Cyprus,
would be regarded as representing Cyprus in the current debate.
At the same meeting, the Council also decided to
invite the representatives of Yugoslavia, Romania and
India to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

At its 1781 st meeting, on 20 July 1974, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Mauritius to
p::irtici;1ate, without vote-, in the discussion of the
question.

Adnrtcd 11nr-nimo11sl_v at the
1781 st meeting.

Resolution 353 (1974)
of 20 July 1974

The Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General. at it, l '/79th meeting, ab,1ut the recent developments in Cyprus,
Having heard the statement of the President of the
Republic of Cyprus and the statements of the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey, Greece and other Member States, 22
Having considered at its present meeting further
developments in the island,
Deeply deploring the outbreak of violence and the
continuing bloodshed,
Gravely concerned about the situation which has
led to a serious threat to international peace and security, and which has created a most explosive situation in the whole Eastern Mediterranean area,
Equally concerned ab011t the necessity to restore
the constitutional structure of the Republic of Cyprus,
established and guaranteed by international agreements,
Recalling its resolution 186 ( 1964) of 4 March
1964 and its subsequent resolutions on this matter,
Conscious of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
l. Calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus;
2. Calls upon all parties to the present fighting as
a first step to cease all firing and requests all States
to exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from
any action which might further aggravate the situation;
3. Demands an immediate end to foreign military
intervention in the Republic of Cyprus that is in contravention of the provisions of paragraph 1 above;
22 Jbid.,

Decision
At its 1782nd meeting, on 22 July 1974, the Council
agreed without objection that the Secretary-General
should proceed forthwith to take the mea5ures he had
explained orally to the Council to reinforce the contingents serving with the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus.

R(•solution 354 (197 ii-)
of 23 July 1974

The Security Council,
Reaffirming the provisions of its resolution 353
(I 974) of 20 July 1974,
Demands that all parties to the present fighting comri ly imrncdiatr:!v with the provi"ions of parar:raph 2 of
Security Council resolution 353 ( 1974) calling for an
immediate cessation of all firing in the area and requesting all States to exercise the utmost restraint and
to refrain from any action which might further aggravate the situation.
Adopted unanimously at the
1783rd meeting.

Decision
At its 1784th meeting, held in private on 24 July
1974, the Security Council approved the text of the

Twenty-ninth Year, 1780th meeting.

2 ·1 Ibid.,

7

1779th meeting, para. 29.
