General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

266

Desirous of ensuring the effective participation of the
above-mentioned national liberation movements as observers in the work of international organizations and of regulating, to that end, their status and the facilities, privileges
and immunities necessary for the performance of their
functions,
I. Invites all States that have not done so, in particular
those that are hosts to international organizations or to conferences convened by, or held under the auspices of, international organizations of a universal character, to consider
as soon as possible the question of ratifying, or acceding
to, the Vienna Convention on the Representation of States
in Their Relations with International Organizations of a
Universal Character;
2. Calls once more upon the States concerned to accord
to the delegations of the national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the
League of Arab States, and accorded observer status by
international organizations, the facilities, privileges and immunities necessary for the performance of their functions
in accordance with the provisions of the Vienna Convention
on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations of a Universal Character;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
16 December /982

37/10S.

Report of the Special Committee on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use
of Force in International Relations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976, in
which it invited Member States to examine further the draft
World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in International
Relations 16 as well as other proposals made during the consideration of this item,
Rtcalling also its resolution 3 2/ l 50 of 19 December 1977,
by which it established the Special Committee on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in
International Relations,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 33/96 of 16 December 1978, 34/ l 3 of 9 November 1979, 35/50 of 4 December 1980 and 36/31 of 13 November 1981, in which it
decided that the Special Committee should continue its work,
Taking note of the statement made by the Chairman of
the Special Committee at its session in 1982, 17
Having considered the report of the Special Committee, 18
Taking into account that the Special Committee has not
completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of the principle of the non-use of force in international
relations and for assistance by the United Nations in this
endeavour,
Expressing the hope that the Special Committee will, on
the basis of the proposals before it, complete the mandate
entrusted to it as soon as possible,
16
Official Records of the General Assembl_v, Thirt_v-ji,urth Session. SupplemLnt No. 41 (A/34141 and Corr. I), annex.
17
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 4/ (A/37/41 ), para.

l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use
of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or
such other recommendations as the Committee deems
appropriate;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in order to ensure
further progress in its work, to begin at its forthcoming
session, as the next step, the elaboration of the formulas of
the working paper containing the main elements of the principle of non-use of force in international relations, taking
duly into account the proposals submitted to it and, in particular, the efforts undertaken at its session in 1982;
4. Invites the Governments that have not yet done so
to communicate their comments or suggestions or to bring
them up to date, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 31 /9;
5. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of the
importance of reaching general agreement whenever it has
significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special
Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
7. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on
its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled •'Report of the Special
Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
/07th plenary meeting
/6 December 1982

37/106.

Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its fifteenth session, 19
Recalling that the object of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law is the promotion of the
progressive harmonization and unification of international
trade law,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolutions 2205 (XXI) of
17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission, 3108
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973, by which it increased the
membership of the Commission, 34/142 of 17 December
1979, by which the co-ordinating function of the Commission in the field of international trade law was emphasized,
and 36/32 of 13 November 1981, by which the importance
of the participation of observers from all States and interested international organizations at sessions of the Commission and its Working Groups was affirmed, as well as
its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the Commission on the work of its annual sessions,
Recalling al.l'o its resolutions 320 l (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
and 3362 (S-Vll) of 16 September 1975,

372.

'" Ibid .. Supplement No. 41 (A/37/41).

19

Ibid .. Supplement No. 17 (N37tl7 and Corr. I and 2).

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law, in reducing
or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade,
especially those affecting the developing countries, would
significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation
among all States on a basis of equality, equity and common
interests and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the well-being of all peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the different social and legal systems in harmonizing the rules of
international trade law.
Bearing in mind its resolution 36/111 of 10 December
1981 concerning the draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses,
Stressing the usefulness and importance of sponsoring
symposia and seminars, including those organized on a regional basis, for promoting better knowledge and understanding of international trade law and, especially, for the
training of lawyers from developing countries in this field,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on
the work of its fifteenth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for the progress made in its work and
for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its working methods;
3. Calls upon the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, in particular its Working Group on
the New International Economic Order, to continue to take
account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the new international economic order, as adopted
by the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special
sessions;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the completion by
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law,
through its Working Group on the New International Economic Order, of the examination of studies related to clauses
in contracts for the supply and construction of large industrial works, preparatory to the commencement of work on
drafting a legal guide identifying the legal issues involved
in such contracts and suggesting possible solutions to assist
parties, in particular from developing countries, in their
negotiations; 20
5. Notes that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law has adopted a provision for a universal
unit of account for expressing monetary amounts in international transport and liability conventions and two alternative provisions for adjustment of the limits of liability in
such conventions;2 1
6. Notes with appreciation that the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law has approved recommended guidelines for arbitral institutions and other relevant bodies to assist them in adopting procedures for acting
as appointing authority or for providing administrative services in cases to be conducted under the Commission's Arbitration Rules; 22
7. Reaffirms the mandate of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law as the core legal body
within the United Nations system in the field of international
trade law to co-ordinate legal activities in this field in order
to avoid duplication of efforts and to promote efficiency,
Ibid .. paras. 90-97.
Ibid .. para. 63; see also resolution 37/107.
22 Ibid .. paras. 74-85.
20
21

267

consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization of international trade law, and, in this connection:
(a) Recommends that the Commission should continue
to maintain close co-operation with the other international
organs and organizations active in the field of international
trade law, in particular the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the International Law Commission, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Commission on Transnational Corporations;
(b) Reaffirms the importance of the participation of observers from all States and interested international organizations at sessions of the Commission and its Working
Groups;

8. Reaffirms the importance of bringing into effect the
conventions emanating from the work of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for the global unification and harmonization of international trade law;
9. Reaffirms also the importance, in particular for the
developing countries, of the work of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law concerned with
training and assistance in the field of international trade law
and the desirability for the Commission to sponsor symposia
and seminars, in particular those organized on a regional
basis, to promote training and assistance in the field of
international trade law, and, in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the decision of the Commission to continue to explore various possibilities of collaborating with
other organizations and institutions in the organization of
regional seminars and also to use those occasions for the
promotion of legal texts emanating from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to those States that have
made financial contributions to be used towards the financing of symposia and seminars and of other aspects of the
training and assistance programme of the Commission;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and
institutions that are arranging seminars or symposia in the
field of international trade law, and endorses the request of
the Commission that its secretariat be supplied with copies
of papers or proceedings in connection with these seminars
or symposia in order to assist in the further planning of
regional seminars;
(d) Invites Governments, relevant United Nations organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in financing and organizing
symposia and seminars;
lO. Recommends that the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law should continue its work on the
topics included in its programme of work;
I I . Reaffirms the importance of the programme of work
of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law;
12. Reaffirms also the importance of the increasing role
of the International Trade Law Branch of the Office of Legal
Affairs of the Secretariat as the substantive secretariat of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
in assisting in the implementation of the work programme
of the Commission;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.the
records of the discussion at the thirty-seventh session of the
General Assembly relating to the report of the Commission
on the work of its fifteenth session.

107th plenary meeting
16 December /982
