188

General Assembly-Forty-flrst Session

field of human rights to Govemments, at their request,
within the framework of the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights;
8. Encourages the Secretary-General to complete as
soon as possible and to submit to the General Assembly,
through the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council, a consolidated report, for eventual publication as a United Nations handbook, on national institutions for the use of Govemments, including
information on the various types and models of national
and local institutions for the protection and promotion of
human rights, taking into account differing social and legal systems;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/130.

Development of public information activities in
the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that activities to improve public knowledge
in the field of human rights are necessary to the fulfilment
of the purposes of the United Nations set out in Article 1,
paragraph 3, ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations and that
programmes of teaching, education and information are
central to the achievement of lasting respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling its relevant resolutions on this subject, in particular resolution 40/125 of 13 December 1985, and related resolutions in the field of human rights conceming
intemational instruments and the activities of national institutions and regional arrangements,
Welcoming Commission on Human Rights resolution
1986/54 of 13 March 1986 on the development of public
information activities in the field of human rights,3 1
Recognizing the catalytic effect ofUnited Nations initiatives on national and regional public information activities
in the field of human rights,
Recognizing also the valuable role that nongovemmental organizations can play in this field,
Believing that the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the lntemational Covenants on Human Rights 24 and
the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration ofHuman Rights2 should provide a focus and
renewed ímpetus to the promotional activities of the
United Nations system in the field of human rights,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the development of public information activities in the
field of human rights;ll2
2. Requests ali Member States to publicize and to
facilitate and encourage publicity for the activities of the
United Nations in the field ofhuman rights and to accord
priority to the dissemination, in their respective national
and local languages, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Intemational Covenants on Human
Rights and other intemational conventions;
3. Emphasizes the need to make available United Nations materials on human rights in simplified, attractive
and accessible form, in national and local languages, and
to make effective use of the mass media and new audio112 E/CN.4/1986/20 and Add.1-3

visual technologies to reach a wider audience, with priority given to children, other young people and the disadvantaged, especially those in isolated areas;
4. Calls upon ali relevant bodies ofthe United Nations
system, including the specialized agencies and the regional
commissions, as well as Member States and nongovemmental organizations, to assist further in the dissemination of United Nations materials on human rights;
5. Recommends that ali Member States include in
their educational curricula materials relevant to a comprehensive understanding of human rights issues;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to finalize work on a draft teaching booklet on
basic human rights, taking into account any comments
that may have been offered by Govemments, and to draw
the attention of Member States to this document, which
could serve as a broad and flexible framework within
which teaching could be structured and developed in accordance with national circumstances;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to complete as soon
as possible the task of issuing the personalized version of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the six official languages ofthe United Nations and to proceed thereafter, in co-operation with regional organizations and
Govemments, to the production of this document in national and local languages;
8. Invites Member States to consider nominating national focal points to which the Secretary-General could
supply copies of relevant human rights materials to complement the existing means by which such materials are
disseminated;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite work,
within available resources, on building up collections of
reference works and United Nations materials at each
United Nations information centre, taking into account
the list ofbasic reference works on human rights prepared
by the United Nations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to make available,
from the existing budget of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, appropriate funding for public information activities in the field of human rights, and
to ensure that adequate arrangements are made for the
storage and distribution of United Nations public information materials in this field;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
reprinting as soon as practicable ofthe publication entitled
Human Rights: A Compilation of lnternational lnstruments; 113
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in bis
report to the Commission on Human Rights at its fortythird session, information on the implementation of the
present resolution, including a status report on the availability, in the official languages and in other languages, of
the principal international instruments in the field of human rights and an assessment of the activities of the
United Nations information centres in this field;
13. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its forty-second session under the ítem entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the
United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

113 Uni1ed Nation, pubhcation, Sales No. E.83.XIV. l.
