United Nations

S/PV.6476

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6476th meeting
Monday, 7 February 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2011/20)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-22641 (E)

*1122641*

S/PV.6476

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Council for the month of February, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Ivan Barbalić,
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his service as President of the Security Council for
the month of January 2011. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Barbalić and his
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I also invite Mr. Roger Meece, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/20, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Meece.
Mr. Meece: It is my honour to appear before the
Council today in association with the second report
presented by the Secretary-General (S/2011/20) since
the adoption of resolution 1925 (2010). I am pleased to
note progress in several significant areas of the

2

(spoke in French)
Relations between MONUSCO and the
Congolese
Government
have
seen
continual
improvement, as confirmed to us by President Kabila
on the occasion of his meeting with the Deputy
Secretary-General and me in December 2010. The
Mission has thus been able to establish a very
constructive dialogue with civil and military
stakeholders at all levels of Government. One outcome
of this, among others, has been a strengthening of
cooperation in terms of military operational
cooperation, police training programmes, the approach
to stabilization programmes, and the joint assessment
process.
(spoke in English)

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2011/20)

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), but also note continuing
concerns and issues, particularly in regard to the
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s report.

The
ongoing
joint
assessment
process
incorporates an active review of security conditions,
utilizing input from a variety of sources, including
non-governmental organizations and the United
Nations country team. Findings have validated the
MONUSCO presence and approach to security issues,
helping also to guide our future planning. There are no
recommendations arising to date from this exercise for
a change to the overall MONUSCO presence or its
general approach, although we will continue to make
specific adjustments in response to tactical and threat
conditions.
The protection of civilians clearly remains our
major priority and focus, driven particularly by the
operations of foreign and domestic armed groups in the
eastern portion of the country. These groups continue
to act as predatory forces, often incorporating the use
of rape or other violence as a weapon against civilians,
as recently took place, for example, in the Fizi area of
South Kivu, where 50 to 80 cases of sexual violence
perpetrated by the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) were reported during the latter half
of January. MONUSCO continues to respond to these
incidents and to provide all possible support and
protection in this area.

11-22641

S/PV.6476

Meanwhile, there have also been too many
reported cases of abuses committed by members of the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the Congolese national police.
We have been working closely with Congolese
authorities to address those abuses, and I am
encouraged to note a significant increase in 2010 in the
number of arrests of Government soldiers and police
accused of such abuses. For example, a significant
number of rapes and other abuses were committed by
FARDC troops in the first days of January, also in the
Fizi area, resulting in at least 35 victims of sexual
violence. Following rapid intervention by Government
authorities and MONUSCO, 11 soldiers were arrested,
including their commanding officer and three other
officers. Such action is a welcome step towards ending
the impunity felt by too many for too long.
It is important to note, however, that there are
still significant weaknesses in the capacity of civilian
and military justice systems. MONUSCO has taken
action to bolster military prosecution capabilities with
the establishment of joint prosecution cells, thanks to
support provided by the Government of Canada and the
Peacebuilding Fund. But much greater efforts are
needed. I must also note that programmes to integrate
former members of armed groups create additional
problems. While such programmes are an essential
component of the efforts to address the problem of
independent
Congolese
armed
groups,
those
individuals integrated without adequate training tend
too often to be associated with reported abuses.
To address this issue and the great need for the
general professionalization of the security services of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I strongly
support all efforts to increase to a sufficient level the
amount of training provided to the FARDC. I would
also wish to underscore the importance of increasing
the capabilities of the Congolese national police. While
MONUSCO initiated in September a long-term training
programme for newly integrated police, with financial
support from the Japan International Cooperation
Agency, much more is needed.
The fundamental cause of continuing violence in
the East, of course, rests with the presence and activity
of remaining armed groups. Of these, the Rwandan
FDLR continues to retain the greatest military capacity,
operating primarily in North and South Kivu provinces.
I can report, however, some hopeful signs in the long-

11-22641

standing effort directed against this derivative of the
former Rwandan Army and Interahamwe forces.
Actions taken in Europe against key FDLR
political leaders have clearly had a demoralizing
impact on forces on the ground, which, along with new
Security Council sanctions targeting key FDLR leaders
and more active MONUSCO operations undertaken in
collaboration with the FARDC, have increased pressure
on FDLR and other forces in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Consequently, we have seen
internal FDLR strains and operational problems, and
some increase in the number of more senior officers
who have presented themselves for repatriation.
It is certainly premature to assert that the FDLR
is collapsing, but the group’s capacity is diminishing
and under strain. In fact, for the first time in my
experience in the region, I believe that the outlines can
be seen of an eventual resolution of this long-standing
threat to the population of the region. We are not at the
point of success, but there has been clear progress. I
consider it vitally important that the political and
military pressure be maintained to the maximum extent
possible in order to build on this encouraging trend.
Other foreign groups obviously also remain a
significant problem. Notably, the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) is still a major threat, with its brutal
tactics and operations. While the numbers of LRA
fighters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
limited, they operate in very remote areas, and the
cross-border regional dimension renders control
difficult. Efforts continue to increase regional
cooperation, including the establishment in late 2010
of the joint intelligence and operations centre in
Dungu, Orientale province. LRA leader Joseph Kony
has reportedly remained outside the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in recent months, and in my
view, as the key to the LRA as an organization, he
should remain a focus of attention, as a complement to
our and others’ ongoing civilian protection efforts.
I would also note that the unfolding situation in
South Sudan in the aftermath of the referendum also
bears
careful
monitoring
regarding
possible
opportunities for the LRA and, indeed, the general
security environment in the region. We have been in
consultation with Congolese Government officials
regarding these issues, and have also initiated
contingency planning based on possible scenarios.

3

S/PV.6476

In recent months, MONSUCO has maintained a
substantially increased level of operations relative to
the threat of armed groups in the East. A variety of
models have been employed, including unilateral
MONUSCO operations and those conducted in
conjunction with related FARDC operations. All,
however, are planned and conducted in full cooperation
with the FARDC and Congolese Government
authorities. I am pleased with how this collaboration
has continued to develop, and I believe that this
approach, while not free of problems, has been
effective, as evidenced in reduced operational
opportunities for armed groups and in pressure to
encourage
disarmament
and
repatriation
or
reintegration actions.
All support to the FARDC is, of course,
undertaken in compliance with the conditionality
policy in support of strict standards in observance of
human rights. I am absolutely convinced that this more
active military posture is a necessary component to
achieve the conditions of long-term security that are
the shared goal of MONUSCO and the Congolese
Government.
I am obliged, however, to note resource concerns.
A shortage of military helicopters imposes significant
constraints on operations. The decision of the Indian
Government to extend the use of existing combat
helicopters until July is most welcome and provides
needed breathing room, but we are still facing serious
shortfalls that are projected to increase absent new
timely contributions. To the somewhat limited extent
that these shortfalls can be mitigated through increased
use of civilian helicopters, this also increases strains on
our already very stretched budget, and I am also very
concerned about this.
I would also note that we have been moving
ahead actively with a variety of initiatives to provide
increased protection against imminent threats, as was
outlined to the Council last year. These include the
establishment of community alert networks, the
augmentation of the number of community liaison
interpreters, the utilization of cell phones with pre-set
contact numbers and of UHF radios, and other actions.
I will not claim that all these efforts will achieve
perfect results. I believe, however, that we have made
significant progress in identifying risks and responding
swiftly to cases of violence, and we will continue to
actively review all operations and initiatives in order to

4

continue to be as effective as possible in this priority
area.
I would also like to note movement to deal with
the illegal exploitation and trade in conflict minerals
supporting armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition to the Congolese
national efforts, including the ongoing establishment of
five trading centres supported by MONUSCO and
several other United Nations agencies, and the
initiatives undertaken in the United Sates and Europe
to control international commerce, an important
regional summit was conducted in Lusaka in December
to address this issue. That summit, with the full
participation of President Kabila and many other
regional leaders, represented an important step
forward. I strongly hope that this momentum at all
levels — national, regional and international — can be
maintained.
As a critical component of the long-term
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would also like to emphasize that good progress has
been made towards the conduct of national elections
this year. While their conduct is obviously challenging,
preparations for general elections have moved forward.
I believe that the importance of the need for
transparent and open conditions to ensure successful
democratic elections is very clear, as is the key
importance of such elections to Congo’s continuing
stability. MONUSCO has been actively providing
needed logistical support, with over 2,600 tons of
election-related material transported to date to 190
hubs and sub-hubs. Progress towards ensuring overall
financing of the Congolese election budget also has
been satisfactory.
I must note my concern, however, about
MONUSCO budget levels, as it is not yet clear that we
will have needed funds in the 2011/2012 budget cycle
to ensure the necessary logistical support we are
uniquely positioned to provide. If we face MONUSCO
budget shortfalls, we will be obliged to utilize funds
from other parts of the Mission’s budget, potentially
with quite significant negative impact on other
important operations. We are engaged in active
discussions regarding these vitally important questions.
A failure to conduct credible elections would, of
course, represent a major setback to the very
significant progress achieved over many years in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

11-22641

S/PV.6476

Finally, I would like to underscore that I believe
we are making important headway in implementing the
overall stabilization agenda, and I would note some
important initiatives in the western Democratic
Republic of the Congo in furtherance of that goal. A
draft integrated peace consolidation programme has
been prepared with the United Nations country team
and international partners, and has been well received
by Congolese Government authorities. In a related
step, in MONUSCO we are moving ahead with an
innovative pilot programme to replace several
traditional head-of-office positions in the western
Democratic Republic of the Congo with areacoordinator positions drawn from United Nations
agencies. We believe that this step should enhance our
ability to deliver effective results and improve
coordination within the United Nations family,
consistent with a one United Nations approach.
(spoke in French)
Before I conclude, I should like to express my
most sincere gratitude to all the staff of MONUSCO
and United Nations agencies in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who are working tirelessly to
establish lasting stability in the country and to ensure a
better future for the Congolese people.
(spoke in English)
With this support, and while cognizant of the ongoing
challenges and difficulties, I remain optimistic that,
with sustained engagement and support, we are on a
path towards achieving the kind of security and stable
conditions that the people of the Congo and region
richly deserve. I thank the members of the Council for
their attention and continuing support of our Mission.
The President: I thank Mr. Meece for his
briefing.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to express
my satisfaction at seeing you, Madame, presiding over
the Security Council this month. You represent a
country, Brazil, with which the Democratic Republic of
the Congo enjoys excellent relations based on mutual
respect and esteem. I take this opportunity to join you
in thanking your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
masterly manner in which he led the work of the

11-22641

Council last month, as well as for his zeal, expertise
and competence in discharging his duties.
In reiterating my best wishes for his success, I
pay a well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Roger
Meece for his work in his capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General at the head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). I thank him for his exhaustive briefing
and introduction of the Secretary-General’s report in
document S/2011/20, before the Council today.
The Council has heard the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General describe the good relationship
between my Government and MONUSCO as it fulfils
its mandate, which I can confirm. The joint assessment
has yet to suggest the need for a new configuration of
MONUSCO’s mandate or deployment. That in itself
speaks volumes. While a great many things have been
accomplished, significant challenges remain, as the
Special Representative eloquently stressed.
Eleven years ago, during the Security Council’s
debate of 10 January 2000 on the impact of AIDS on
peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.4087), although
I was not yet Ambassador I drew the Council’s
attention to and denounced the use of rape as a weapon
of war in my country. As I recently stressed at the first
regular session of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, held from 24 to 26 January,
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo violence
against women remains a real scourge, a dark reminder
and a sinister legacy of a decade of ruptured
international peace and security, of which my country
was the expiatory victim.
The third International Action of the World March
of Women, held in Bukavo from 13 to 17 October 2010,
and the opening just a few days ago, also in Bukavo, of
the City of Joy for Congolese women who have escaped
sexual violence are among the significant indications
that it is time to put an end to that barbaric practice. I
reiterate once again the unfailing commitment of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to eliminating the
scourge of sexual violence.
The fight against violence against women,
particularly sexual violence, is a shared but
differentiated responsibility of the international
community and the United Nations, whose
management of the Great Lakes crisis a decade ago

5

S/PV.6476

was not one of its shining moments. It is, of course,
also the responsibility of the Congolese Government,
which is primarily responsible for security, the
protection of civilians and ensuring respect for the rule
of law, international humanitarian law and human
rights in our country.
I am quite optimistic and confident about the
outcome of the visit now under way by Ms. Margot
Wallström, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, particularly
regarding the preparation of strategies for preventing
and deterring sexual violence against women.
However, these crimes against humanity, by whosoever
committed — nationals, foreigner or even messengers
of peace — call for reparations. They require us to put
an end to this impunity. We should also stress that,
despite these shortcomings, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains one of the rare countries where
senior officers have been prosecuted and incarcerated
for acts directly related to sexual violence.
The assistance provided to us by MONUSCO,
particularly in apprehending perpetrators and setting up
early warning systems with a view to preventing
possible cases of rape, should also be highlighted. In
that regard, I am very reassured by the fact that the
process aimed at providing a response to the report of
the mapping exercise documenting the most serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed between March 1993 and
June 2003 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made substantial progress.
The judicial architecture to be established, while
delivering justice to the millions of Congolese who fell
victim to the rupture in international peace and
security, will certainly be built in such a way as to
enable us to know which cases of rape are still being
committed. The return of peace, of total peace, is the
best guarantee for putting an end to these acts that we
deplore. That is why, in areas where insecurity persists,
the fight against foreign and Congolese armed groups
must be pursued, with the support of MONUSCO and
other interested partners.
In the northern part of the country, the fortunate
developments in the Central African Republic and the
Sudan should enable us to better coordinate to
effectively combat the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
Those developments will also help us in the eastern
part of the country, in the North and South Kivu

6

provinces, in the fight against the remnants of foreign
armed groups, most of Rwandan origin, and against
those of my Congolese countrymen who have become
outlaws.
The fight against armed groups must be waged in
tandem with security sector reform. Organic laws to
reform the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), the organization
and functioning of the armed forces and the
organization, funding and functioning of the Superior
Council of Defence, as well as a draft organic law on
the police, were recently enacted by Parliament. We
should now expedite the security sector reform process
with a view to meeting the requirements of a national,
republican and apolitical army that is subject to
constitutionally established civilian authority at all
levels of power. That authority should respect and
protect the dignity and fundamental freedoms of the
individual, particularly of women, while also taking
into account the country’s geopolitical and geostrategic
importance. Everyone agrees that such reform is
essential to the stabilization and post-conflict
consolidation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I would now like to briefly review the
humanitarian situation. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/20) is quite detailed in that sense,
particularly in regard to the eastern and southern
provinces. Overall, the situation remains a source of
concern, although we should recognize the work of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and MONUSCO. The situation is particularly
worrisome not only in the east, but also in the west.
In the north-west, the Government signed a
tripartite agreement with the sisterly Republic of the
Congo and UNHCR, and adopted a timetable
establishing 20 April as the date on which operations
would begin to repatriate my country’s displaced from
northern Republic of the Congo. The rainy season has
made the living conditions of the displaced quite
precarious. The UNHCR requires additional resources
to help both Congos to provide assistance to the
displaced.
Further to the west, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo recognizes the sovereign right of all
countries to manage their immigration policies as they
deem fit. However, as we do with other countries on a
daily basis, particularly those in the northern

11-22641

S/PV.6476

hemisphere, we would ask that the expulsions of
Congolese nationals be carried out with dignity and in
accordance with the relevant commitments made more
than 10 years ago.
The year 2011 will certainly be an election year
in Africa. The Democratic Republic of the Congo plans
to hold elections in late November. All Council
members have followed the discussions that led to the
constitutional review. It is important to emphasize that
no one in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
questions the constitutionality of that review.
Regardless of the real or alleged intentions of those
who initiated the review, it is worth emphasizing that
they did so in full compliance with articles 218 and
219 of the Constitution of 18 February 2006.
It is equally useful to recall that the debate on the
review of the Constitution dates back to 2006, when it
was promulgated by the President of the Republic. The
hardliners still hope that Parliament — which was
newly elected at the time and on which the people, the
supreme leaders, will be voting again this year — will
review the entire Constitution, which was the result of
trade-offs, negotiations and even bargaining among
non-elected entities during the political transition
period.
The minimalists, for their part, are in favour
of making adjustments as and when necessary as
institutions grow stronger and reassert themselves.
In any case, the Government is firmly convinced
that the review will enable it to assume its historic
responsibility to adjust the ambitions of our young
democracy, which is still finding its voice, to match its
own resources and to learn from other African
experiences.
Moreover, as highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General, my Government has made a
commitment to covering the majority of the election
costs. This is a sovereign decision, dating back to
2006, that was presented to and accepted by the
Steering Committee. Given our current economic
difficulties, this is a significant sacrifice that will be
useful and necessary if one day we wish to organize
elections as they are organized in all democracies
worthy of that name.
The Congolese Government will be responsible
for the security of candidates, polling stations and
results. We have already requested logistical support
from MONUSCO. It is thanks to MONUSCO that we
have already begun to distribute various electoral

11-22641

materials. My country has assumed the fuel and
maintenance costs of the distribution. We are now
awaiting detailed instructions from the newly
established
Independent
National
Electoral
Commission on how to organize the electoral process,
in particular voter registration, electoral lists, voting
operations and ballot counting. In short, we ask the
Commission to shine a light on our path towards these
elections.
These are the few points that I wished to raise in
this morning’s meeting. I cannot conclude, however,
without first expressing my gratitude to you, Madame
President, in your other, high capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Relations between my Government and the
various groups of experts we have seen since 2001
have rarely been contentious and have been
characterized by respect for the scope of action of all
actors involved, despite our differences. Often, and this
was again the case last year, the reports of the Group of
Experts have largely strengthened the peace process.
One can readily identify the modest contribution of the
Group of Experts in the resolutions and decisions
adopted at the summit of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region on mineral resources
management and certification, which was held in
Lusaka, Zambia, on 15 December 2010. The
collaboration between the Group of Experts and the
Government, through the Ministry of Mining, is far
from over.
We hope to continue benefiting from the Group’s
expertise, particularly this year, during which the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will chair the
Kimberley process. The same holds true for other
areas, such as the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, in which the Group’s
ideas have certainly held our attention. In other words,
my country hopes to continue to work closely with the
Council and the Group of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1952 (2010) in a spirit of mutual respect.
That is our request.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. I should now like to invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
