TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 20 MARCH 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 1400)

... ........ ...................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30
August 1963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic
of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/8454)
.. .... .. ... .. ... .. ........ .... ............ ...

1

SlPV . 1400

I

/
:

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
j&w-es. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fie Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

nesday, 20 March 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Ousmane Soce DIOP (Senegal).

Council table in order to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. K. Johnson
(Jamaica) and Mr. J. B. Mwembn (Zambia) took places at
the Council table.

2. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): The cold-blooded
assassination of five African nationalists by the racists of
Rhodesia has once again reminded the international community of the extreme gravity of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia. The executions have been condemned by
Governments and peoples all over the world as an inhuman
and savage act, violating the canons of behaviour which
govern the conduct of societies in civilized nations.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1400)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on
behalf of the representatives of thirty-two Member
States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454).

3. The Prime Minister of India, speaking in Parliament on
this subject on 7 March 1968, stated:
“We have learned with inexpressible horror that the
Southern Rhodesian regime has perpetrated a heinous
crime by executing three Africans. The world has
followed their fate with great anxiety in the last few days.
This monstrous deed of the white racist clique evokes our
wrath and condemnation. I am sure everyone in the
House and the country will condemn this barbarous act ,”
4. While we strongly condemn these murders, my delegation believes that the question of executions is only a
symptom of the diseased society into which the Whites of
Rhodesia have formed themselves. It is a timely reminder of
the futility of attempting to solve the problem by halfhearted measures, It has sh.own clearly that unless strong,
determined and early action is taken, the minority r6gime
will persist in its criminal policy, regardless of the sufferings
of the African people of Zimbabwe.

Adoption of the agenda
The Qgenda was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed, to the
President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/9382 and
S/5409) :
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria,
Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaviile), Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinee, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454)

5. It is now almost two and a half years since the white
minority in Rhodesia, in the face of grave warnings from
the Administering Authority, illegally seized power and
declared independence under a new constitution. Many of
us at that time expected the Government of the United
Kingdom to follow up its earlier warnings by taking strong
and effective action to quell the rebellion. The history of
the Rhodesian problem since the unilateral declaration of
independence is a history of the failure of the United
Kingdom Government to restore constitutionality in one of
its colonies and to safeguard the legitimate rights of the 4.5
million Africans of the Territory.

1. The PRESIDENT: (translated f?om French): In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its 1399th
meeting, and if there is no objection, I shall invite the
representatives of Jamaica and Zambia to take places at the

6. It is hardly necessary for me to analyse in detail the
course of events in Rhodesia since UDI, as this has been
done in the past by many delegations, including my own.
1

in Pretoria that the regime envisaged development for the
non-Whites in Southern Rhodesia along lines similar to the
development of the Bantu groups in the Republic of SOUtll
Africa. A number of bills have been passed in the
white-dominated Parliament of Rhodesia giving
effect
to
the now-official policy of separate development of the
races-for example, the African (Urban Areas) Accommodation and Registration Act, the Municipal (Amendment) Act, and so forth. The Law and Order (Maintenance)
Act of 1963, as amended on 16 November 1967, under
which four of the five assassinations have been carried out,
bears a striking and ominous resemblance to another odious
law with which the world is only too familiar-namely,
the
Terrorism Act-2 of South Africa. The Rhodesian Act, like
the South African Terrorism Act, throws the onus of proof
on the accused persons, who are presumed to be “terrorists” or “saboteurs” unless they can prove beyond reasonable doubt that they did not intend to use their weapons tu
endanger the maintenance of law and order in Rhodesia or
in a neighbouring territory. But, in an obvious bid to
out-Pretoria Pretoria, the Rhodesian Act makes the death
penalty the only sentence for those found in possession of
“weapons of war”, even in cases in which not only no life
had been endangered but no damage had in fact been done.

We are all aware how, immediately after UDI, a majority of
the membership of the United Nations called upon Britain
to use force to put down the rebellion. We are all aware of
the unwillingness, in the beginning, of the United Kingdom
and other Western Powers even to enforce any mandatory
sanctions against the Smith regime. We are all aware of the
utter ineffectiveness of the so-called voluntary sanctions
which were imposed in December 1965. We are all aware of
the selective mandatory sanctions which were imposed in
December 1966 (resolution 232 (1966)J and of their
failure to remedy the situation. And finally, we are all
aware of the tragic and deplorable consequences of the lack
of effective action on the part of the Government of the
United Kingdom and its refusal to heed the advice given by
many of us about the most effective manner of dealing with
this problem.
7. Despite the clear recommendations of the General
Assembly to the British Government not to enter into any
negotiations with the representatives of the illegal regime,
the British Government made repeated attempts during the
past year to arrive at some understanding with the Smith
regime. Instead of endeavouring to start talks with the
genuine representatives of the people, high dignitaries went
to Salisbury on negotiating missions. What wasthe result of
those visits? We understand that the Smith regime proposed amendments to the Tiger constitution which would,
in effect, further dilute the already inadequate safeguards
for the rights of the Africans contained in the original Tiger
proposals.’ For example, it was proposed that all African
members of the Rhodesian Senate should be chiefs. That
proposal would have removed the “blocking third”namely, elected African representatives in the Rhodesian
Parliament who could prevent the adoption of discriminatory legislation. Another measure suggested was the
abolition of cross-voting.

11. Several thousand Africans have been imprisoned under
this wide-sweeping Law and Order (Maintenance) Act. In
1964 alone, there were 5,000 convictions for political
offences. We have all learned with profound indignaiion of
the brutal hangings last week. There are many more
Africans in Rhodesian prisons under sentences of death.
Many of the detainees have had no charges framed against
them, except a vague belief that they had engaged in
subversive activity. And the conditions in the prison cells
can only be compared to the conditions in concentration
camps.
12. The selective sanctions imposed by the Security
Council in December 1966 have failed. When I say they
have failed, I do not mean that they have had no impact at
all on the Rhodesian economy. I know that the sanctions
have had some effect on certain sectors of the economy in
Rhodesia. Tobacco cultivation has suffered fairly serious
consequences. Some of the industries, such as the automobile industry, have also been affected. But the fact
remains that the sanctions have not produced the promised
political results. The Smith regime is still there, very much
in power, showing no signs of succumbing to the severe
punishment which the sanctions were supposed to inflict on
it.

8. The strong position taken by the Smith regime and the
retrograde measures it suggested during the course of these
negotiations, clearly proved that the differences between the
two positions were unbridgeable. Mr. George Thomson, the
Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs, stated in the
British Parliament:
“I am sorry to have to tell the House that the
differences between our position and Mr. Smith’s proved
even greater than earlier discussion had indicated.”
9. It is the sincere hope of my delegation that the
Government of the United Kingdom has realized the
futility of negotiating with Salisbury, particularly after the
latest example of contemptuous disregard by the Smith
regime for the authority of the British Crown. The illegal
regime in Rhodesia is surely and swiftly following the path.
of racial discrimination and apartheid well trodden by its
neighbour to the south.

13. Even in the economic field the sanctions have not
been particularly effective. To quote from a report in 7%~
Times of London of 29 December 1967:
“Rhodesia is entering 196% with its economy in better
shape than seemed possible a year ago when the United
Nations was in the process of imposing its wide range of
mandatory sanctions”.
The report further revealed that Rhodesia’s export earnings
of gl27.6 million for 1967, while about one third down

10. On 4 August 1967 Mr. L. B. Smith, the so-called
Deputy Minister of Agriculture in the illegal regime, stated
1 For the statement and document of the meetingbetweenPrime

Minister Harold Wilson and Mr. Ian Smith on board HMS Tiger,
setting out proposals for an independence constitution, see:
Rhodesia-Proposals for a Settlement, I966 (London, Her Majesty’s

2 Act to prohibit
terroristic activities and to amend the law
relating to Criminal procedure; and to provide for other incidental
matters, Promulgated on 21 June 1967.

Stationery Office, 1966), Cmnd. 3159.

2

from the pre-independence level, was slightly higher than in
1966. Economic activity within Rhodesia in the previous
twelve months had been very near to pre-independence
levels, The report concluded that from the experience of
the past two years it had seemed to become easier, not
more difficult to buy and sell goods in the face of
sanctions. According to the information given in the
Working Papers of the Committee of Twenty-Four: 450
new industrial projects were approved during the last two
years, involving an investment of &X.5 million; 380 of those
projects are already in operation. In the first nine months
of 1967, sales of manufactured goods amounted to 6140
million, compared with the total for 1966 of 2133 million.

Parliament on 11 November 1965 that the solution of the
Southern Rhodesian problem was not one to be dealt with
by military intervention unless troops were asked for to
avert a tragic action such as subversion, murder, etc. On 12
November 1965 Prime Minister Wilson, in elaboration of his
earlier statement, explained that if the legally constituted
Government of Southern Rhodesia, that is, the Governor,
were to seek help in dealing with law and order, the United
Kingdom Government would have to give it the fullest
consideration. The murders committed by the Smith regime
and the repressive measures taken by it to deal with the
unrest among the people of Zimbabwe provide more than
the required justification for the administering Power to
intervene with force.

14. According to one report, Rhodesia’s mining output
last year reached record level to beat the previous best of
232.6 million. As regards oil, apart from an increase in the
price of petrol, the Rhodesians do not seem to have
experienced any particular shortage. Although rationing of
petrol has not been lifted, any amount of “off-ration” fuel
can be purchased at a slightly higher price than the rationed
petrol. Further, according to a recent report, the extra price
of “off-ration”
petrol has been brought down from
2 shillings a unit to 6 pence a unit. A most convincing proof
of the failure of the sanctions and of the soundness of the
Rhodesian economy is to be found in the fact that within a
period of seventeen days in October 1967, the regime
floated three loans of $16 million all of which were
immediately oversubscribed.

17. There has been a persistent call for the imposition of
comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. My delegation is prepared to lend its
support to such a proposal provided-and I must emphasize
this-that effective measures are taken to secure compliance
from all States. This is necessary because two Member
States of the Organization which are in close and unholy
alliance with Southern Rhodesia, in an effort to preserve
and perpetuate white supremacy in southern Africa, have
openly and unashamedly declared their intention to continue to help the Smith regime in overcoming the effects of
sanctions. In other words, the economy of Southern
Rhodesia must be put under a siege with effective measures
for implementation if the sanctions are to have the
necessary political impact, As far as my country is
concerned we severed all relations with Southern Rhodesia
including trade and commerce even before the United
Nations adopted the relevant recommendations,

15. It has been said that the selective sanctions imposed
by the Security Council on 16 December 1966 have failed
because of non-compliance by certain Member States, in
particular South Africa and Portugal. But even before the
Security Council adopted resolution 232 (1966) of 16
December 1966 the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal had stated publicly that they would continue to
co-operate with the Smith regime in the normal way
irrespective of any action which the United Nations might
take against Southern Rhodesia. It was, therefore,
unrealistic for anyone to expect that South Africa and
Portugal, whose record of defiance of the authority of the
United Nations is notorious, would respect the decisions of
the Security Council.

18. My delegation and my Government fully support the
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe to regain their national
dignity. Indeed, given the lack of effective action on the
part of the Government of the United Kingdom the
Africans of Zimbabwe have had no option but to take to
arms to achieve their independence. My country has already
made a modest contribution to the struggle of the African
freedom fighters and I take this opportunity to renew our
pledge of full support for their struggle. At the same time,
the Council should call upon the Government of the United
Kingdom to give up its policy of “too little, too late”, and
to adopt effective measures, not excluding the use of force,
to fulfil its responsibilities. Furthermore, the Council
should impose comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions and couple them with a warning that all Member
States of the Organization would be bound to comply with
the sanctions imposed in terms of their obligations under
Article 2.5 of the United Nations Charter. We believe that
such action, if taken now, will forestall a violent racial
holocaust which is bound to engulf the whole of southern
Africa if freedom and justice are denied much longer to the
African peoples of the area.

16. My delegation has always held that the Government of
the United Kingdom, in its capacity as the administering
Power, is fully entitled to launch a police action in a colony
where law and order have completely broken down as was
so dramatically and, tragically demonstrated by the recent
events in Rhodesia. It was unfortunate that Prime Minister
Wilson, even before the unilateral declaration of independence, had assured the white community that force
would not be used against them. It is yet more unfortunate
that the Government of the United Kingdom, even at this
stage, found it necessary to repeat its no-use-of-force
declaration thus encouraging the Smith regime in its
intransigence. In this context I should like to recall a
statement made by Prime *Minister Wilson in the British

19. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): As the letter ,from thirtysix African States requesting this meeting [S/8454] points
out, it is over a year since the Security Council last met on
the question of Rhodesia. As this is the first occasion on
which the Canadian delegation has had the opportunity in
the Security Council to speak on the situation in Southern
Rhodesia, I should like to outline Canadian views on the

3 Document A/AC.109/L.445
(mimeographed).
4 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

3

the measures adopted by the Council in December 1966.
His reports have been studied with care and my delegatio:l
supports his renewed call to Member States to respond to
his earlier requests for reports and statistics; it is indeed
difficult to understand why some Member States have not
fulfilled their obligations in this regard. They r-nay say that
their trade with Rhodesia is either non-existent or negligible, but does this justify failure to report in response to
the Secretary-General’s request?

various aspects of the question which have been raised at
the United Nations,
20. We all know that the decision to meet at this
particular time resulted directly from the reprehensible
display of injustice of the Smith r&me in executing so far
five prisoners. What is particularly outrageous is that these
men were held for years under sentence of death with their
fate uncertain and with the fundamental right of appeal
ultimately denied to them. Three were executed despfte the
granting of reprieves by Her Majesty the Queen; two had
rem0ve.d from them the remedy of an appeal to the Privy
Council. Their executions are indicative of the deplorable
conduct of the Rhodesian rt&ime which Canada has
denounced more than once.

26. I know also that there are those who advocate the use
of force to bring down the illegal r6gime in Rhodesia. But
this is an approach which, in our view, must be carefully
weighed. It seems probable that what would be involved in
present circumstances would be a full-scale invasion and
war causing bloodshed and widespread damage, and we
cannot ignore the human and material cost of such action
inside and outside Rhodesia.

21. We believe that the Council should certainly condemn
these executions and demand, in the name of civilized
behaviour and, common humanity, that those responsible in
Salisbury desist from further inhuman acts and political
persecutions. The Security Council should send a clear
message that the illegal r&ime’s use of prisoners virtually as
pawns in a political conflict is reprehensible to the highest
degree, We hope that such a call can be sent out promptly
and unanimously.

27. It is one thing to advocate the use of force; it is
another to determine sound and effective means for
applying it. A decision to use force must include a decision
about who shall be charged with its employment. There
seem to be two possibilities: either the use of force by the
United Nations in accordance with the Charter in exercise
of our collective responsibility to remove threats to the
peace or to deal with breaches of the peace or acts of
aggression, or, alternatively, the exercise of this responsibility by the United Kingdom alone taking action against a
colony in rebellion. If the Council is to decide on the use of
force by the United Nations there must be agreement
among those members of the Council which would have to
carry the main burden of implementing this decision that
measures not involving the use of armed force are inadequate and that such force is necessary. Whatever views
may be held on the use of force in this situation, I do not
believe that a basis exists now for such agreement. As for
the use of force by the sovereign Power, it is quite clear
that the United Kingdom is not prepared to embark on this
approach to a solution at this time. The United Kingdom
has taken the firm position that it is not prepared to use
force, except as a last resort for restoration of law and
order,

22. As regards general Canadian policy on Rhodesia;
Canada has repeatedly expressed the conviction that
Rhodesia must not be granted independence before majority rule is obtained. The Canadian Government has also
made it clear that it is inadmissible that a society should be
organized on a system of racial discrimination under which
a minority of Whites exercises political and economic
control over a vast majority of African people. Canada has
also faithfully applied the sanctions’s0 far authorized by
the Council as is shown by the reports of the SecretaryGeneral’ in pursuance of the Council’s resolution
232 (1966).
23. In considering the question of sanctions against the
illegal r&me in Rhodesia, we must take into account the
lack of successso far in achieving the aim to which the
sanctions resolution of December 1966 [232 (1966/J was
addressed, that is, the’change of the r&.ime and the return
to legality in Rhodesia.
24. My delegation does not speak of a “failure” of the
sanctions already imposed, because as has already been
mentioned, it is clear from the Secretary-General’s report
[s/7781/Add.4/
and from other available reports that these
sanctions have had some inipact on the economy and the
general situation h Rhodesia. But this impact could
certainly have been greater if the directives of the Security
Council had been carried out by all, It is clear indeed that
without full co-operation from every Member State in this
Organization the purposes of the United Nations will be
frustrated.

28. There is,‘in our view, another important consideration.
We ‘believe that the Security Council should weigh carefully
the advantages against the disadvantages before abandoning
the course it has embarked on for the first time in the
history of the Uqited Nations. It is our view that we must
try harder to make the mandatory economic sanctions
work. This is a matter involving the isolation of the
Rhodesian rdgime. The objective of the mandatory sanctions programme is not only to bring economic pressure to
bear on those who have usurped power in Rhodesia and are
now misusing it, but to underline for them the fact that
they have no place in the world community of nations so
long as they pursue the policies which the overwhelming
majority of the representatives of that community have
condemned. In some respects this isolation is at least as
important as the specific effects of economic sanctions, as
it brings to bear the weight of world opinion and makes
clear that this r8gime and what it stands for are unacceptable.

25. We are gratgful to the Secretary-General for having
carefully reported, to the extent possible, on the effect of
5 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1967, documerit S/7781 and Add.1 and 2; ibid., Supplement for July, August
and September 1967, document Sl7781lAdd.3; and ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1967, document

S/ll81/Add.4.

4

We believe that particular attention should be given to
the possibility of ‘broadening the mandatory economic
sanctions to a comprehensive embargo on Rhodesia’s
external trade. Acknowledging, as I did earlier, that the
sanctions so far applied have only partially achieved our
aim, we must )remember that the measures adopted were
partial only, It is right, therefore, to move from these
selective measures to the broader act of a complete trade
embargo against Rhodesia. In the light of our experience
with selective sanctions, it may be too much to hope that
comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions will quickly
achieve our purpose, but there is no doubt that this would
have an effect on the Rhodesian regime and would enhance
the impact the Council’s measures have already had.
29.

30. The Canadian delegation will be prepared to support
any appropriate moves by the Security Council to impose
more stringent additional sanctions with the object of
bringing down the illegal regime and is prepared to enter
into consultations forthwith to that end.
31. Mr, BERARD (France) (translated from French): The
deplorable circumstances which have led to the convening
of the Security Council have aroused the indignation of the
world, and this feeling has been most eloquently expressed
by our Secretary-General. They mark a new and tragic stage
in the conflict which, within the British framework, sets the
United Kingdom, the administering Power, in opposition to
its colony of Rhodesia.
32. The nature of this crisis has not changed, As a
spokesman for the African Congress of Trade Unions of
that Territory stated a few days ago in the Committee of
Twenty-Four: “It is unquestionable that Rhodesia is a
British colony, and it follows without question that
Rhodesia and all its internal problems are the responsibility
of Great Britain.“6 To forget this aspect of the problem
would be to play into the hands of Salisbury and to endorse
the regime’s claims to international recognition. That is a
position which France has from the outset refused to
adopt.
33. My Government vigorously condemned the so-called
declaration of independence of 11 November 1965, It does
not recognize the de facto authority that has set itself up in
Salisbury and has no diplomatic relations. with it. It goes
without saying that my Government gives that authority no
assistance.
34. France is nevertheless fully aware of the extreme
gravity of the problem, both political and humanitarian,
which the actions of Salisbury are creating for the people of
Southern Rhodesia and its neighbours. But France’s position of principle on this matter is well known, we do not
think it possible to maintain that the Security Council is
legally entitled’ to pronounce judgement on a matter in
which a dependent territory is pitted against its own
metropolitan Power. That is why the French delegation had
to abstain from voting on earlier resolutions; moreover, in
our opinion the provisions of those resolutions did not
seem fully to accord with the purpose in view-namely, to
put an end to the rebellion,
6 Document AjAC.109jPV.585.

35. These remarks do not by any means imply that France
is not concerned to help the responsible British Government to meet its obligations. In December 1965 France
prohibited the sale of petroleum and oil products to
Rhodesia, suspended the granting of all import licences for
Rhodesian sugar and completely halted the purchase of
tobacco coming from that Territory.
36. On 25 February 1967, it prohibited the importation
into France and the exportation to Rhodesia of all the
products listed in resolution 232 (1966) of 16 December
1966. The latest customs statistics, covering the first eleven
months of 1967, and the detailed studies which the French
authorities have carried out in certain selected cases, show
beyond question that those restrictions have been scrupulously,observed; I wish to make this point quite clear.
37, Nor is the French delegation indifferent to the
lamentable events which have brought about the convening
of the Security Council.
38. It deeply deplores the fact that the efforts of the
administering Power did not succeed in preventing five
criminal executions. It is extremely apprehensive for the
future. of the hundred or so condemned persons who are
now in Rhodesian prisons waiting for their fate to be
decided. It ,was relieved to learn that the sentences of
thirty-five of them had been commuted.
39. Moreover, the French delegation to the Commission
on Human Rights associated itself with the consensus7 in
which that Commission expressed its horror at the tragic
executions in Salisbury and requested the United Kingdom
to restore the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
the African people in its colony and to take steps to save
the lives of the prisoners who were still living under the
threat of capital punishment. In addition, our delegation
approved the text of the telegrams addressedto the British
Government to that effect. It is our hope that, in response
to this appeal, the United Kingdom Government will
shortly make known the measures it means to employ to
resolve the crisis in Rhodesia, which has already lasted too
long.
40. On the, basis of its own recent experience, France can
state positively that a crisis of this kind is not insoluble. Its
solution depends, first, on the decision of the London
Government; but if, in its determination to make Salisbury
see reason, the United Kingdom were to call on friendly
countries for assistance, the latter would certainly not
refuse their co-operation.
41. I reserve my right to speak again later in the debate.
42. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Jamaica.
43, Mr. JOHNSON (Jamaica): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to express to you my thanks for allowing me to
speak on behalf of Jamaica on this question.
I See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4, para. 102.
8 Ibid., para. 103.

44. This is the second time that Jamaica has sought to
address the Security Council and it is the second time that
it ,has sought to do so on the question of Rhodesia. It is not
to deny or minimize the wealth of experience and wisdom
which are the Security Council’s that we appear here, but ’
rather to express our solidarity with millions of oppressed
Africans.
4.5. We are here because my country, cannot but be
concerned with the urgent problems of the people of
Zimbabwe, who have been and are being subjected to a
repression which has made a mockery of the rule of
law-repression within the borders of the land which
belonged to their forefathers, and in which they now find
themselves enslaved.
46. The history of the United Kingdom’s and the United
Nations reaction to the unilateral declaration of independence by the Ian Smith regime is too well known to be
recounted. What has brought us here is specifically the
execution of five Africans whose judicial murder symbolizes a situation in a colony characterized by repression,
violation of human rights and discrimination. Jamaica has
offered assistance to the dependents of the deceased. In my
country, tomorrow has been set aside as a day of national
mourning for those who have been executed and, in a larger
sense, over all those conditions brought about by the Smith
regime that are a source of sorrow to Jamaica.
47. If history has any lesson for us, it is that human beings
who are subjected to conditions such as these will ultimately rebel against them. Reported incursions into
Rhodesia by guerrilla forces during the last few days have
demonstrated the inevitability of a violent response to
repression. We salute the efforts of these Zimbabwe
nationalists. The fight for freedom is as old as man. The
lessons of history suggest that the shackles that have been
imposed upon the people of Zimbabwe will have no better
fate than those imposed upon earlier generations in other
lands.

49. Qn 16 December 1966, the Security Council adopted
resolution 232 (1966) which determined that the situation
in Rhodesia constituted a threat to international peace and
security and decided that all States-Members of the United
Nations-should impose a ban on the import of certain
commodities from Southern Rhodesia and on the export to
that country of oil and oil products, arms and military
equipment, aircraft and motor vehicles and equipment or
materials for the manufacturing or assembling of them.
Those sanctions appear to have failed. It was to be expected
that there would be some adverse effect on Southern
Rhodesia’s economy, but certainly their efficacy had to be
judged by their capacity to bring down the Smith rdgime or
to change its nature substantially. Neither has occurred. It
was also realized beforehand that certain States-Members
of this Qrganization-would not fully co-operate with these
sanctions. It is therefore no use saying either that sanctions
have not been given time to work or that they have failed
to work because all States have not co-operated. We all
knew beforehand who would not co-operate and why.
50. The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom recently
stated in the House of Commons:
“Perhaps the Security Council will be well advised to
proceed on the basis of what is practicable and what is
effective . . , perhaps a little less forcible talk and a little
more practical action on the part of all concerned might
get the right answer.“’ O
Could practical action perhaps mean the closing of the
borders of Southern Rhodesia to the entry of goods and
equipment from South Africa? Could it mean the application of economic sanctions against South Africa and
against Portugal? Is there reason to believe that these are
likely prospects?
51. Would not an extension of the mandatory economic
sanctions by the Security Council or an attempt to tighten
the sanctions which already exist founder on the policies of
the Governments of Portugal and South Africa? If sanctions are to work, something has to be done about the
policies of those Governments. The permissiveness of
Governments which support the Smith regime by refusing
to enforce sanctions against Rhodesia is, in our view, a
grave mistake. What now appears to be of economic
advantage to such nations may one day prove to be nothing
more than an economic mirage.

48. The traditions with which Jamaica has developed have
left no room for an understanding of the summary rejection
of the reprieve granted by Her Majesty the Queen to three
of the Rhodesians executed. The Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom stated in the House of Commons on 14
March that “in present circumstances there can be no
question of resuming contacts ,with ‘the illegal r&ime”.a
These words are to be applauded-and more so if they
imply that the United Kingdom Government is now
prepared to have discussions with representatives of the
majority of the population of Rhodesia, citizens of the
United Kingdom and colonies who are still being denied
their rights. I appeal to the conscience of those Member
States represented on the Security Council who have
espoused and championed the maxim, “Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity”. I appeal to them to demonstrate their commitment to this cause for all peoples, and not only on behalf of
themselves and those whom they accept ‘as friends. The
application of double standards will always create more
problems than it solves.

52. On the other hand, we cannot continue to rule out the
possibility and the likelihood of the use of force. At
Jamaica’s earlier appearance before this Council, my distinguished predecessor had said:
“If the United Kingdom, .for its own ,reasons, is
convinced that it ought not to resort to the use of force,
Janmica would wish to see the Council go further into
this question with the Government of the United King
dam.” [1262nd meeting, para. 2 7.J
We still recognize that the United Nations would most
likely call upon a Government to employ military force
only following consultations with that Government and
having consi dc4rl:d the implications of the application of

‘9 Parliamentary Debates (Hansard), House of Commons Official
Report, Fifth Series, vol. 760 (London, Ber Majesty’s Siationery
Office), col. 1617.

10 Ibid., col. 1’62

6

‘lgl authorizes the Government to contribute to any
fund which may be organized by the United Nations or
any appropriate international agency to provide for the
bereaved dependents, and
“‘(h) authorizes the Government to declare a day of
National Mourning in respect of the atrocious acts of the
illegal regime.”

force. Southern Rhodesia is a. colony ruled by an illegal
regime whose leaders are guilty of treason and whose
actions have violated the sensibilities of all civilized men
everywhere.
53. The people of Jamaioa, through our Parliament, have
taken note of the utter failure of the sanctions so far
imposed on Southern Rhodesia. They have recorded a vote
of no confidence in the likely successof any sanctions that
may be imposed in the future on Southern Rhodesia. They
consider that the only effective means of returning
Rhodesia to the rule of law is by force. On 13 March 1968
the Jamaican Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution
which reads as follows:
“Whereas the Government and people of Jamaica have
been shocked and horrified by the latest outrageous
action of the illegal racist regime in Rhodesia in executing
persons who had been granted a reprieve by Her Majesty
the Queen, and
“Whereas these latest actions constitute an intensification of the reprehensible policy of oppression of the
black majority in Rhodesia and a suppression of their
rights, and
“Whereas the Government of Jamaica has consistently
called for the termination of this regime by all measures,
including the use of force, and has offered its support in
so doing, and
“Whereas the United Kingdom has so far failed in
discharging her responsibility in bringing down the illegal
rebellious rbgime, and
Vhereas the Prime Minister of Jamaica has expressed
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and to the
Secretary General of the Commonwealth Secretariat
Jamaica’s horror at the recent executions, and has
re-ernphasized Jamaica’s views that negotiations with the
Smith regime were pointless, and that only the sternest
and strongest measures could save Rhodesia and its
people from further atrocities, and
“Whereas in a message to the United Nations and to the
Organization
of African Unity the Prime Minister has
asked what assistance could be provided for the bereaved
dependents of the deceased,
‘Be it resolved that this House:
“(a) records its strongest condemnation of the action
of the illegal racist regime,
‘@) records its support of the actions already taken by
the Prime Minister,
“(c) reaffirms its belief that the use of military force in
Rhodesia is the only feasible means of bringing down the
illegal regime,
“(d) calls upon the United Kingdom to take the
strongest and sternest measures, including the use of
force, against the illegal regime,
“(e) calls upon the Security Council of the United
Nations to take all urgent and necessary steps to ensure
the downfall of the illegal regime,
“(f) calhi upon all countries to give maximum support
to the Security Council and to the United Kingdom to
this end, and to ensure the return of Rhodesia to
constitutional
rule and the institution of a system of
government by the majority,

The Senate likewise unanimously endorsed this resolution.
54. The Government of Jamaica supports the use of force
to overthrow the illegal regime of Ian Smith. It does so
because we see no other way of bringing about this
desirable end quickly and with a minimum of further
economic dislocation of the neighbouring State of Zambia,
whose economy has suffered because of the sanctions
already imposed. Our support for this measure is not
merely that of a spectator on the sidelines. We are ready to
contribute, within our capacity, to any force so organized
directly under the authority of the United Nations.
55. This is Jamaica’s stand. It is a stand based not only on
principle but also on what we consider to be a realistic
assessmentof the situation confronting us.
56. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): The continued existence of
the illegal minority regime in Salisbury is not only a
disgrace, it is a challenge to all of us, As we seeit, we have
all a clear duty to assistin a determined effort to bring that
regime to an end. Our meeting today, however, has a
specific and tragic background. We meet in the awareness
that the Smith regime does not refrain from even the most
serious and ruthless actions, that it is prepared illegally to
execute citizens deprived of their human and constitutional
rights. The cruelty thus demonstrated by the regime in
Salisbury has rightly been condemned by unanimous world
opinion.
57. The Government and the people of Denmark share the
anger and disgust aroused by these executions. There can be
no doubt that the road upon which the Smith regime has
now embarked may well lead towards disaster. Therefore,
when we express our abhorrence at the executions we are at
the same time deeply concerned about the consequences
that those criminal acts may entail. If reason is not allowed
to prevail in Southern Rhodesia it is indeed only proper to
ask whether the ultimate iesult may not be a racial war
with unpredictable consequenca,.
58. Denmark today adds its voice to the voices of those
who protest against the illegal acts of the regime in
Salisbury, and we feel that the Council must find ways of
expressing its condemnation of the illegal executions and
demand that no more illegal hangings be carried out.
59. It is the unanimous wish of the Council that the
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia be brought to an end. We
have in particular taken note of the statement made by the
representative of the United Kingdom to the effect that this
continues to be the determined attitude of his Government.
This basic fact that there is agreement about the goal before
us must be taken into consideration and to it must be
ascribed great importance in the further actions of this
Council.
7
L

bears a most disconcerting resemblance to legislation we are
accustomed to find wherever oppressive and arbitrary
government exists. That amendment, which the illegal
regime put into force last November over the objections of
the Constitutional Council, prescribes a mandatory death
penalty for persons who, “with intent to endanger the
maintenance of law and order”, possess “any arms of war”.
Like South Africa’s Terrorism Act the new Rhodesian
amendment violates the essence of civilized justice by
placing upon the accused, and not the accuser, the burden
of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that he did not
intend to “endanger the maintenance of law and order”.
And, like South Africa’s Terrorism Act, the Southern
modesian Law and Order (Maintenance) Amendment Act
carries a broad and ambiguous definition of “terrorism”,
conviction on which can itself carry the death penalty.

60. Since this is the first time I have spoken about this
matter in the Security Council, I wish to reiterate that my
country has complied fully with Security Council resolutions 216 (1965) of 12 November and 217 (1965) of 20
November 1965, and that we have, of course, fully
implemented the mandatory sanctions imposed by the
Security Council in its resolution 232 (1966) of 16
December 1966.
61, We have indeed gone considerably further by prohibiting exportation of all goods from Denmark to Southern
Rhodesia, direct as well as via third countries, and by
prohibiting importation into Denmark of all goods of
Rhodesian origin. Furthermore, representatives of my
country, on more than one occasion during the twentysecond session of the General Assembly, declared that
Denmark, on the basis of adequate information, would be
prepared to support a move in the Council to extend and
tighten up the economic sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia.

66. The United States condemns as an outrage the hanging
of the five condemned men by the Smith @ime-fiangings
which, in the opinion of the sovereign authority for
Southern Rhodesia, were illegal. Moreover, we share the
world-wide sense of alarm at the prospect that more
hangings may follow, pursuant to legislation which violates
the most elementary standards of human justice.

62. On that basis I wish to pledge the full co-operation of
my delegation in the consultations which in our opinion
must now follow in order to enable members of the Council
to assessthe possibilities and the potentials of the situation
so that the Council may act in the most effective manner
possible with a view to bringing an end to the rebellion in
Southern Rhodesia and an end to the illegal minority
r&me and its persecution of the people of Southern
Rhodesia.

67. But these developments, however grim in themselves,
must concern the Council in a much wider sense, for they
do give confirmation to our long-held forebodings about
the entire policy on which the r&ime in Salisbury
embarked over two years ago. Step by step, ever since its
unilateral and illegal declaration of independence in 1965,
the Smith regime has maintained and reinforced the
Draconian powers by which it deprives the Rhodesian
people of rights to which they are entitled as citizens under
the 1961 Constitution, and as human beings under the
United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and international law. It has even moved to
embrace the odious racial policies of South Africa, particularly in regard to living accommodations, property
ownership and the use of public facilities. In Southern
Rhodesia today this is referred to as “separate development”, and this is a term, of course, which we have all
come to know as a euphemism for apartheid.

63. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): The dismaying events of the past two weeks in Southern Rhodesia
have brought us together here once again to consider the
tragic situation in that Territory. Three condemned African
prisoners appealed in vain from an execution order issued
by an illegal r@me. Reprieves were then granted to those
prisoners by Her Majesty the Queen, acting fully within her
rights as the acknowledged sovereign of Southern Rhodesia.
But thereupon the Smith rBgime, in deliberate defiance of
her authority, proceeded to hang them, along with two
other condemned prisoners. Public opinion throughout the
world, including my own country, has responded to these
events with a senseof outrage.
64. As long ago as August 1967, ti official spokesman in
Salisbury stated that the regime there had reached a
decision to proceed with such executions on what he
termed, ironically, “humanitarian grounds”, He also said
that there were eighty-two “remaining cases” in which
death sentences were pending and that they would be
“dealt with systematically and decisions taken on each case
as soon as it is possible to do so”. Since that time, we regret
to say, the number awaiting execution has increased to over
100. Five condemned prisoners, including the three re-,
prieved by the Queen, have already been put to death.
Forty-seven have had their sentences commuted by the
regime for reasons unknown to us.

i 68. In all these policies the authorities in Salisbury have
acted in flagrant defiance of the authority of the United
Kingdom and in flagrant defiance of the resolutions of the
Security Council.
69. Knowing all this, we dare not close our ears to the
banging of the gallows trap in Salisbury. That sound must
end any lingering doubts about the nature of the Smith
r&in=, its intentions towards the future, and its contemp.
tuous disregard for the Tights of those who constitute the
overwhelming majority of the population. There is ample
evidence that in its determination to perpetuate minority
rule in Southern Rhodesia the rBgime there is making ever
more remote the possibility of human understanding among
the races in Southern Rhodesia.

65. But what of those scores who remain under sentence
of death? Presumably, they are still to be “dealt with
systematically”. We know that several of them have been
sentenced under a recent amendment to Southern
Rhodesia’s Law and Order (Maintenance) Act, which now

70. NOW more than ever the United States looks upon the
situation in Southern Rhodesia with shock and grave
concern. We are dismayed by the r&ime’s inhumanity and
by its defiance of sovereign authority in its dealings with
8

the prisoners. And we are gravely concerned abou; the
ftiture. For while my Government has made every effort to
onsure full compliance on the part of our own country with
the selective mandatory sanctions which the Council
imposed
against Southern Rhodesia by its resolution
232 (1966) of December 1966, we share the recognition
already expressed around this table that the sanctions
applied thus far have simply not achieved their desired goal.

The representatives of Algeria, Ethiopia and India, in their
reasoned and convincing statements to the Council, have
already shown .the tragic situation in which the longsuffering people of Zimbabwe are living and have pointed
to the serious consequences which will result from the
criminal and inhuman policy of the racist clique in
Salisbury. The Soviet delegation, for its part, declares its
resolute support for the views expressed by the representatives of those countries.

71. Accordingly, while my Government will continue to
cornply fully with the mandatory sanctions under resolution 232 (1966), we earnestly hope that the Council can
and will, quickly and unanimously, find ways to achieve
what I believe is the common objective, shared by us all. We
were very pleased to hear yesterday from the representative
of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, that his Governn-rent, as the sovereign authority, is willing to enter
immediately
into consultations to this end, and I should
Iike now to pledge to him and the Council the full and
constructive co-operation of the United States in such
discussions.

7’7. The situation in Southern Rhodesia is growing worse.
What course are the events there, in fact, taking? Instead of
the abolition of the racist regime, as called for so often by
the Security Council and the General Assembly, that regime
is achieving some form of stabilization. Instead of attaining
freedom and inuependence, the people of Zimbabwe are
being subjected to ever more cruel oppression and bloody
terror. The racists and colonialists who have usurped power
in Southern Rhodesia have recently turned to new and even
bloodier crimes. They have turned to physical violence
against the patriots of the Zimbabwe nation who are
struggling for their national independence, As we know, at
the beginning of March three political prisoners, who had
been fighting for the freedom of their homeland, were
executed in Salisbury.

72. The regime in Southern Rhodesia must change its
present unlawful and disastrous policies. That regime,
representing only a small minority, cannot be allowed to
continue to impose upon the majority of the population a
system which defies the sovereign authority and flagrantly
violates
the rights and interests of the people and the
fundamental moral law recognized by all mankind.
73. In closing, I would brief’ly draw attention to the
performance
of those countries which have experienced
special problems in carrying out the will of the Council to
the best of their ability. In this connexion I feel we should
express our sympathy with regard to the difficulties faced
by countries such as Zambia, whose non-racial policy
contrasts so sharply with the deplorable policies now being
followed in Southern Rhodesia.

78. This evil act in Southern Rhodesia aroused the deep
indignation and strong protests throughout the world.
These protests have been reflected in recent decisions of
two United Nations bodies-the Committee of TwentyFour and the Commission on Human Rights-which resolutely condemned the wicked assassination of the three
Africans which was carried out by the illegal regime of the
racist minority. However, that did not put a stop to the
criminal actions of the racists. Several days later they foully
executed two more African patriots. As has already been
noted here, hundreds of Africans struggling for the freedom
of the Zimbabwe people are now threatened with the death
penalty.

74, Let us now, as members of thrs Council, find ways to
unite on action that will meet this new and more odious
phase of the Southern Rhodesian tragedy and bring the
people of that Territory the relief, the tranquillity and
indeed the justice which they deserve.

79. The evil acts of the racists are aimed at suppressing the
movement, which is growing among the indigenous population of Zimbabwe, for freedom from colonialist oppression. The racists are attempting, by terror and force, to
remain in power and to consolidate their mgime.

75. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(franslated from Russian): I should like first of all to
express my sincere thanks to the representatives of two
friendly African countries, Algeria and Ethiopia, for their
kind words of welcome addressed to me at the last meeting.
In this connexion, we are very happy to note the successful
development,
during the past ten years, of broad political,
diplomatic,
economic and social relations between the
Soviet Union and the countries of Africa. The Soviet Union
has always supported the African peoples in their antiimperialist
struggle to consolidate their unity, to achieve
progressive development and to eradicate colonialism and
racism from African soil.

80. The appearance and presence of the racist regime in
Southern Rhodesia is unquestionably part of the large-scale
and sinister designs of the forces of imperialism against the
freedom-loving peoples of Africa. The designs include plans
not only to create obstacles to the progress towards the
complete liberation of Africa, but to turn Southern
Rhodesia, as well as South Africa and the Portuguese
African colonies, inro a stronghold of colonialism and
racism. For this reason, events in Southern Rhodesia are
becoming increasingly significant not only as far as the
Zimbabwe people’s struggle for their legitimate rights and
national liberation is concerned, but in the general context
of the development of the national liberation struggle of
African people as a whole. It goes without saying that this
is of extreme significance for the entire international
situation.

76. The attention of the Security Council is now directed
again, on the initiative of al1 the thirty-six States of
independent
Africa, to the fate of the Zimbabwe people
and to the explosive situation in Southern Rhodesia, which
is a threat to peace-and not only on the African continent.

81. The reason for the creation of a situation which is SO
dangerous for peace in Southern Rhodesia is well known to
9

British goods imported into I~hodesia had amounted to
$5.9 miiliolt . This figure inclucie? machines and ‘transport
equipment to a.value of S,3.$ u~il!ion, various manufactured
a!:tlclcs to i: vaiiic of X.1.7 million, and chemical products to
a value of &$8o,aoo.

everyone. ‘During debates cm the cluestion of Southerrl
Rhodesia in the variou:; United idations bodies, the delegations of the Soviet [Jnion and other socialist countries, as
well as those of African and Asian countries, have irrefut..
ably shown that the crimes and disgraceful acts now &in@,
committed by the racists in Southern Rhodesia are the
logical consequence and the direct result of colonialist
policy. The United Kingdom Government’s refusal to grant
independence to the people of Zimbabwe, and its actual
complici-ty with the racist minority in that country, led,
two and a half years ago, to the emergence in southern
Africa of yet another hotbed of racism which threatens the
freedom a:ld independence of the peoples of that region.

87. i[n conne!;ian with the attempts of Mr. Thomson, the
United Khgdom
Secretq~
of State for Commonwealth
Affairs, to refute the ikct of the United Kingdom’s
violatiou of the ecor~o~nic
sanctions, this Southern
Rhodesian racist stressed that the United Kingdom Government had either di!;i.orted its figures, in order to hoodwink
its African friends, or did ilot even know what was going on
in its own backyard.

82. Yet, at that time, London would only have had to lift
a finger to prevent further reinforcement of the racists’
domination in Southern Rhodesia and their usurpation of
power. Instead, the Wnited Kingdom embarked on a path of
connivance with the Salisbury r&ime, and engaged in
negotiations with it, thus in effect taking that r&gime under
its protection. In the Security Council and u&r (Jnit~:ti
Nations bodies, United Kingdom dipJoin:icy has striven to
create the impression that half-hearted cccnomic sanctions
and partial trade restrictions could put an end to that racist
rdgime.

88. Another of Smith’s henchmen, D. Young, declared on
21 September 1967 that Southern Rhodesia was able to
import sufficient quantities of oil, armaments and ammunition, aircraft, machines and equipment. Where then are the
sanctions? It is a!so lalown that in 1967 there was a
sig:iific::ilC cxpnnsicn of production, for example in the
S3utheril Rhodesian mini& industry, with the co-operation
and participation of Wes’i~n monopolies. A further
seventy-four riii~es and pits were l~rou~$iCinto operation.
89. In the srarlement of the Chairman of the Committee of
Twenty-Four-the represent:ltive of Tunisia, Ambassador
Mestiri-which was transmitted on 19 March 1968 to the
Security Council pursuant tQ a decision of that Committee,
we read that: “Despite sanctions, new foreign investments
are still being made 11%
Southern Rhodesia and the level of
imports durin!$ ;he first half of 1967 was nearly 20 per cent
higher thail during the same period in 1966”. [S/C%%.]

83. Already in 1966, however, the whole world became
aware of the entirely ineffectual nature of the limited
economic sanctions defended at the time by the United
Kingdom, the United States and other Western Powers,
which were portraying those half-hearted measures almost
as a kind of panacea for all ills. The United Kingdom
representatives at that tim, ~1opposed decisive action against
countries violating United Nations resolutions concerning
the economic boycott of Southern Rhodesia-first and
foremost against Portugal and the South African Republic.
The United Kingdom Government had no wish to use other
means at its disposal against the racist rCgime, despite the
fact that the demands of the African countries for such
action were supported by a majority of States Members of
the United Nations.

90. South Afiji:: and Poi.kligal are playing a special role in
the deliberate sabotage of the Security Council resolutions
concerning economic sanctions. As the Secretary-General
rightly pointed cnrt irl the Pntroduction to his annual report
to the twenty-second session of the General Assembly:
“ . . the policies pursued by the Governments of South
Africa and Portugal, controlling as they do the trade
routes of land-locked Southern Rhodesia, have strengthened the economic position of the illegal regime and have
fortified it in ils defiance of the international community.“’ 1

84. The Soviet delegation pointed out at that time, in
December 1966 (1340th meeting/,
that the measures
proposed in the draft resolution submitted at tllat time
were clearly inadequate. It was particularly stressed that,
unless the basic demands of the African States were taken
into account, that resolution would serve merely as a cover
for the sinister manoeuvres of the colonialists and racists.
Events have fhlly borne out the Soviet delegation’s warnings that the adoption of such a resolution by the Security
Council could be taken advantage of by the colonialist
countries to protect the interests of monopoly capital.
which profits from the exploitation of the indigenous
African population of that country.

91. The facts show that the so-called “alliance of three”
or, as Africans call it, “the unholy alliance”, namely, the
South African racists, the Smith clique and the Portuguese
colonists, becomes more and more overt in form and
aggressive in nature. From joint action to oppress and
suppress the indigenous African population, the racists are
passing on to the organization and commission of aggressive
acts against independent African States.
92. The centre for planning such operations, according to
a recent issue of T,le Times of London, is the military
council of these three racist r&imes. One of this alliance’s
aggressiveacts, as is well known, was the recent invasion Of
the Congo by Belgian mercenaries with the direct connivance of the Portuguese colonialists in Angola. At the
-__-_
1 I offid Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. lA, para. 124.

85. The Governments of the United Kingdom, the United
States and borne other Western countries did not even carry
out the inadequate measures provided for in the Council
resolution. Those governments turn a blind eye to all sorts
of wiles and stratagems by means of which the monopolies
in those countries are evading the formal prohibi,tions.
86. Quite recently, Russell, one of Smith’s assistants,
stated that from January to July 1967 only the cost of
10

present time, the racists and colonialists ilre malting active
preparations for aggressive m’~ves against znclther African
State-Zambia. In South West ./1t&c:), antic: ,:J.!bv the racist
rt5gime of Pretoria, and in the imlnediatc vi.&ity of ihe
Zambian Efrontier, a military ri: base 11::sbr::il ,.:,::is:crlcred
which, again acceding
to Y%c %~LY, canwi
br? :mythiilg
but a base for offensive acts against Zambia. lndr:cd, from
there and from the territtxy of Smfhew
I?!lodesia the
armed forces of the racist rCgim(: 01 SOlIt
A l‘GCl!
hi! VC
already perpetrated a number of pruvocaiive acts against
Zambia. Arms supplied by Portugal play an important role
in the hostile acts committed by the racist:: against African
States. Everyone knows that behnd !“:~riug$ stands ;11r
NATO military bloc which ot’fcrs wid? military assistance
to Portugal.
93. The British pllilosopl~er Bertrand Russell recently
wrote in the New Statesman: “An important part of NATO
activity is the support of the remnants of European
colonialism. The success or failure of P,ortugal’s attempts to
preserve its African empire depends entirely on American
aid supplied to it through NATO.” These are the words and
testimony of an eminent and world-famous English phi!osopher and scholar.
94. The Western Powers, taking advantage of the Lisbon
and Pretoria authorities’
services, arc supplying the
Southern Rhodesian r&ime with such important strategic
materials as oil. This is further proof of the fact that they
are directly violating even the limited sanctions provided
for in the Security Council resolution.
95. The President of Zambia, Mr. Kaunda, declared at a
press conference in Lusalca on 15 February of this year
that, between January 1966 and A.ugust 1967, over
700,000 tons of oil and petroleum products had been sent
to Mozambique for trans-shipment to Southern Rhodesia.
Who supplied this oil and these petroleum products? It is
clear from the documents mentioned by the President that
the oil supplies for Southern Rhodesia were dispatched in
British, Greek, Norwegian and other Western countries’
ships. In thirty-six trips, British vessels delivered over
125,000 tons of petroleum products. Oil is delivered to the
illegal racist rdgime of Smith by the most important
international
imperialist
monopolies, Foremost among
which are American and British oil companies such as
Mobil, Caltex and Shell. The leading role played by British
and American companies in violating the Security Council
sanctions was acknowledged by the Portuguese Minister for
Foreign Affairs in his statement of 19 December 1967.
Such are the facts.

South African Republic and several other countries operat-’
ing in Southern Rhodesia. United Nations documents
contain abundant facts and data showing that foreign
capital plays a decisive role in the Southern Rhodesian
l?conrllny: K?ecid!y
in the mining and the tobacco industries.
98. It is not by chance, therefore, that the twenty-second
SessLonof the General Assembly, in resolution 2262 (XXII)
conccrnirlg Southern Rhodesia, condemned the activities of
those foreign monopolies and other interests which, by
supporting and assisting the illegal racist minority r&$me in
Southern Rhodesia, and by their exploitation of the hun;;m
and maler.ial resourcesof that country, are undermining ihe
effective implementation of sanctions and are impeding the
people of Zimbabwe from attaining freedom and independence. The General Assembly called upon the Governments
of the countries concerned to take all necessary measures to
end such aclivities on the part of Western monopolies. The
Assembly also resolutely condemned the policies of the
South African Republic and of Portugal in giving further
support to the racist rt$ime in Salisbury, thus grossly
violating the General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. The Council must give the most serious
attention to these appeals by the General Assembly, which
for its part has taken all due measures.
99. It is obvious that if Britain, the United States, Western
Germany and several other Western countries ceased entirely to give economic and other assistance to the racist
@ime in Southern Rhodesia, and severed all economic and
other relations with it, as called for in the Security Council
resolution, the foundation of the Smith racist clique’s
existence would be undermined. Attention must also be
drawn to the fact that some Western Powers are not
inclined to severtheir connexions with the Salisbury r&me
in the political and diplomatic field either. In Security
Council resolution 217 (1965) of 20 November 1965, it
was proposed and recommended that all States should
refuse to recognize the illegal racist authorities in Salisbury
and to maintain any form of diplomatic or other relations
with it. However, a study of official publications of the
State Department of the United States for January 1968
shows that in Salisbury there was a United States Consulate-General with six officials. How can this fact, this
attitude of the United States, be in keeping with the
Security Council demand to sever all diplomatic and other
relations with the Smith regime?

96. As a result of -the deliberate sabotage by several
Western Powers of the Security Council decisions, the
Southern Rhodesian racir;?s have accumulated such larg!
strategic reserves of oil that they liove been able to make a
significant increase in the sales levels of this commodity, as
if international sanctions against that r6gime did not exist
at all.

100. We cannot fail, furthermore, to be alerted by the
statement which the United Kingdom representative made
yesterday 11399th meeting/. He spoke to the effect that
this was no time for arguments and accusations, but for
action. The question naturally arises, who and what
l,revented or prevent: Britain from acting? It is Britain
which, as administering authority over Southern Rhodesia,
has all the means required to take effective measures against
the racists in Salisbury; it is the British Government which
holds all the cards, so to speak.

97. Thus, this policy of protection for the racist minority
in Southern Rhodesia has behind it the deep financial and
economic interests of British and American monopoly
capital as lYeI1 as of monopolies in Western Germany, the

101.. However, all these pious appeals, and all this verbal
thunder and lightning, against the racist Smith clique, are at
variance with the real line taken by the United Kingdom, a
lille which has been justly criticized by the Afric.in

representatives in the Security Council. It is easyto seethat
if things go in this way, the racist regime in Salisbury will
not be abolished but, on the contrary, with the assistance
of its high protectors, will pursue its criminal activities.

murders. It was at one with all those African, countries
which demanded more stringent and decisive measures to
abolish the cruel regime of racist terror in Southern
Rhodesia, and called on the United Kingdom Government
finally to play its part in settling the Southern Rhodesian
problem in a manner consonant with the interests of the
African peoples and the decisions of the United Nations..

102. The maintenance of the present situation in Southern
rtirodesia, a situation which constitutes a serious threat to
the peace and security of the African peoples and to
international peace, cannot be tolerated. The continuance
in power of the Southern Rhodesian racists brings, with
each new day, further suffering for millions of Africans.

106. That attitude of the government of the German
Democratic Republic, decisively condemning the racist
Smith regime, is radically different from the policy of
Western Germany, which is collaborating with and protecting the Soutlrern Rhodesian racists on an ever-increasing
scale.

103. The Soviet Union is ready to continue its cooperation with the African countries and other peace-loving
States in rendering the utmost assistance to the Zimbabwe
people in its just and lawful struggle. The Soviet Union,
true to its policy of support for the national liberation
struggle of colonial peoples, has taken the necessary
measures to carry out in full all the provisions of the
Security Council resolutions on the question of Southern
Rhodesia. It speaks out in favour of the adoption by the
Security Council of such decisions and measures as would
really lead to the speedy abolition of racism in that part of
Africa.

107. The Soviet delegation deems it the duty of the
Security Council to demand fulfilment of the Zimbabwe
people’s inalienable right to freedom and independence,
and to confirm once again the legality of their just struggle
to achieve that right. The Council must call upon all States
to give the utmost moral and material help and support to
the Zimbabwe people in its just struggle, against the illegal
racist regime, for the freedom and independence of its
homeland.

104. Reflecting the will and demands of the peoples of
our country, the Soviet Committee of Solidarity with the
Countries of Asia and Africa published the following
statement in connexion with the execution of the
Zimbabwe patriots:
“The Soviet people are deeply shocked at the news of
the new crime by the demented. racists in Rhodesia. The
executioners of the Zimbabwe African people have
committed yet another bloody crime, in executing the
Zimbabwe patriots Victor Mlambo, James Dhlamini and
Duly Shadreck, together with 110 of their comrades who
were also condemned to death and were fighting for the
happiness and freedom of their people.
“Having committed this crime, the ruling circles of
Rhodesia have once again proved the essentially racist
nature of their regime and have flung an open challenge
to world public opinion.
“This orgy of tyranny and lawlessness in the country is
a direct result of the policy of assistance to the Smith
regime pursued by the United Kingdom authorities.
“The Soviet people, together with ‘all progressive
humanity, holds the assassinsup to shame, and demands
stern retribution on all those responsible for the bloody
terror which in Rhodesia has become part of’ the
Government policy, following the example of its fascist
mentors in Pretoria”.

‘, 108. It is essential to speak out decisively against the
policy of connivance with the racist clique in Salisbury and
to put an end to collaboration with the clique of racist
imperialist monopolies which are enriching themselves by
exploiting the Zimbabwe people and the natural wealth
which belongs to it. We also deem it essential for the
Security Council to take appropriate measures against those
States, including the South African Republic and Portugal,
which continue to have economic and other relations with
the Southern Rhodesian racist regime.

105. We know that this is the attitude taken also by other
Socialist countries. For example, Mr. Kiesewetter, the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic Republic, in a telegram addressed to ,the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations,’ 2 declared that the German
Democratic Republic shared the indignation and horror of
democratic world public opinion at these infamous

111. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I had very
much hoped that during this debate, in which I knew that
strong feelings would be expressed, we could avoid a
negative and unconstructive controversy and I still hope
that that may be the case. Nevertheless, having listened very
carefully to the speech which has just been made by the
representative of the Soviet Union, I feel that I cannot let
what he has said passwithout a brief comment in reply.

109. The United Kingdom must take active measures
against the minority racist regime in Southern Rhodesia.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples must be
unconditionally guaranteed by the holding of general
elections in Southern Rhodesia, on the basis of “one man,
one vote”, and the immediate transfer of power to a
majority government expressing the will of the Zimbabwe
people,
110. The Security Council can and must adopt, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, the comprehensive and effective sanctions, against the racist regime in
Southern Rhodesia, which the existing situation demands
and which are necessary in order to eradicate this hotbed of
racism and neocolonialism.

12 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1968, document S/8504.

112. I set myself during ‘this important discussion, as I
indicated yesterday, to put forward practical and effective
12

116. When figures are quoted to us, we have a right to
expect that they have been checked and authenticated..

propositions for the consideration of this Council. This
readiness to adopt a forward policy of constructive consultation, I am glad to say, has been well received by other
members of this Council and the consultations have already
begun. I trust that they can be pursued to effective
co-operation and agreement. Therefore I much regret that
the representative of the Soviet Union should have thought
fit at this time not to move towards co-operation and
agreement but, by the use of serious accusation amounting
to insult, to reduce the level of the debate on which we are
engaged. I very much hope that when he has been longer
with us he will be able to moderate the mischief which is
done by the information and the text presented to him.

117. As to the equally misleading information concerning
supplies of oil through the ports of Mozambique, I shall
again not enter into details except to point out that, of the
tankers carrying oil to Mozambique to which the representative of the Soviet Union referred, a considerable number
were carrying crude oil, which cannot be refined in
Rhodesia except at the Umtali refinery, which is closed. To
suggest, therefore, as I think was done today, that the oil
supplied in British ships to Mozambique was destined for or
directed to Rhodesia is not substantiated. Again I think
that when the representative of the Soviet Union brings
statistics to us, he should make sure that they are more
reliable.

113. He made two most serious accusations against my
Government. The first was that, if I remember his words
exactly, my Government had not lifted a finger to deal with
the illegal declaration of independence in Rhodesia. I do
not propose to go over all the ground now, but he must
know that from the very first day of the illegal declaration,
when my Foreign Minister came to this Council, we
declared what action we would take at considerable
economic sacrifice, and we called on others to do the same,

118. I would further say that there are those who call for
sacrifice with the comforting knowledge that no cost or loss
or hurt will fall on them. They sound the trumpet for the
charge knowing that the trumpeter will not be expected to
do more than trumpet. I would urge the representative of
the Soviet Union not to put himself in that category.
119. Mr. MALIK

114. I shall repeat again what I said yesterday-that no
cquntry has done more than my country to give effect to
the purposes which we then declared and to the decisions
which were subsequently taken by the Council.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian):I shall confine myself to one or

two observations. First, what I presented were facts, and I
have the sources. Were those facts and sources authenticated? If the United Kingdom representative has doubts
about them, let him check them.

115. But an even more grave accusation was then madethe accusation that my Government had specifically
abetted the illegal regime. Those were the words used. The
strength of the accusation is not increased by the fact that
the evidence was provided from those described, rightly
enough, as Southern Rhodesian racists and, in the words of
the Soviet Union representative, the “acolytes of Smith”.
That was the evidence he produced to us and relied upon in
making this grave accusation against my country, I shall not
attempt to enter into statistics this evening, but I should
like to assure him that the information provided to him is
wholly unreliable-unreliable
to the extent that a figure
which he quoted of nearly 26 million as the total value of
imports from Britain into Rhodesia, as reported to him, is
in fact much nearer t600,OOO and is made up of certain
categories that are well known, particularly of drugs and
medical supplies, books, newspapers and other cultural
material,
and certain spare parts, especially for machinery
which is of value not directly or only to Rhodesia but to
neighbouring countries too,

120. Secondly, I drew attention to the statement, made
yesterday by the United Kingdom representative in which
he said that “we must act”. Well, go ahead and act. You
hold all the cards. The more active you are, the sooner will
the problem be solved.
121, That is all I have to say. If it does not please, it is a
pity, and I am sorry.
122. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no further speakers on my list. Before adjourning this
meeting, I have to inform the Council that in the course of
consultations a number of members of the Council have
expressed the wish that our next meeting be held tomorrow
at three o’clock, in order to allow time for further
consultations. Since there seems to be no objection, we
shall meet again at that time.
The meetingroseat 5.25 p.m.

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications,may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

ler publications
des
dhpositaires
du monde
Nations
Unies, Section
KAK

llO4Y’iHTb

lla~a~trrn

CONSEGUIR

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

DES NATIONS

OPTAHH3AqHH

06~e~nacmdx
mipa.
a,qpecy:
Km

PUBLICACIONES

fiaqnli

~IaBOAWTf3
Opramaaqas
aeaesa.

UNIES

06bEfiHHEHHblX
n1oxi110

xynww

HAuMti
R KIIII;KII~IX

CIIpaBKH
06 113~aIllIHX
OGbeAuIleImxx

nraramIIax

II RUIIeM

IIaqriii,

R

I:lIIliIiHOM

Celtqrrs

uo

en venta en libreriar
Y carar dirtribuidorar
o dirijose
o: Nociones
Unidar,
Secci6n

de

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicacioner
de lar N&ones
Unidor
ertdn
en todos partes
det mundo. Cons&e
a su librcro
Yentas,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho in U.N.

throughout
New York

Nations
Unies
rant
en vente
dons ies libroiries
et ler agences
entier.
Informez-vour
auprbr
de votre libroirie
ou adreraez-vous
6:
der venter,
New York ou Get&e.

iWCIITCTBaX
110 BCCX &UlirOIIaX
5fammte
n.m
IIII~~IITC
no
npo~am
naflamfi,
Hbm-llopK

COMO

be obtained
or write

LE.5 PUBLICATIONS

HBAAHHR

Opre~~lroar~nn

PUBLICATIONS

UNIDAS

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35416-May

1971-2,100
