A /75/PV.47

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

47th plenary meeting

Monday, 21 December 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 92
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia — residual functions
Draft resolution (A/75/L.51)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.51.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): The Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, a tribunal
established in 2005 by an agreement of the General
Assembly, has made substantial progress in fulfilling
its mandate, including by obtaining convictions for
genocide, crimes against humanity and grave breaches
of the Geneva Conventions in cases involving former
members of the Khmer Rouge regime.
The Extraordinary Chambers projects that the
trial and, where relevant, appeal stages, for those
cases that have proceeded to trial could be completed
in 2022. United Nations ad hoc and hybrid courts and
tribunals, such as the Special Court for Sierra Leone
and the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia, have benefited from the
early development of frameworks for the performance
of residual functions, including the management of
records and archives, the revision of judgments, the
protection of victims and witnesses and the enforcement
of sentences.

In resolutions 73/279A and 74/263, the Assembly
requested that the Secretary-General undertake
consultations with the Government of Cambodia
and the Extraordinary Chambers to identify residual
functions, if any, that might need to be performed
following the completion of the mandate. Consultations
involving the Secretary-General’s representatives,
the Government of Cambodia and the Extraordinary
Chambers are ongoing.
As we outlined when we sought a new agenda item
for this session, the purpose of this item is to allow
the Assembly to provide a further mandate to the
Secretary-General to consult with Cambodia to finalize
a proposed framework for the completion of the work of
the Extraordinary Chambers. We brought forward draft
resolution A/75/L.51 to that effect.
In paragraph 1, the draft resolution would provide
a further mandate to the Secretary-General to continue
consultations with the Government of Cambodia with
a view to finalizing a proposed framework for the
completion of the work of the Extraordinary Chambers,
including with regard to the drawdown of activities and
residual functions requiring performance.
In paragraph 2, the draft resolution would obligate
the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly on
progress by 15 May 2021, in the light of which the
Assembly may wish to take further action next year.
Finally, in paragraph 3, the draft resolution would
include this item in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-sixth session of the Assembly.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-36785 (E)

*2036785*

A/75/PV.47

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.51.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): Together with Australia, I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.51,
entitled “Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia — residual functions”.
As the General Assembly know, in April 1975
the Khmer Rouge regime took power in Cambodia,
plunging the country into a brutal period of forced
labour, starvation, torture and execution. At least
1.7 million Cambodians died at the hands of the Khmer
Rouge regime before it was overthrown in January
1979. Resolutions 57/228A and 57/228B established the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
(ECCC) to prosecute senior leaders of the regime
for grave violations of national and international law
during that period.
Since its inception, the ECCC has served a vital
purpose in bringing justice and reconciliation to the
Cambodian people who suffered at the hands of the
brutal regime. The ECCC has substantially achieved
its mandated objective, obtaining the convictions of
former leaders and senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge
regime for genocide, crimes against humanity and
grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions.
The judgments delivered by the ECCC constitute
a solid foundation of academic research, which will
aid teachers and legal practitioners in their work. That
foundation will underpin the world views of future
generations of Cambodians, who will learn from
history and seek to nurture the culture of peace at home
and abroad.
During the whole process of the ECCC, the Royal
Government of Cambodia has worked closely with
the United Nations to ensure that the Extraordinary
Chambers effectively discharges its duties in the pursuit
of the highest standards of justice and due process
of law.
As the work of the tribunal winds down, it is
important to ensure that relevant residual functions
of the ECCC will continue to be performed after the
conclusion of its mandate. The adoption of draft
resolution A/75/L.51 would aid in that process.
In paragraph 1 of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would request the Secretary-General to
continue consultations with the Royal Government of
2/12

16/12/2020

Cambodia with a view to finalizing the framework for the
completion of the work of the Extraordinary Chambers.
In paragraph 2, the Assembly would request that
the Secretary-General report to it on that effort by
15 May 2021.
In paragraph 3, the Assembly would decide to
include the item in the provisional agenda of its seventysixth session.
As one of the co-sponsors of draft resolution
A/75/L.51, I would like to seek the valuable support of
all Member States for its adoption.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Royal Government
of Cambodia, I wish to take this opportunity to express
my sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General, the
members of the Steering Committee, principal donors
and the Group of Interested States for the support and
assistance provided to the Extraordinary Chambers in
the Courts of Cambodia.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in the debate on this item. The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 92.
Agenda item 133
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
Draft decision (A/75/L.49)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft decision
A/75/L.49.
Mr. Lennartsson (Sweden): Sweden is pleased to
introduce draft decision A/75/L.49, on the investigation
into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the
tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members
of the party accompanying him.
In its resolution 74/248, of 27 December 2019, the
General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to
reappoint the Eminent Person appointed pursuant to
resolution 72/252, of 24 December 2017, to continue
to review the information received and possible
new information made available by Member States,
including by individuals and private entities, to assess
its probative value and to draw conclusions from the
investigations already conducted. The Assembly also
20-36785

16/12/2020

requested the Secretary-General to report to it before
the end of its seventy-fifth session on progress made.
Due to the situation caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the challenges it poses for
Member States, individuals and private entities, and
with reference to the letter dated 5 November 2020
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/75/635), the draft decision
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly before the end of the seventy-sixth session on
progress made, instead of during the current seventyfifth session. It is our hope that the draft decision can
be adopted by consensus.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
decision A/75/L.49, entitled “Investigation into the
conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic
death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the
party accompanying him”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure.
Under the terms of the third paragraph of draft
decision A/75/L.49, the General Assembly, taking note
of the letter dated 5 November 2020 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the General
Assembly contained in document A/75/635, would
request the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly before the end of the seventy-sixth session on
progress made and decide to include in the provisional
agenda of its seventy-seventh session the item entitled
“Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
of the members of the party accompanying him”.
Pursuant to sub-paragraph (a) of the third paragraph
of the draft decision, it is understood that a one-year
extension of the mandate to July 2022 is being approved
in line with the request contained in document A/75/635.
Pursuant to subparagraphs (a) and (b) of the third
paragraph of the draft decision, it is envisaged that
there would be an increase in resource requirements
in 2022 under section 1, “Overall Policymaking,

A/75/PV.47

Direction and Coordination”, and section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs and
Conference Management”.
To implement the request contained in
subparagraph (a) of the third paragraph of the draft
decision, a non-recurrent provision for consultancy
services, including the Eminent Person, in the amount
of $120,500, would arise under section 1, “Overall
Policymaking, Direction and Coordination”.
To implement the request contained in subparagraph
(b) of the third paragraph of the draft decision, a
non-recurrent provision for one pre-session document,
with a word count of 35,000 words, in all six languages,
in the amount of $109,500, would arise under section 2,
“General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
Affairs and Conference Management”.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft decision A/75/L.49, additional resource
requirements would be included in the proposed
programme budget for 2022 under section 1, “Overall
Policymaking, Direction and Coordination”, in
the amount of $120,500; under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs and
Conference Management”, in the amount of $109,500;
and under section 36, “Staff Assessment”, in the
amount of $13,100, as set out in the table in paragraph 7
of the document to be posted on the eStatements section
of The Journal of the United Nations, to be offset by
the amount of $13,100 under income section 1, “Income
from Staff Assessment”.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft decision A/75/L.49?
Draft
decision
(decision 75/542).

A/75/L.49

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 133?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major

20-367853/12

A/75/PV.47

United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/75/L.46/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.46/Rev.1.
Mr. Purev (Mongolia): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.46/Rev.1, entitled
“Education for democracy”; the first resolution on this
item (resolution 67/18) was adopted at the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly in 2012.
Initiated by my country in its capacity as a former
Chair of the International Conference on New and
Restored Democracies and Chair of the Community
of Democracies, the draft resolution reaffirms
the interdependent and mutually reinforcing link
between education and democracy, as it recognizes
the transformative power of education towards
the strengthening of democratic institutions, the
realization of human rights and indeed the achievement
of all international goals, including the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).

16/12/2020

in implementing the SDGs, promoting a culture of
peace and democracy has become more crucial than
ever in building inclusive, peaceful and resilient postpandemic societies.
Educating, empowering and engaging youth
in promoting the values of peace, human rights,
democracy, respect for religious and cultural diversity
and justice through education is therefore at the core
of that endeavour. Therefore, in the updated draft
resolution, Member States are encouraged to intensify
their efforts towards educating and empowering young
people, in particular in the aftermath of COVID-19, to
shape societies that uphold the values of human rights
and the rule of law.
The draft resolution also encourages Member
States to further their efforts to develop and strengthen
educational policies and initiatives that contribute
to
combating
disinformation,
misinformation,
stigmatization, racism, xenophobia, hate speech,
discrimination, exclusion and violence, in particular
through accessible media and information literacy,
to improve education for democracy in the emerging
digital environment.

Two years ago, the United Nations Youth Strategy
was launched, given that the United Nations is
committed to stepping up its efforts to protect and
promote the rights of young people and supporting
their civic and political engagement, including through
human rights education. One year ago, the plan of
action for the fourth phase of the World Programme for
Human Rights Education was adopted by the Human
Rights Council. The fourth phase, which covers the
period 2020-2024, also focuses on young people and
places special emphasis on education and training
in equality, human rights and non-discrimination,
inclusion and respect for diversity.

I would like to avail myself of this opportunity
to extend our gratitude to all delegations that actively
engaged in the informal discussions, as well as to all
sponsors for their steady support. On behalf of all
sponsors, may I express our hope that the draft resolution,
as a testimony to our commitment to fostering global
citizenship and consolidating the culture of democracy,
will receive the unanimous support of Member States
and wide co-sponsorship.

To reach consensus on the draft resolution, we
organized several rounds of informal consultations,
during which participating Member States expressed
concern about the rise of discrimination and hate speech
in the context of the emerging digital environment, as
well as the disrupted and fractured connection between
young people and educational institutions as a result of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

I give the
the Secretariat.

Against the backdrop of an increasingly
interconnected world and amid the current pandemic,
which threatens to deepen inequalities and the fragility
of our societies as it reverses hard-gained achievements
4/12

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.46/Rev.1, entitled
“Education for democracy”.
floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.46/Rev.1 and in addition to the delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
also become sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.46/
Rev.1: Angola, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Guatemala,
Israel, Lebanon, the Maldives, Montenegro, Pakistan,
Peru, the Republic of Moldova, Thailand, Timor-Leste
and Togo.
20-36785

16/12/2020

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.46/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/75/L.46/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 75/199).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Santiago (United States of America): The
United States believes that education is transformational
for individuals and societies and creates pathways
to better health, economic growth, a sustainable
environment and peaceful democratic societies. On
15 November 2018, the United States Agency for
International Development announced a new education
policy aimed at focusing resources on programmes that
produce measurable learning outcomes for students.
The policy also recognizes the important role of
non-State actors, including civil organizations, faithbased and charitable entities and the private sector, in
providing educational opportunities that help students
gain access to the education and skills they need to be
productive members of society.
The United States joins the consensus on the
education for democracy resolution, with the express
understanding that, when that resolution acknowledges
the importance of taking measures to ensure various
aspects of education, it does so in terms that are mindful
of, and consistent with, the governance framework for
education in the United States and of our respective
federal, state and local authorities.
We recognize the significant challenges in meeting
education needs during the global pandemic. In many
instances, non-State schools and providers, which often
include faith-based and charitable organizations, fill
gaps that may otherwise prevent access to education for
many children and youth. The United States recognizes
that non-State schools, including those of faith-based
and charitable entities, have an important role in helping
to provide access to quality education for children and
youth in developing countries.
The United States would like to thank the
facilitators for working to reach consensus on resolution
75/199. However, we would like to emphasize that the
language in paragraph 9 that calls for combating hate
speech, discrimination stigmatization and more means

A/75/PV.47

that States should promote and foster strong counternarratives and a robust exchange of ideas, rather than
suppressing protected speech and thought.
The Trump Administration strongly supports the
right to freedom of expression at home and abroad,
and we oppose any attempt to unduly limit the exercise
of that human right, including freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. Efforts to combat hate speech,
stigmatization and other ideas or speech with which we
disagree should not be allowed to lead to unchecked
power to censor, restrict, edit, shape, hide or alter
virtually any form of communication between private
citizens and large public audiences.
No State should restrict free thought, impose
conformity or shut down the voices of people.
Democracy depends on the free exchange of ideas and
the ability to dissent. We robustly protect freedom of
expression because the cost of stripping away individual
rights is far greater than the cost of tolerating hateful
words. The best way to combat intolerant ideas is to
have them defeated in a vibrant marketplace of ideas
where they fall of their own weight when challenged.
In America, the very heart of the education system’s
mission prepares students for life as citizens in a free
society. Taxpayer dollars will not subsidize anti-First
Amendment institutions, resolutions or efforts.
We note that, as of 31 December 2018, the United
States withdrew from UNESCO and is no longer party
to it. In joining consensus on today’s resolution, we refer
members to our remarks delivered on 20 November
regarding our position with respect to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I take the floor to explain our position on resolution
75/199, entitled “Education for democracy”.
At the outset, let me announce that the Islamic
Republic of Iran considers the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the UNESCO Education
2030 Framework for Action, as well as the Incheon
Declaration: Education 2030 — towards inclusive
and equitable quality education and lifelong learning
for all, adopted at the World Education Forum 2015,
as non-legally binding voluntary instruments that
merely set out a number of non-obligatory guidelines,
suggestions and recommendations.
My delegation hereby officially announces that
the Islamic Republic of Iran is not committed to those

20-367855/12

A/75/PV.47

parts of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
the Education 2030 Framework for Action and the
Incheon Declaration that in any way contradict Iranian
national priorities, laws, regulations and policies,
Islamic principles, our cultural and religious norms or
the values of Iranian society. Accordingly, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has no legal obligation vis-à-vis the
implementation of those instruments.
Considering the references in resolution 75/199
to instruments to which the Islamic Republic of Iran
has declared its official reservations, my delegation
disassociates itself from the fifth and ninth preambular
paragraphs and paragraph 4 of the resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/75/L.52)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.52.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.52,
entitled “International Day of Human Fraternity”, on
behalf of the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Arab Republic
of Egypt, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates.
The draft resolution expresses deep concerns at
those acts that advocate religious hatred and undermine
the spirit of tolerance, especially as the world confronts
the unprecedented crisis caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. It highlights the need for a global
response based on unity, solidarity and renewed
multilateral cooperation.
The draft resolution also recognizes the valuable
contribution of people of all religions and beliefs to
humankind and underlines the role of education in
promoting tolerance and eliminating discrimination
based on religion or belief. It takes note of all
international, regional, national and local initiatives and
efforts by religious leaders to promote interreligious
and intercultural dialogue.
6/12

16/12/2020

In that regard, the draft resolution takes note of the
meeting between Pope Francis and the Grand Imam
of Al-Azhar, Sheikh Ahmad al-Tayyib, on 4 February
2019 in Abu Dhabi, which resulted in the signing of the
document entitled” Human Fraternity for World Peace
and Living Together”.
At its core, the draft resolution decides to
proclaim 4 February as the International Day of
Human Fraternity, to be observed each year beginning
in 2021. It also invites all Member States, relevant
organizations of the United Nations system, other
international organizations and civil society to observe
the International Day as they see fit.
Proclaiming the International Day of Human
Fraternity has never been more urgently needed.
In recent years, the world has witnessed a dramatic
increase in violence, hate speech, xenophobia, religious
bigotry and all other forms of discrimination. In the
face of such transnational threats, we need to support
initiatives that encourage solidarity and unity among
people in the spirit of human fraternity.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, the Arab Republic of
Egypt, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates aspire through this initiative to celebrate
together our shared values of acceptance, openness,
empathy and love towards other human beings.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all the Permanent
and Observer Missions to the United Nations for their
support to reach consensus on the draft resolution. We
look forward to observing with all of their members the
International Day of Human Fraternity on 4 February.
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position before action is taken on
the draft resolution, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Germany.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its States
members to explain our position on draft resolution
A/75/L.52.
The European Union supports the United Nations
culture of peace agenda, which reflects our core
values, goals and actions. The European Union is also
a strong supporter of freedom of religion or belief and
20-36785

16/12/2020

A/75/PV.47

actively encourages and supports interreligious and
intercultural dialogue.
At the same time, we firmly believe that we need to
avoid the proliferation of international days and years
within the United Nations system. During the informal
consultations, we noted that the International Day of
Living Together in Peace already exists and suggested
combining it with the very similar Day proposed in the
draft resolution, which was regrettably not accepted.
The European Union generally joins the consensus
on draft resolutions proposing new international days,
years and decades if there are no programme budget
implications, no new mechanisms are created and if
they contain agreed language. In the context of draft
resolution A/71/L.52, the EU sought to safeguard the
language regarding the freedom of expression and the
freedom of religion or belief, which are very important
for us as a measure to prevent attempts to curtail or
redefine them.
The EU regrets that, in the ninth preambular
paragraph, a reference to “pluralism” was replaced by
a reference to “pluralistic tradition”. Pluralism is not a
tradition but a fundamental principle, as are tolerance
and mutual respect, which are mentioned in the same
provision. Despite our reservations, the European
Union and its States members will join the consensus
today with the clarifications that we have made.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution. The Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution 75/L.52, entitled “International Day
of Human Fraternity”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce, that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.52 and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.52: Afghanistan,
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cyprus, Greece, Guatemala, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kiribati, Lebanon, Mauritania,
Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, the Sudan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Yemen and Zambia.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to draft resolution A/75/L.52.
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/200).

A/75/L.52

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Mr. Santiago (United States of America): The
United States strongly believes in encouraging a culture
of peace through the promotion of justice, democracy,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
by rejecting violence and addressing the root causes
of conflict.
We would also like to note our concern that the
use of the phrase “pluralistic tradition” in the ninth
preambular paragraph of resolution 75/200 may
be confusing, as it seems to privilege what may be
considered a long-standing tradition of pluralism rather
than current efforts to promote pluralism. In addition,
the phrase could raise questions as to whose traditions
are referred to in the paragraph. It could be read as
being somewhat narrow in scope and may be wed to
certain ideas of what constitutes pluralism.
The United States prefers to promote the concept
of religious pluralism. We note that as of 31 December
2018 the United States withdrew from UNESCO and
is no longer a member. In joining the consensus on the
resolution, we refer members to our remarks made on
20 November regarding our position with respect to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 64
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution A/75/L.53
The President: I would like to start by thanking
the co-facilitators of draft resolution A/75/L.53,

20-367857/12

A/75/PV.47

Ambassador Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Ambassador Craig Hawke of New
Zealand, for their skill in steering the negotiations. My
thanks also go to the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Secretariat for the valuable inputs provided throughout
the process and to Member States for exercising the
flexibility to secure this fruitful outcome.
Four years ago, we took a decisive step forward
in the review of the peacebuilding architecture. The
General Assembly and the Security Council adopted
twin resolutions that defined the concept of sustaining
peace for the first time, reaffirming that sustaining
peace is a shared task and responsibility for the whole
of the United Nations system.
The joint action strengthened our focus on prevention
and recognized that sustaining peace is fundamental to
all pillars of the United Nations — peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights. That bold
new approach is a paradigm shift in the manner in
which we must deal with peace and security issues.
Draft resolution A/75/L.53 is the next step to advance
the ambitious course set in 2016. The Security Council
will adopt a substantially identical draft resolution
(S/2020/1246) today, continuing the comprehensive and
innovative nature of the peacebuilding architecture of
the United Nations.
With these draft resolutions, we are once again
putting conflict prevention at the core of our actions.
We are clearly restating that our efforts must address
the structural causes of conflict and provide for
inclusive and participatory political processes. We
are recognizing the importance of the participation
of women and young people in peacebuilding. We are
calling for a strengthened role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in bringing sustained international
attention to conflict-affected countries and in
strengthening joint analysis and strategic planning
across the United Nations system.
Achieving peace is difficult; sustaining peace
is harder. Sustaining peace requires a focus on all
phases of the conflict cycle — before, during and after
conflict. An integrated approach that aims to prevent
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of conflicts is required to maintain long-term peace.
An integrated approach must support inclusive
national processes that take into account the needs
of all segments of the society concerned. Long-term
8/12

16/12/2020

institution-building is critical, especially in efforts to
prevent conflict and achieve good governance.
Close strategic partnerships among national
Governments, the United Nations, especially the
Peacebuilding Commission, and other key stakeholders,
including international, regional and subregional
organizations and international financial institutions,
are vital for meeting the challenges of sustaining
peace. More predictable and sustained financing of
peacebuilding efforts is fundamental to the achievement
of our goals.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has further
reinforced the need to enhance our peacebuilding
efforts. The crisis is reversing hard-won development
and peacebuilding gains, aggravating conflicts
and undermining efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. It is having a devastating impact
on human rights and gender inequalities.
While it is critical that Member States continue
to implement relevant resolutions on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, we must also advance efforts to
bring greater coherence to the peacebuilding efforts of
Member States and the entire United Nations system so
as to enhance the efficiency and impact of our work.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations, it is more than ever high time to renew
our commitment to peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
which must be at the heart of our efforts to achieve
peace and security.
I would like to remind members that the debate on
item 64 will be scheduled during the resumed part of
the seventy-fifth session on a date to be announced.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.53, entitled “Review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
A/75/L.53?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/201).

A/75/L.3

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
20-36785

16/12/2020

Ms. Wegter (Denmark): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
States members.
First, I would like to thank the co-facilitators of
New Zealand and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
for successfully shepherding us through this important
and sometimes challenging negotiation process. As all
delegations agreed at the outset, the main objective
of the process was to reaffirm the 2016 acquis on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace and address only
the most important issues required for allowing us to
continue to make progress and fully implement this
important agenda.
Overall, the European Union considers that
resolution 75/201 does exactly that and constitutes an
agreeable compromise among positions. In line with
our consistent messaging throughout the negotiations,
we are pleased to see that the resolution includes a
particular stress on the importance of the women and
peace and security agenda, a focus on prevention and
a One United Nations approach that builds on the
interlinkages connecting development, security and
human rights. That calls for increased joint analysis
and effective strategic planning at the heart of efforts
to build and sustain peace. It is also a very positive
development that we will now see regularized biennial
reporting on this agenda going forward.
Finally, the resolution calls on all of us to more
systematically consider linkages to the sustaining peace
agenda when implementing the Secretary-General’s
reform agenda, as well as efforts to build back better and
greener. On behalf of the EU and its States members, I
would like to convey our continued commitment to the
agenda of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We look
forward to continuing to work closely with all partners
to fulfil our common ambition to see impact at the field
level in order to enable all people everywhere to live in
peaceful, inclusive and resilient societies.
At the same time, we recognize that will be an
insurmountable challenge if we are unable to secure
more predictable, reliable, flexible and sustainable
funding for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We
therefore look forward to engaging proactively in the
important preparatory work to advance, explore and
consider viable options in that regard. It will be critical
to ensure that all relevant United Nations bodies and
organs, including the Peacebuilding Commission, take
part in those discussions in order to ensure a system-

A/75/PV.47

wide approach to financing for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
NAM wishes to express its deepest appreciation
to the co-facilitators, Ambassador Rhonda King and
Ambassador Craig Hawke, for their leadership and
skilful steering of the intergovernmental consultations
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture leading
to the consensus adoption of resolution 75/201.
We would like to thank all delegations for
their constructive engagement, flexibility and
accommodation, which resulted in the consensus
outcome of this important review exercise. My special
thanks go to all our experts for their sincere and tireless
efforts in the entire process.
NAM is pleased to see the strong emphasis on
the implementation of the peacebuilding resolutions,
especially at the field level, in support of the nationally
determined peacebuilding priorities. We very much
welcome in that regard the reaffirmation of the principle
of national ownership in the resolution just adopted.
NAM appreciates that the resolution recognizes the
importance of full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and young people in peacebuilding, given
that the review process coincided with the twentieth
anniversary of the women and peace and security
agenda and the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace
and security agenda.
We welcome the emphasis placed on the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
especially on the fifth anniversary of resolution 70/1
and the beginning of the decade of action to implement
the SDGs, including the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic on peacebuilding and development.
We also welcome the call for further strengthening
the role and working methods of the Peacebuilding
Commission with a view to enhancing its efficiency
and impact.
We consider the decision in paragraph 4 of
resolution 75/201 to convene a high-level meeting on
peacebuilding financing at the General Assembly
during its seventy-sixth session as one of the most
notable achievements of the current review process. In
that regard, NAM remains fully committed to actively

20-367859/12

A/75/PV.47

engaging with all stakeholders in their efforts to achieve
action-oriented outcomes.
Let me conclude by reiterating NAM’s full
commitment to the effective implementation of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, with a particular
focus on national ownership, inclusivity and the
capacity-building of national institutions. NAM stands
ready to work with all concerned in that regard.
Mr. Attelb (Egypt): At the outset, I would like to
subscribe to the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the African coordinating
mechanism on the Peacebuilding Commission, also
known as the African Peacebuilding Commission
Caucus, which includes Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Mali, Rwanda, Sierra Leon, the Central African
Republic, Burundi, Liberia, Guinea-Bissau, the Gambia
and Morocco.
The African Peacebuilding Commission Caucus
wishes to express its deep appreciation and gratitude
to the co-facilitators of the consultations on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, Her
Excellency Ambassador Rhonda King, Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and
His Excellency Ambassador Craig Hawke, Permanent
Representative of New Zealand, and through them
to thank their teams for their tireless efforts to find
convergence among many diverse proposals and reach
a consensual outcome.
Similarly, the African Peacebuilding Commission
Caucus appreciates the constructive engagement of
all delegations throughout the process and adoption
of the 2020 twin resolutions (resolution 75/201 and
Security Council resolution 2558 (2020) on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture by the
General Assembly and the Security Council.
The African Peacebuilding Commission Caucus
welcomes the adoption of resolution 75/201, supports
the emphasis that it places on taking stock of the
progress made in the implementation of the 2016 twin
resolutions and encourages taking further actions to
address the remaining gaps in a coherent manner, with
a focus on making an impact at the field level.
It is also commendable that resolution 75/201
reaffirms the principle of national ownership, which
underlies the important role of the Peacebuilding
10/12

16/12/2020

Commission, and the need to further strengthen its
working methods; highlights the centrality of the
women and peace and security agenda and the youth,
peace and security agenda in peacebuilding; recognizes
the importance of advancing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development; underlines the significance
of healing the devastating impacts of the coronavirus
disease pandemic; addresses the critical challenge of
financing for peacebuilding; calls for coherence and
coordination in support of peacebuilding; and indicates
the intention of Member States to review the impact
of United Nations reforms on the Organization’s
performance in advancing the implementation of
resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In conclusion, the African Peacebuilding
Commission Caucus congratulates the co-facilitators
and all delegations for the successful completion of
the review and looks forward to the implementation of
the twin resolutions in the coming period. The African
Peacebuilding Commission Caucus will spare no
effort to strengthen the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, including through the localized
implementation of its recommendations.
Mr. Santiago (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join the consensus on
resolution 75/201, which reaffirms the importance
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We remain
committed to the United Nations mission to advance
peace and security. We thank the delegations of New
Zealand and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which
drafted and facilitated the text of the resolution, for
managing that process so smoothly. We also thank our
colleagues for their collective efforts, which enabled us
to reach a balanced and agreed text.
However, there is one position that we wish to
clarify as part of our support for resolution 75/201. With
respect to references to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the United States addressed its concerns
in our general statement delivered on 18 November.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the consensus adoption of
resolution 75/201, on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The consensus reached
by Member States is vital to the resolution, which
provides the main reference framework for the General
Assembly and the Security Council in taking action
on peacebuilding over the next five years. We thank
the co-facilitators for skilfully conducting the formal
20-36785

16/12/2020

phase of the review, as well as all Member States that
constructively committed to reaching this outcome.
Resolution 75/201 underscores the importance of
our collective commitment to implementing the holistic
concept of sustaining peace as it was defined in 2016.
An approach based on the prevention that integrates the
three pillars of the United Nations and focuses on the
entire conflict cycle is imperative.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/74/976), significant progress has been made over the
past five years in the area of sustaining peace. However,
we must also acknowledge that significant challenges
persist in many areas. The current coronavirus disease
pandemic also threatens to undo the gains made in the
area of peacebuilding. Resolution 75/201 reaffirms
the importance of action being taken by the entire
United Nations system and emphasizes that sustaining
peace is key to peacebuilding and building back better
during the post-pandemic period. To that end, ensuring
adequate, predictable and sustainable financing for
peacebuilding remains vital. Switzerland welcomes the
fact that the resolution provides a process for addressing
that challenge and will remain constructively engaged
in that respect.
Furthermore, Switzerland welcomes the regular
reports of the Secretary-General on the status of the
implementation of sustaining peace. The reports must
provide a systematic analysis of the root causes of
conflicts, identify the actions needed to respond to
them and assess their impact in the field. Switzerland
recommends following up in that regard the resolution’s
call to incorporate contributions from thematic and
regional consultations in future analyses and reports.
Resolution 75/201 validates the 2016 framework
for sustaining peace. Such collective efforts towards
peacebuilding and sustaining peace must be pursued
with greater unity and coherence. Switzerland remains
fully engaged in contributing to reaching that goal,
including as a future member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission next
year and as a candidate for membership to the Security
Council for the period from 2023 to 2024.
Mr. Namazu (Japan): This year marks the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, which was
created to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. It also marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which Heads of States and
Government decided to establish, while gathered here

A/75/PV.47

for the 2005 World Summit, with a view to bringing
together all relevant actors to marshal resources and
advise on and propose integrated strategies for building
peace. We are pleased that the agenda of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace has been attracting attention and
making a difference on the ground over the past 15
years towards realizing the aspiration of the founders
of the United Nations.
In the face of the serious human security crisis
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic and its
multifaceted challenges to the survival, livelihoods and
dignity of individuals, we are deeply concerned about
losing the hard-won peacebuilding gains. The world is
watching us with both scepticism and expectation as to
whether the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
deserves its name or not.
That is why, since the very first months of this year,
Japan, as Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
advocated the importance of making this once-infive-year review process worthy of marking this historic
year. During the formal phase of the review since
October, Japan consistently underscored the need to
make resolution 75/201 forward-looking, reflecting the
strong commitment of Member States to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, as well as action-oriented, by
proposing concrete ways to further strengthen the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, based
on our experience and other developments since the
previous review in 2016.
We now have before us resolution 75/201, which
was adopted by consensus. We are grateful for the
dedicated efforts of the co-facilitators, His Excellency
Ambassador Craig Hawke of New Zealand and Her
Excellency Ambassador Inga Rhonda King of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, and their teams, as well
as to all those who engaged in the intensive negotiation
process for the past three months.
We appreciate that some of our proposals, such
as including an independent paragraph on the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission and the need to
continue strengthening its working methods to enhance
its efficiency and impact, were reflected in the final
text. However, we regret that, towards the end of the
negotiations, we saw a rush to produce a final draft that
resulted in dropping, at the very last stage, without any
transparent or inclusive consultations, the reference
to institution-building that Japan had underlined
throughout the negotiations.

20-3678511/12

A/75/PV.47

Japan has been a strong advocate for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace at the United Nations and other
multilateral forums. At the same time, Japan has
been supporting operational activities to promote and
sustain peace around the world as a major donor in the
area through its bilateral assistance in partnership with
United Nations and other multilateral agencies.
Throughout the process of the 2020 United Nations
peacebuilding architecture review, including during the
informal phase before this summer, Japan emphasized
the importance of institution-building, which is one
of the most important means of implementation,
together with financing, for building and sustaining
peace. Effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
are essential to developing people’s trust in their
Governments, which is a precondition for tackling the

12/12

16/12/2020

root causes of conflicts. This is Japan’s firm conviction
based on its own experience on the ground.
We were encouraged during the negotiations to hear
many Member States express their support for focusing
attention on institution-building, which is one of the
main purposes of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
agreed by our leaders 15 years ago. We look forward to
further promoting and deepening our discussion on this
important theme at the Peacebuilding Commission and
the General Assembly in 2021 and beyond.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of
its consideration of agenda item 64.
The meeting rose at 1l.05 a.m.

20-36785
