UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFWIAL

RECORDS

UN LIBRARY
MAR1 7 1995

FORTIETH

YEAR

2612*”

MEETING:

3 OCTOBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/26 12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..........

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17510)- -

1

S/PV.2612

NOTE
,.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
.-with figures.. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
‘documknt.~ ,
JIocuments

of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is,.given.
,_ i j: :
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

T;: .a.qtiarter$:Supplements

2612th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 3 October 1985, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS
(United States of America).

(Zimbabwe) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives qf the follqwing States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great-Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request contained in the letter
dated 1 October 1985 from the representative of Angola to
the President of the Council [S/17520].
3. I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/17518, which contains the text
of a letter dated 1 October 1985 from the representative of
India to the Secretary-General.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2612)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

4. The first speaker is the representative of Angola, upon
whom I now call.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17510)

5. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President, I
thank you for convening this meeting of the Security
Council.

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.

6. Just a few days ago, on 20 September to be exact
[2606th meeting], I had the honour of bringing to the attention of the Council the fact that there had been a massive
armed aggression against the people and the territory of
Angola. On that day the Council, in a most gratifying
show of support for the position of the People’s Republic
of Angola and for the principles for which we stand,
unanimously adopted resolution 571 (1985) on the question of South African aggression against my country and
people.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/17510)

7. The ink had barely dried on that resolution-its
recommendation on a fact-finding mission to Angola by a
group of Council members had not even been implemented-when, lo and behold, the racist minority rkgime
in Pretoria duplicated the very operation concerning which
it was tried and censured on 20 September. On 28 September, South African aircraft violated the airspace of Angola,
repeating the violation on 29 September, both violations
having been carried out with the purpose of reconnaissance of the position of Angolan troops. On 30 September,
between 3 a.m. and 6 a.m., a formation of over eight South
African aircraft flew over Angolan troop positions in the
vicinity of Mavinga and bombed our troops, causing more
than 65 casualties, wounding hundreds and destroying six
Angolan helicopters. In addition, there was a direct clash
with the racist armed forces infantry.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Angola, Cameroon, Cuba, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Kuwait, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de FigUredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table: Mr. Engo (Cameroon), Mr. Malmierca Peoli (Cuba), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait). Mr.
Garba (Nigeria), Mr. San-6 (Senegal). Mr. von Schirnding
(South Africa), Mr. GoIob (Yugoslavia)), and Mr. Chiketa

8. The South African racist forces, whose total strength
has not yet been determined, were landed in the territory
of the People’s Republic of Angola from Namibia, a coun1

try under illegal occupation by South Africa, which is
thus, at one go, guilty of two related violations of international law and the Charter of the United Nations: not only
has it illegally occupied Namibia-not
that there can be
any “legal” occupation-but
it has also consistently used
the Territory of Namibia for its armed invasions and other
acts of aggression against a sovereign State, the People’s
Republic of Angola.

13. At present it is not only Angola which is under
attack, but in a sense, it is also the Security Council. By
disregarding the Council’s actions so blatantly, the racist
regime shows its supreme contempt for the United Nations
and its institutions. The Council must take action so that it
does not allow this disregard to become institutionalized,
as apartheid is. The Council must take action so that it
neither becomes nor is seen to be impotent. The Council
must take action so that it, itself, does not become guilty of
contravening the Charter’s articles by virtue of its silence,
its neutrality or its inaction.

9. In the present instance, the racist forces are located at
Mavinga, in Angola, 250 kilometres from the Namibian
border and even further away from the South African
border. These racist forces have already launched several
aggressive actions against FAPLA (People’s Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola) units, using Mirage
aircraft.

14. In a communication
addressed to the SecretarvGeneral, the President of my country has made reference
to the right of a sovereign State to ask for broader assistance. We would not do this easily or lightly, but if Angola
is not given any concrete assistance in getting rid of the
racist monster’s unwanted and uninvited presence in
Angola and the racists’ interference in the strictly internal
affairs of Angola, then our Government and our people
will do everything within our means to take action to
defend our sovereignty and territorial integrity against the
aggressor.

10. Before we are forced to listen to allegations,
unfounded charges, false accusations and downright lies
and untruths, may I offtcially inform the Security Council
that this latest racist action took place just as our courageous FAPLA were breaking through the third and last
defence position of the South African-run, South Africansupplied, South African-supported, South Africandependent, South African-defended, South Africancontrolled,
South African-maintained group of puppets, traitors, bandits, mercenaries and thieves which calls itself the UNITA
(National Union for the Total Independence of Angola)
group. In fact, even the UNITA group’s so-called fighters
are actually either South African racist dressed in UNITA
uniforms or mercenaries recruited and paid by the South
Africans to fight on the side of UNITA and pretend to be
UNITA.

15. The struggle continues. Victory is certain.
16. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Sir, you have begun your
tenure as President of the Security~ Council with a full
agenda and a heavy responsibility that goes with it. Your
eminent personal qualities and long and rich diplomatic
experience are well known. We are therefore confident that
you will provide wise and impartial guidance to the Council’s work during October.

11. On one hand, I feel reluctant to repeat once again for
the benefit of the Council a list of South Africa’s crimes, its
violations and its transgressions. Angola has been presenting its case to the Council-to
no avail, may I add-since
1976. Yet, on the other hand, the rape of my beloved
country by the racist troops, the desecration of our land,
the murder of our people, the violation of Angolan sovereignty, all compel the Government of Angola to come
before the Council again and again and yet again-as
many times as it takes to get some concrete international
action which will lead to the cessation of these racist
attacks. Therefore, no matter how repetitious our case, we
must present it to the Council and demand action. It is our
due right under the Charter, and the Council’s duty, also
under the Charter.

17. It is not my intention to sneak at length. Even if I
wished to do so, I would find it rather difftcult, since I can
say little that we have not already said before. It is in itself
a tragedy that so many of us should have repeatedly to say
the same things in the Council about the same crimes by
the same offender, without that fugitive from justice ever
being brought effectively to book.
18. The racist regime of South Africa has yet again
infringed the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Angola by launching a fresh act of aggression against that
country. It has done so, as it has done so often in the past,
even before the ink was dry on the last resolution of the
Security Council on the subject, adopted barely 13 days
ago. Resolution 571 (1985), unanimously adopted by the
Council on 20 September last, had once again strongly
condemned the racist regime of South Africa for its “premeditated, persistent and sustained armed invasions of the
People’s Republic of Angola” as a “flagrant violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country, as
well as a serious threat to international peace and security”. It had furthermore renewed the Council’s demand
that South Africa

12. I must state once again for the record that the area
which has been the target of racist attacks and is still under
racist occupation does not contain, nor has it ever contained, any Namibian refugees or elements of SWAP0
(South West Africa People’s Organization). The attack
was aimed primarily
at saving the racists’ protege,
UNITA, once again, and simultaneously at attacking in an
attempt to destroy the Angolan nation’s institutions, its
people, its. aspirations, its infrastructure, its efforts at
reconstruction, its vital tasks and responsibilities relating
to peace in southern Africa and its mandates inside Angola
and in the region.

“withdraw forthwith and unconditionally all its military
forces from the territory of the People’s Republic of
Angola, cease all acts of aggression against that State
2

and scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola”.
The large-scale aerial bombardment unleashed by Pretoria’s forces on 28 September, of which Mr. de Figueiredo
has just apprised the Council, was South Africa’s arrogant
but by now familiar response to the verdict of the Security
Council.
19. At the Meeting of Ministers and Heads of Delegation
of Non-Aligned Countries to the fortieth session of the
General Assembly, held in New York on 1 October, a
special communique [S/17.518, annex] was adopted reflecting the position of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries with regard to the acts of aggression committed by
South Africa in the last few days. I would like to read into
the records of the Council relevant excerpts from this
communique:
“The Ministers and Heads of Delegation . . . strongly
condemned the racist regime of South Africa for its
latest aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola, which only offers further evidence of Pretoria’s
policy of destabilization and subversion in the region
and repeated violation of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of front-line African States, as
well as its use of the illegally occupied Territory of Namibia as a springboard for such aggression. They reaffirmed their steadfast support and solidarity with the
Government and people of Angola in their heroic
efforts to resist South African aggression and consolidate their independence.”
The Ministers and Heads of Delegation further declared
that the latest instance of aggression by South Africa
further testifies to the arrogance and intransigence of the
racist regime and its utter lack of respect for the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and all
norms of international law. They urged the Security Council to meet urgently to deal with the serious threat to peace
and security posed by the latest acts of aggression and
“renewed the call repeatedly made by the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries for the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa . . .
under Chapter VII of the Charter”.
20. I wish only to add that the Government of India
joins in the universal condemnation of this latest act of
aggression. We would like to reassure the Angolan
Government and people that India and the entire nonaligned movement continue to stand by it in the face of
continuing South African aggression. As the non-aligned
declared at New Delhi in 1983, and again at Luanda last
month, aggression against Angola and continued occupation of its territory by South Africa constitute an act of
aggression against the entire Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
21. To those who are often at pains to stress the need to
maintain the dignity, authority and credibility of the Security Council-and
indeed, we are all agreed on this-1

would only wish to pint out how greatly these attributes
are undermined by the Council’s apparent impotence to
deal with the present situation. This is the third time this
year alone that South Africa has invaded Angola, and we
all know that South African troops have never left AngoIan soil, despite Pretoria’s professions to the contrary. This
is the seventh time this year that the Council is formally
confronted with Pretoria’s transgressions, of one kind or
the other, of the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
22. The representative of South Africa comes before the
Council only to challenge its authority openly by repudiating its decisions in advance. How long can such intransigence and arrogant defiance of the Council go
unpunished? How long must the most powerful organ of
the United Nations bow supinely to the duplicity and prevarication of a recalcitrant Member State? How long
before the Council becomes a laughing-stock, if it has not
become one already? We must in all honesty ask ourselves
these questions. Our response, I suggest, should be an
unequivocal condemnation of South Africa and unanimous and swift action to make it comply with its Charter
obligations.
23. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
24. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): Permit me,
on behalf of the South African delegation, to convey to
you, Sir, our warmest congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council.
25. When the Council met on 20 September [2606th
meeting], I pointed to the growing conflict in southern
Angola and to the role which the Soviet Union and its
surrogates were playing in the civil war. I asked at the time
whether the democratic countries would stand aside while
the people of Angola fought on alone against foreign interventionists. I pointed to the dangers that the new Soviet
imperialism posed for Africa, and I said that South Africa
stood with all true Africans against the forces of the new
imperialists.
26. And what was the response of the Security Council?
By adopting resolution 571 (1985), and in particular its
operative paragraph 5, the Council issued, on behalf of the
MPLA (People’s Liberation Movement of Angola) regime
at Luanda, a call to arms to the international community.
In essence, the Council requested all Member States to
export to Angola more weapons, more military personnel
and, as an obvious consequence, more violence and
bloodshed and killing.
27. The Soviet Union and its surrogates have of course
seized upon this invitation and have taken full advantage
of the opportunities it offered. Their involvement in the
current lighting is even more extensive than I indicated to
the Council on 20 September. Soviet pilots are flying some
of Angola’s MIG-23 aircraft and MI-25 helicopter gunships, the very same gunships they are using to slaughter
the people of Afghanistan.. It is clear that the Soviets are

directly involved and are in fact commanding
MPLA offensive.

the current

South Africa and Angola-and the present situation surely
makes such a dialogue more urgent than ever. But peace
and stability cannot be achieved while foreign interests
dictate developments in our subcontinent and while foreign Powers abuse the countries of southern Africa for the
furtherance of their own global aims.

28. No doubt the Soviet Union has sought to take advantage of the current international vendetta against my country further to expand its influence in our continent. No
doubt it imagines that it can intervene militarily in southem Africa with impunity.

33. Only the other day, the South African State President
again appealed to all the leaders of southern Africa to
stand together in order to rid our region of all foreign
forces. He said:

29. South Africa has no illusions about its relative
power. But it does have regional responsibilities, responsibilities for the security of its own people and responsibilities for the security of the people of South West
Africa/Namibia.
Even now, SWAP0 is sending major
units southward as part of the Sovietdirected offensive
with the intention of opening new fronts in its terrorist
campaign against the people of South West Africa/Namibia. Despite our limited capabilities, it must be understood that South Africa cannot and will not simply shed its
responsibilities. Those involved should understand, and
understand clearly, that there will be no cheap victories.

“Par the sake of its own security, for the sake of its
own peace of mind and for the sake of its own progress,
I hope that southern Africa will attempt to free itself
from the forces of enslavement now encroaching upon
it.
“Say to the Cubans ‘Go home’ and say to the Russians ‘Go home; and the minute this happens, I will be
prepared to contain all our military forces inside South
Africa.”

30. If the Council would like to establish what is happening in southern Angola, my Government suggests that it
send a fact-finding mission to the area to establish who is
fighting whom, who is directing the operations, what
armaments are being used and what the people of Angola
would like to see happen in their country. The Council
would then discover what support UNITA enjoys in
Angola. If the MPLA wishes to confirm this, let it hold
free elections. Let the people of Angola determine their
future in a peaceful manner instead of by ,destroying one
another in this endless civil war, a civil war which has been
instigated. by foreign Powers for the promotion of their
own interests.

34. South Africa has issued an unambiguous call for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Angola. This moming, the representative of the MPLA regime asked for
action by the Council. We agree. In terms of our prerogative under rule 38 of the Security Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, we have prepared and requested circulation of the draft resolution contained in document
S/17522 to give effect to this call.
35. If members of the Council fail to give due consideration and support to this draft resolution, I would invite
them to tell us with which aspects they disagree. Let me
stress that this is a sincere and serious attempt by my
Government to bring about peace in our region. It is not
an attempt to score political points or to apportion blame
for the development of the current situation in Angola. On
the contrary, it is designed to serve the interests of southem Africa as a whole.

31. But if the MPLA chooses to continue the civil war,
why should it be the only party entitled to call on assistance? The United States Congress, by repealing the Clark
Amendment, has already recognized the admissibility of
aiding UNITA, and as recently as this morning, Secretary
of State Shultz of the United States is quoted in i%e New
York Times as follows:
,’
“But we must also mmember‘what has happened in
El Salvador, and throughout Latin America over the
past five years-and, for that matter, what is today
happening in Nicaragua, Cambodia, Afghanistan and
Angola, where people are fighting and dying for independence and freedom.”

36. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria, who wishes to make a statement in his
capacity as’ Chairman of the Group of African States for
October. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
37. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): In my capacity as Chairman
of the Group of African States for the month of October, I
should like td congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I am convinced
that with your proven skills as a diplomat
and
negotiator-and,
beyond that, as the representative of a
great Power committed to maintaining international peace
and security-you will discharge your duty with your characteristic aplomb. On behalf of the ‘Group of African
States, I should like to pledge our full cooperation and
support for you and your delegation during your tenure as
President of the Council.

32. South Africa is committed to peace and stability in
southern Africa. My Government has often gone on
record to invite the leaders of southern Africa to come
together, to negotiate and to work out solutions’to the
problems of the region. I have frequently repeated and
extended such an invitation in the Council. South Africa
would far prefer to resolve the problems of southern
Africa by negotiation. It does not believe that military
solutions are feasible. I would accordingly like to repeat
the appeal which I made on behalf of my Government on
20 September for the resumption of direct talks between
4

38. We also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
your predecessor, Sir John Thomson, for the very able
manner in which he directed the affairs of the Council last
month.

‘and operative paragraph 1 of resolution 571 (1985)
.
_ and to
raise ihe follo;lling-questions:
-First, having established that racist South Africa has
consistently and with impunity committed acts of
aggression, what decisive action will the Council take?

39. It was on 20 September that the Council met to
debate South African aggression against Angola. We meet
today to discuss another act of aggression by racist South
Africa. In both cases, the aggression was vicious, unprovoked, premeditated and dastardly. In each case, the consequences were devastating in material terms and tragic in
human dimensions and constituted a breach of the peace
and, most certainly, a threat to international peace and
security.

-Secondly, having also established beyond doubt that
South Africa habitually contravenes the Charter and
that Article 39 of the Charter provides options for
action against violations of the Charter, which option
will the Council adopt?
-Thirdly,
is it possible that there are interests so strong
and so committed to the support of South Africa in its
aggression that they will resist all attempts to take
action to halt this aggression?

40. To justify this criminal act, the Pretoria regime has
used numerous pretexts. Its most often repeatedargument
when invading Angola is that of stopping the campaign of
terror by SWAPO. However, in a recent statement credited to the racist Defence Minister, the regime stated its
unswerving commitment
to bolster and support Jonas
Savimbi and his UNITA dissident group, who, as South
Africa’s proxies, are committed to the destabilization of
Angola.

-Fourthly,
is it possible that political-strategic interests
have become so entrenched that they override the fundamental Charter consideration of halting acts of
aggression and maintaining peace and security?
46. One of the main reasons for the outbreak of many
wars in the past has been the appeasement of aggressors or
a lack of effective and decisive action against them. That
was the case in 1939. Today, Africa is being subjected to
aggression on all sides. In the south of our continent we
have an institutionalized racist State terrorizing, destabilizing and ravaging its neighbours. In the north, the Israeli
aggressor, with its traditional bellicose and imperialist
character, has violated the territorial integrity of another
African State, Tunisia. The Group of African States unreservedly condemns this unprovoked and premeditated
action against the sister Republic of Tunisia. I shall have
the opportunity of speaking on that question later today.

41. The facts surrounding-the latest unprovoked South
African attack against Angola are gruesome in their brutality. The Pretoria regime is engaged in saturation bombing of a wide area of Angolan territory and, in particular,
of the area of Mavinga. The latest reports reaching the
Group of African States indicate.that 85 Angolan soldiers
have died, dozens have been wounded and tremendous
material destruction has been caused.
42. There is no reason, no argument, no circumstance
that can justify this unprovoked, consistent and coldblooded aggression with its consequent destabilization of
Angola. The Pretoria regime is bent on following its dcstructive course. It has continuously violated the territorial
integrity and subverted the national sovereignty of the People’s Republic of Angola and the front-line States. It continuously treats with disregard, scorn and utter contempt
the basic principles governing inter-State relations that are
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

47. If the Security Council cannot act decisively, consistent with the provisions of the Charter, it will be a telling
indictment of its capacity, its will and its effectiveness in
regard to discharging its primary function: the maintenance of peace and security, and to react forcefully in the
face of unprovoked aggression.
48. In conclusion, I strongly recommend, on behalf of
the Group of African States, that the Council transcend
the habitual strong but ineffective condemnation of South
Africa for its aggression against Angola and call for the
following measures: the immediate payment of full and
adequate compensation to the People’s Republic of
Angola; the full implementation
of the arms embargo
against South Africa and the application without delay of
comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the Pretoria regime for its policy and practices of apartheid and
acts of aggression against Angola and other front-line
States; and, lastly, that the Council begin to consider other
measures, such as those set out in Article 42 of the Charter,
to stop the racist regime in Pretoria from committing
further acts of aggression against Angola and the front-line
States.

43. The Group of African States strongly condemns this
latest act of unprovoked aggression against Angola. That
act is unacceptable to us, and we wish to state unequivocally that these events ,have gone on for far too long.
44. The fundamental refrain that continues to manifest
itself in the ongoing debates in the General ‘Assembly is
how to strengthen the Organization, especially in regard to
its peace and security functions. The credibility of the’security Council in its primary function-namely,.thk
,maintenance of international peace and security-is severely
jeopardized when the Council cannot be seen to act decisively, effectively and objectively when acts of aggression
and breaches of the peace are blatantly committed.

49. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cameroon. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

45. On behalf of the Group of African States, I call on
the Council to recall the seventh preambular paragraph
5

50. Mr. ENGO (Cameroon): The Cameroon delegation
deeply appreciates the opportunity
granted by the
members of the Council to add the voice of our concerned
nation to the universal expressions of indignation and frustration regarding the continuing compulsion shown by the
archdeacons of the apartheid system in southern Africa.

clear message to the world of a dramatic determination to
bring to an end the senseless loss of life and property as
well as the sufferings of men, women and children caused
by the South African regime. The deprived peoples of
southern Africa have had enough. The spirituality that has
restrained our freeddm-seeking and peace-loving peoples
can no longer spare them the full intensity of the agony
and the blunt real&s of their predicament. Must more
people die? Must future generations of South Africans,
black, white and socalled coloureds, of Namibians, of
Angolans and the nationals of other front-line States be
born into unproductive violence and grow in the bitterness
that buries feelings of love and human understanding, destroying en route those imperatives for the construction of
viable nations?

51. Permit us to commence by congratulating the distinguished team from the United Kingdom, especially Sir
Geoffrey Howe, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, and representative Sir John Thomson,
which brought experience and scholarship to the leadership of the Council last month. We hope that they will
assist you, Mr. President, in the historic task that you inust
discharge this month.
52. We warmly greet you, Sir, at the moment of your
assumption of the heavy responsibilities of the presidency
of the Council. Your nation, the United States, was born in
a spectacular revolution, bringing reality to history’s
abhorrence of economic and social injustices, reaffirming
the inevitable truth that the will of deprived peoples cannot
be suppressed indefinitely and demonstrating that peace
and security are excellent fuels for development. The
United States Constitution recognizes that all men are
created equal and that they are endowed with certain inalienable rights, among which is the right to the pursuit of
freedom.

56. We had the privilege of visiting the sister People’s
Republic of Angola when the non-aligned countries
assembled to discuss the rudiments of peace and economic
development. The picture was so vivid. Angoians are
peace-loving people who have never been given the
genuine opportunity to exploit their God-given resources
for the well-being of their populations. They must seek
survival in a mood of crisis, in a cruel world. National
sovereignty and territorial integrity are concepts which
others take for granted but which in Angola are undermined tith impunity from without. They are supposed to
turn their backs on the fraternal peoples to the south, in
Namibia and in South Africa itself, where even worse
forms of cruelty and injustice express their sardonic joy of
existence.

53. You therefore come from a background of an
extraordinary passion for freedom. This must inspire you
and greatly enhance your capacity not only to understand
the cries of those who are victims of an alarming crescendo
of institutional&d
violence but also to fulfil judiciously
the special leadership role accorded to your nation by
virtue of permanent membership of this important body,
which was established to build and to maintain lasting
international peace and security.

57. The people of Angola are consequently condemned
to divert valuable resources from development to armament in costly defence of the young nation. As is characteristic of conditions today, the manufacturers and salesmen
of diabolical weapons profit from the woes of the poor and
the weak of this era. Before a complacent comity of
nations, the trigger-happy racists of South Africa have
acquireda nuclear capability, thus increasing the chances
of escalating the already precarious arms race in the subregion and further endangering international peace and
security.

54. As a linguist who must understand, more than m&t,
the emotions of peoples across the globe, as an accomplished general who dedicated his life to the struggle against
aggression and other conditions of war, you have a personal background that equips you to face the challenges
thrust upon the Security Council at a moment when this
generation is called upon to fill undesirable gaps in credibility introduced into the United Nations by our very poor
responses to cruelty, immorality, murder and defiance of
universal norms of decency and principles of legality. Your
presidency must not fail, because we cannot afford, in this
commemorative year, to demonstrate an incapacity on the
part of the most powerful among us to defuse the fiustrations of the helpless or to uphold those norms of civilized
conduct we collectively cherish. We must be seen to be
rekindling the lofty hopes of man that attended the success
of San Francisco four decades ago.

58. No, the victims of aggression and a concerned international public do not need the tranquillizers of unproductive resolutions, passed or vetoed. They ask for no more
than effective co-operation for the attainment of peace in
the region. They welcomed the recent initiative of one of
the permanent members of the Security Council to draw
attention dramatically to the plight of the people of that
region, as well as to the dangers that provoke breaches of
international peace and security. Those poor people saw in
that action some light at the end of the tunnel. We must
not prove that it was a mere mirage. There can be no
turning back now.

55. We have not requested this opportunity of speaking
here merely to join in a chorus of deserved condemnation,
which the Pretoria rigime has consistently treated with
casual contempt. It is our belief that the Security Council
must reach a decision after this debate which would send a

59. In our dilemma and in our frustration, we send out a
strong appeal to the two super-Powers of this age and to
the other economic and military giants of this era. We ask
them to accept a moratorium on confrontation over the
critical issue ijf disarmament, to examine the grave and
6

impeding effects of the arms race on the chances of survival of a young nation like Angola, and to monitor the
threats of wider conflict deriving from evil winds of belligerency blowing over what may appear to be small or localized skirmishes.

65. My delegation also finds it incredible and altogether
unacceptable that the South African Government should
blatantly disregard the decisions of the Council enshrined
in resolution 571(1985). That constitutes a deliberate flouting of international opinion and, even more, of the United
Nations body charged with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
South African action deserves the severe censure of the
Council. The South Africans must understand that those
actions forfeit all respect and sympathy.

60. Instead of mere condemnatory resolutions, let the
world witness new initiatives for substantive change of policies in South Africa, enhancing meaningful negotiations
and leading to immediate termination of the current acts
of barbarism perpetrated by the racists. The major Powers
of the day are represented here. Collectively they have the
power and influence to bring the Pretoria regime down
from the shelves of decadence and illusion, where it seems
to be filed away from civilisation. The racists do not possess the moral rectitude with which those Powers could
engage in any evolutionary process. The longer the powerful nations shy away from facing this historic responsibility, the more our daily existence will continue to underline
the nature of the evil, with its lamentable predictability.

66. As I have said, the South African Government seems
extraordinarily blind to the principles and concerns of
governments such as mine. It leaves my delegation with a
sense of indignation that it should so misunderstand us.
67. The representative of South Africa has just given us
various pieces of advice. It is ironic that he does not see
that in the first place that advice applies to his own
Government. The representative of South Africa calls for
the removal of all foreign forces from Angola. We agree.
But what business, then, do the South African forces have
in Angola fighting the legitimate Government of the country? The representative of South Africa urged the Angolan
Government to hold free elections. At one and the same
time, the South Africans actually negotiate with the
Government of Angola, thus acknowledging it, and attack
it militarily. How are free elections to be held in those
conditions? Moreover, if we are in the business of giving
advice to sovereign governments about holding elections,
what about free and full elections in South Africa? How
about beginning at least with a dialogue with the genuine
leaders of black South Africans?

61. For the rest, we offer our fraternal condolences to
our brothers and sisters of Angola, reaching out to those
others who bear the oppressive burdens of the deprivations
induced by the apartheid system. Our sense of solidarity
grows stronger with each grief provoked by the calculated
mischief of collaborators in crime in that region. Our frustrations must lead us to greater endeavours, knowing that
we cannot lose, because God and truth are on the side of
those who have a just cause.
62. We look forward to the day when we can all assemble here to hail the dawn of peace, real peace, lasting peace
and progress in southern Africa, peace designed and
achieved through the leadership of the Security Councilleadership over which you, Sir, as a distinguished representative of a super-Power, presided.

68. I return now, after these spontaneous comments on
the pieces of advice we have just heard, to the immediate
situation before us. In resolution 571 (1985), the Security
Council decided to embark on a particular course of action
with regard to the conflict within Angola. As the Council
urged in paragraph 8 of that resolution, Member States are
applying pressure to the South African Government. In
accordance with paragraph 7, the Council has now
appointed three of its members to constitute a Commission of Investigation to visit Angola.

63. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): I intervene
on the question of the South African attack on Angola for
the second time in two weeks and with a deep sense of
indignation. During the Council’s debate on 20 September
[2607th meefing], I stated in the clearest possible terms the
British Government’s condemnation of South African
incursions into Angola and repeated violations of Angolan
sovereignty. I spoke against intervention by combat troops
from other countries. It is our firm belief that it should be
left to the people of Angola to resolve their internal affairs
without such external intervention. Intervention from
whatever quarter carriers an obvious risk to regional stability and cannot but impede efforts to resolve the urgent
problems of southern Africa.

69. In the present situation, we should carry through
energetically and expeditiously the action upon which we
decided on 20 September. It would be most helpful to us if
the Commission of Investigation could visit Angola in the
very near future to carry out its important work and report
back to us at the earliest possible date. Its report will be of
considerable assistance to the Council as it seeks to establish what further action it can best take to help bring peace
to Angola.

64. While I do not wish to repeat what I have so recently
said, I cannot emphasize too strongly that the United
Kingdom deplores and condemns the renewed attack by
South Africa upon Angola, and is concerned at its consequences. South Africa’s action is not merely improper and
illegitimate,
but utterly shortsighted and certain to be
counter-productive. We find it incredible that the South
African authorities fail to perceive how damaging such
behaviour is to their own national interests and security, to
say nothing of others’.

70. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
71. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): At the outset, Sir, I
should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Your vast knowledge
of international relations and issues undoubtedly makes
you well qualified to guide the proceedings of this Council.
7

72. At the same time, I should like to congratulate the
representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John Thomson,
on the distinguished and knowledgeable manner in which
he guided the deliberations of the Council during the
month of September.

79. The use of force, and occupation, intervention and
destabilization are recognized as crimes by the intemational community, and therefore they are crimes in southem Africa as well as elsewhere. In our opinion no
allowance can be made in this regard for any Power and
no new set of rules can be introduced for any region,
including in this particular case South Africa.

73. It may be helpful to recall that representatives of the
family of nations have gathered here at United Nations
Headquarters for the fortieth session of the General
Assembly, resolved to give an impetus to dialogue and to
negotiations. It may be recalled as well that that was the
substance of the call issued by the Conference of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries that was held at
Luanda. While in Angola, participants from 120 countries,
about two thirds of the membership of the United Nations,
became witnesses to the desire and dedication of the
Government and the people of Angola to live in peace, to
invest their energies in the recovery and reconstruction of
their land, and to strengthen. the independence of their
country.

80. Yugoslavia extends its full suunort and solidarity to
the people of Angola, to the other front-line States and to
the national liberation movements in South Africa and
Namibia.
81. It might be worth while to repeat that the countries
maintaining relations and co-operating with South Africa
should heed the voice of reason and understand that any
co-operation with South Africa is detrimental to peace and
stability in the region, and that such co-operation blocks
international efforts aimed at eliminating apartheid and
achieving independence and selfdetermination
for the
people of Namibia and the liberation of the front-line
States from constant pressure, interference and aggression
by South Africa. Those countries should use the weight
they carry with South Africa to make it change its policy.

74. It might very well be recalled too that in the course of
the last 10 days, in the General Assembly an overwhelming
majority of Heads of State or Government and Foreign
Ministers have stressed the necessity of dialogue and
expressed the hope that the impending dialogue between
the two super-Powers will produce a climate in which the
use of force can be effectively curbed and we can turn to a
peaceful way of solving disputes. The emphasis is on peace
and the peaceful.
75. But South Africa has once again chosen to show us
all that it simply does not care about that.‘It has recklessly
committed another act of aggression against Angola only a
few days after the Security Council called upon it to cease
all acts of aggression against that State and scrupulously to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola.

82. I should like also to recall here that the Conference of
Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries at Luanda
adopted a special communique on South Africa, [S/Z7610
and Corr.1, annex, p. 60’j in which the conference reaffirmed its solidarity with Angola and other African States
that have been the victims of South Africa’s brutal aggression. The communique said that the military incursions
into and the occupation of parts of the territory of Angola
by South Africa are a clear manifestation of the threat
which the apartheid regime poses to international peace
and security, and the Foreign Ministers demanded the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of South African
troops from Angolan territory.

76. South Africa has once again destroyed lives; it has
destroyed property; and it has violated an independent
country and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
country. While there is no doubt that the material damage
can be restored, the lives of children, of women and of men
so ruthlessly and criminally done away with cannot be
restored.

83. Two days ago, the Ministers and Heads of Delegation of Non-Aligned Countries, considering South Africa’s
latest aggression against Angola, renewed the call repeatedly made by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for
the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions
against South Africa under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter [see S/27528, annex].

77. Angola is being advised by some to be patient and to
negotiate with South Africa. While ready to do this, nonaligned Angola continues to be made the victim of incursions, of bombardments and of commando raids aimed at
crushing the will of its people to stand up and tight against
the extension of the evil regime of aparrheid.

84. We believe that it is the obligation of the Security
Council to adopt at this time a meaningful resolution containing meaningful measures.
85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Isidoro Malmierca Peoli.
I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

78. The hands of apartheid, soaked in the blood of the
people of South Africa, are continually seizing on the lives
and freedom of the peoples of the front-fine States, including Angola. Unwilling to see the reality and the inevitability of change, they desperately want to carry the system of
apartheid all the way into the twenty-first century. They are
adding fuel to the flames of distrust, and they are threatening to plunge the whole region into conflagration.

86. Mr. MALMIERCA
PEOLI (Cuba) (interpretation
from Spanish): Only a few days ago, on 20 September, the
Security Council adopted a resolution which, inter alia,
strongly condemned the racist regime of South Africa for
its armed invasions of the People’s Republic of Angola and
8

furthermore demanded that South Africawithdraw forthwith and unconditionally all its military forces from that
country’s territory.

aggression by South Africa against Angola. In both cases,
the same Power‘is stimulating acts of aggression through
its unconditional political, diplomatic, economic and military support. The “strategic alliance” between the United
States and Israel and its policy of “constructive engagement” with South Africa are two sides of a single false
coin. They are the Trojan horse of imperialist aggression
against the Arab’ and African peoples.

87. Nevertheless, the racist Pretoria regime has not only
once again ignored a resolution of this body, which is
charged with the maintenance of international peace and
security, but, in open defiance of the authority of the
Council and the will of the international community,
stepped up its aggression against Angola, initiating an
escalation by using its air force to provide cover for its
. infantry, which, in express violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the decisions of the Council, continues
to sow death and destruction in the sovereign territory of a
Member State of the United Nations.

93. Every day we see an increase in.the protest by the
international community, which is calling for an end to
Israeli aggression, the withdrawal of its forces from all
Arab and Palestinian territories and the exercise of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Similarly, we
see a constant increase in the indignation felt by the international public at the outrages of the racist authorities in
South Afiida. As evidence of this, of the 83 speakers who
had addressed the General Assembly in the general debate
up to yesterday, the overwhelming majority-73
countries-condemned
the apartheid system in the strongest
terms and called for an immediate unconditional end to
South Africa’s acts of aggression against neighbouring
countries. In addition, the calls are becoming more numerous for the application of effective sanctions against South
Africa, including those provided for under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

88. The significance of this is that the racist authorities
have ceased to attempt to conceal their true designs. They
are publicly voicing their determination to continue their
attacks and acts of aggression against Angola and are now
overtly proclaiming their determination to carry out open
war against Angola.
89. Long ago, in this very forum, Cuba denounced the
goals pursued by the Pretoria racists through these actions.
South Africa is seeking to protect the mercenary bands of
UNITA from the unerring blows that have been inflicted
upon them in recent months by FAPLA and at the same
time to distract the attention of international public opinion and opinion in its own country from the explosive
situation that has developed in South Africa as a result of
the criminal cowardly repression Mr. Botha’s henchmen
have unleashed against black men, women, children and
old persons who with unparalleled heroism and courage
are risking their lives by confronting the shameful system
of apartheid.

94. Here as well, various members of the Council whose
Foreign Ministers spoke at the special meeting to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations
have expressed their concern at the frequent use of the veto
by some permanent members of, the Council to protect
their allies in Pretoria and at the non-compliance of the
racist Governments with the resolutions of the Council.
That provides further proof, if proof were necessary, of the
need to take measures to enable the Council to fulfil its
responsibilities under the Charter.

90. On the other hand, we cannot rule out the possibility
that the racists are seeking to provoke through these
actions a major confrontation with Angola, with unforeseeable consequences, with a view to ensuring greater support from their closest allies, in particular the United
States, and thus trying to escape their growing intemational isolation.

95. The Ministerial Conference of Non-Aligned Countries which met recently at Luanda expressed the firm conviction of its 101 full members when it condemned the
apartheid regime in the most energetic terms and called for
the imposition of the sanctions provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter.

91. It cannot be a coincidence that, only a few days after
the repeal of the Clark amendment by the United States
Congress, South Africa increased and publicly avowed its
support for the UNITA bandits. Nor can the intention of
the United States Government, in supressing that amendment, be anything other than to encourage the Pretoria
racists to continue the escalation of their action against
Angola within the framework of its policy of “constructive
engagement’* with the fascist Botha.

96. The Security Council in its resolution on Angola of
20 September urges Member States to take prompt, appropriate and effective action to bring pressure to bear upon
the Government of South Africa’ to comply with the provisions contained therein and in the Charter, to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and to desist
from all acts of aggression against neighbouring States. It
also requests Member States urgently to extend all necessary assistance to Angola and other front-line States in
order to strengthen their defence capacity against South
Africa’s acts of aggression.

92. Cuba has on more than one occasion, acting with
other Member States, condemned the WashingtonPretoria-Tel Aviv axis. Its murky activities are now being
considered by the Council, which is obliged to consider
,practically at the same time the treacherous attack perpetrated by the Zionist regime of Israel against the peaceloving sister Republic of Tunisia and this cowardly act of

97. The South African racists’ reply to ‘that’ unanimous
position of the Security Council constitutes the clearest
evidence, if any still entertain doubts on the matter, that
this body must proceed without further delay to apply the
9

comprehensive mandatory sanctions that are clearly provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter.

from any further aggressive actions against Angola, a
course which, as the representative of the United Kingdom
has just said, would seem, in our eyes, to be in South
Africa’s own best interests.

98. Cuba, which has never hesitated to extend its hand in
solidarity to our brothers in Angola faced with acts of
aggression by the racists, takes this opportunity to reiterate
its steadfast support for the Government and people of
Angola.

106. Mr. KASEMSARN
(Thailand): Two weeks aeo the
Security Council met to consider the. agenda item e&led
“Complaint by Angola against South Africa”, resulting
from the renewed escalation of hostile, unprovoked and
persistent acts of aggression and sustained armed invasions
committed by the racist regime of South Africa in violation of the sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of
Angola. The Council then unanimously adopted resolution 571 (1985) demanding that “South Africa withdraw
forthwith and unconditionally all its military forces from
the territory of the People’s Republic of Angola” and
deciding “to appoint and send immediately to Angola a
commission of investigation . . . in order to evaluate the
damage resulting from the invasion by South African
forces’*.

99. Mr. WOOLCO’IT
(Australia): My delegation listened with concern and sympathy to the statement of the
representative of Angola, who for the third time in as
many months has been forced to appear before the Council as a direct result of South Africa’s illegal military interventions against his country in disregard of Angola’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty.
100. It is clear that this latest action on the part of the
South African armed forces was illegal, and the Australian
Government deplores the loss of life and the destruction of
property that it entailed. My Government extends its sympathy to the families of those killed and injured in these
attacks.

107. Up to now, the racist regime of South Africa has
continued to maintain its forces in Angola in blatant
defiance of the Council’s resolution. My delegation is
therefore compelled once again to express in the Council
Thailand’s grave concern about the continuation of the
serious situation in Angola.

101. The Australian Government has consistently condemned South Africa’s attacks this year against Angola
and Botswana, as well as the attacks in recent years against
other neighbouring countries of South Africa.

108. Having made a statement in the Council on the
complaint against South Africa by its neighbouring countries on several occasions concerning the acts of aggression
by South Africa against those countries, my delegation
believes that any foreign occupation and violation by one
country of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
another country constitutes a gross violation of intemational law and the Charter of the United Nations. We see
no justification whatsoever in the violation of Angola’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity by South African forces. Such actions not only threaten the stability of the
southern African region but also undermine international
peace and security.

102. Australia rejects South Africa’s claim to any right to
enter the sovereign territory of its neighbours against their
will. Australia cannot condone the doctrine of tutorial or
punitive aggression. Australia may be geographically far
removed from southern Africa, but we follow very closely
developments in that region.
103. South Africa’s repugnant apartheid policies, its
aggressions against its neighbours and its refusal to relinquish control of Namibia constitute fundamental violations of international law and human rights which, as we
have said many, too many, times, are totally unacceptable
to us.

109. Thailand has consistently and in the strongest possible terms opposed and condemned South Africa’s acts of
aggression against the neighbouring countries, as well as
its illegal occupation of Namibia. We therefore demand
that the racist Pretoria regime cease its lawless acts and
immediately and unconditionally withdraw its illegal presence from Angolan and Namibian territories. Moreover,
South Africa must desist from any further violation of
Angolan sovereignty and territorial integrity and adequately compensate Angola for any loss resulting from
South African actions. My delegation also demands that
South Africa comply with resolution 571 (1985) and other
relevant United Nations resolutions without further delay.

104. Australia was pleased to be asked to participate in
the Commission of Investigation formed by the Security
Council in application of resolution 571 (1985) to evaluate
as soon as possible the damage resulting from the previous
invasion of Angola by South African forces in September
of this year. Our participation reflects our concern that all
members of the international community, and particularly
members of the Council, have a role to play in containing
the escalation of violence which has occurred in recent
months in Angola and in other parts of southern Africa.
105. When acts, good or bad, occur frequently, there is
an imperceptible tendency somehow to become accustomed to such acts. It is the duty of members of the Council not to grow accustomed to such acts, but to maintain
and to re-emphasize condemnation of illegal actions in the
hope that repetition will oblige South Africa to accept the
established norms of international behaviour. Therefore,
Australia reiterates its appeal to South Africa to refrain

110. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
111. Mr. SARRB (Senegal) (interpretation from French): I
should like first to thank the representative of the United
10

Kingdom for his preliminary comments which were so
objective and pertinent with regard to the South African
delegation. My delegation endorses what he said, and I
shall therefore, not repeat those remarks.

and security, must act in order to command respect for its
authority.
119. The stubborn policy pursued by the South African
Government, which is heedless of any appeal or warning
and poses a threat to international peace and security,
should be met with a vigorous response from the Council,
a response commensurate with the great hopes and faith
the peoples and the Governments of Africa continue to
repose in the United Nations.

112. Yesterday the Council embarked on a debate on the
Israeli attack against Tunisia, and today it is opening a
new debate, the seventh this year, on South African aggression against neighbouring territories. As members will
have noted, in both those cases it is Africa that has always
been the victim. With regard to those attacks against
Africa, we are tempted to apply the remark of the Cornelian hero on the subject of Africa, when he said that on
both sides the evil is infinite.

120. A few days ago [2606rh meeting‘l in this Chamber,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, read to the Council a message from President Abdou
Diouf to the President of Angola which reflected the condemnation and censure of all of Africa against the State
terrorism of South Africa.

113. In the face of this aggression, Mr. Abdou Diaf,
President of Senegal and the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) who is now visiting
the front-line States, has asked me to express to the Council Africa’s renewed confidence that the Council will now
do everything in its power to make South Africa see reason. The credibility of the Council is at stake, as is the
consolidation of international peace and security.

121. At these critical moments when the credibility and
the fate of the United Nations are at stake, I have no
doubt whatsoever that the Council will act in accord with
the wisdom of its members and the precious heritage of
the founding Members of the Organization to bring
about the victory of the cause of human rights and peace
in the world.

114. It is with great resolution that Africa comes to the
Council once again. Our continent would far prefer peace
and security so that it might be able to devote all of its
resources, human and otherwise, to development. The
most recent summit meeting of the OAU gave proof of
this.

122. At a time when the United Nations is commemorating its fortieth anniversary, it is anachronistic and wrong
for the South African people to continue to live under the
same Pretoria regime, and for the sovereign and independent African States to continue to be victims of aggression
by the forces of apartheid, just as the Palestinian people
continue to be denied the exercise of their inalienable
rights. The verdict of history awaits us, and we must succeed in setting the record straight in response to the legitimate as aspirations of those peoples.

115. Once again flouting the principle of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the racist
South African regime has, after a pause of only two weeks,
attacked and violated southern Angola, thereby demonstrating in how little esteem it holds the decisions of the
Council.

123. The Council is called on once again to shoulder
fully its responsibilities to Angola, the front-line States and
the international community in order to put an end to such
acts of aggression through the implementation
of mandatory comprehensive sanctions, which alone can bring the
South African regime to see reason. The Council also has
an opportunity to identify ways and means of ensuring the
immediate and full implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions with regard to Namibia.

116. Only a few days ago, the Council, deciding to
shoulder fully its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations, strongly condemned the South African
racist regime for the act of aggression it committed on 16
September against the People’s Republic of Angola and
demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
all South African military forces from the territory of
Angola. Thus South Africa’s determination to defy the
international community, including those Powers that had
hoped that reason might prevail, is more obvious than
ever.

124. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

117. By openly implementing
its policy of aggression
against the independent neighbouring States, the South
African regime is practising an imperialism so overt that it
no longer needs describing. It has even had the effrontery
to presume to speak and to decide on behalf of the sovereign people of Angola.

125. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency. My compliments and thanks go also to your predecessor, Sir John Thomson, for the very special way that he
conducted the affairs of the presidency and for the valuable services he offered to the Council.

118. Faced with this serious situation, one that may
become aggravated and plunge southern Africa and the
whole of the African continent into chaos, the Security
Council, to which the Charter has entrusted the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace

126. The South African regime has launched its second
aerial invasion of Angola in just two weeks. The purpose
11

of these savage attacks is to paralyse the defence capability
of Angola and to give protection to the QlITA mercenar:
ies, who have been receiving military and other support
from the United States Administration
contrary to the
Clark Amendment, which forbids that Administration to
offer immoral and unjustified military and political sup
port for the UNITA henchmen who, under the guise of
fighting for freedom and democracy, provide shelter for
the apartheid regime of South Africa in order to secure,
American interests. Suffice it to remember that of the
3,000 multinational ‘companies in South Africa, at least
600 totally or partially belong to American investors. The
economic ties between United States companies and the
apartheid regime of South Africa are better disclosed
nowadays with the riots that have occured in South Africa.
However, in addition to the United States there are others
who have economic and even military co-operation with
the apartheid regime.

preservation of American interests. Both regimes are
protected-very
often, as a matter of fact-by American
vetoes in the Security Council. Finally, both regimes enjoy
the luxury of intelligence, military, technological and economic co-operation with Western imperialism, headed by
the United States. And, interestingly enough, both regimes
are also producers of military hardware.
132. Both regimes attack the countries that give refuge to
those who have escaped from the repressive policies of the
two racist regimes. In Botswana, South Africa claimed to
have killed terrorists. Among the 12 victims, there was a
child of six and an old man of about 60.
133. As the international community has often decided,
the nations of the world must sever their military, economic, cultural and diplomatic relations with South Africa
and the Zionist base in the Middle East. Regrettably, there
are countries which simply make a mockery of that call to
the global conscience and maintain their illegal ties with
both the apartheid regime and the Zionist base.

127. We have just heard the statement of the representative of South Africa in which he advocated democracy for
Angola and called for free elections in that country. What
a surprise. That is exactly what the whole world also wants
to occur in South Africa, and the people of South Africa
are at this very moment tighting for it. If free elections are
good, then why not in South Africa too?

134. In paragraph 4 of its recent resolution 571 (1985),
the Security Council “Calls upon all States to implement
fully the arms embargo imposed against South Africa in
resolution 418 (1977)“. Yet military co-operation and even
arms purchases by certain countries continue. As reported
in document S/l7322 of 3 July 1985, the miserable Iraqi
regime, perhaps as a result of its racist nature, is also to be
found in the camp of those criminals which have military
ties with the apartheid regime of South Africa.

128. The apartheid regime occupying South Africa and
the Zionist regime occupying Palestine are identical in
many respects. Both of them are agents of the global arrogance headed by the United States. Both of them adopt
strict racial policies against local inhabitants. In South
Africa, the local black population, and in occupied Palestine, the indigenous Palestinian Arabs are the victims of
those racial policies. Both regimes claim to be fighting
communism in order to protect Western interests. Do you
think, Mr. President, that the American oil companies in
Cabinda and the American technicians and experts were
really communists?

135. Those who are involved in military, economic, cultural and diplomatic activities in South Africa and those
who purchase arms and other products from that country
are, as a matter of fact, assisting the apartheid regime in all
its crimes against both the indigenous population in that
country and neighbouring nations. It is imperative that
such countries act more responsibly in regard to the criminal regime of South Africa.

129. Both regimes are indisputably the agents of tension
and instability in their respective regions. In the region of
southern Africa, all the neighbouring countries such as
Botswana, Angola and Mozambique are targets of South
Africa’s unbridled attacks, whereas in the Middle East, all
the neighbouring countries, and even those hundreds of
miles away, are not immune to Zionist aggression.

136. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
strongly condemns the recent military attack by the South
African regime against Angola and expects the intemational community not only strongly to condemn this act of
aggression but also to reiterate its call for the total isolation of the racist regime of Pretoria in order to bring to”an
end its crimes and acts of aggression.

130. Both regimes try to secure their borders and, to
achieve this objective, try to sign non-aggression pacts and
peace agreements with their neighbours. We have now
seen that, when necessary, the racist regime of Pretoria
violates those pacts and agreements, as in the cases of the
Lusaka and Nkomati agreements. Do you not think, Mr.
President, that those violations should teach a lesson to
those who are now thinking of initiating negotiations with
the Zionist aggressors and are in fact going to fail into the
same trap as was set for South Africa’s neighbours?

137. The PRESIDENT:
The fact that I am President
does not mean that I cannot reply. On a number of occasions the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
asked if I did not agree with him. On many of them-in.
fact, most of them- I did not.
138. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation believes that the time for words has passed
and that the usefulness of repetitive talk has long since
come to an end. We believe it is high time for the Security
Council to take decisive action in regard to this frequently
recurring situation.

131. Both those regimes engage in mutual nuclear cooperation and enjoy technical assistance from Western
countries. Both rigimes constitute strategic bases for the
12

139. Barely two weeks have passed since the adoption by
the Council of resolution 571 (1985), in which it clearly
condemned the aggression committed by South Africa
against Angola and called for the immediate withdrawal of
South African military forces and the cessation of all acts
of aggression against that State. Yet South Africa has now
launched a new act of aggression, using its infantry and air
force in the manner indicated by the representative of
Angola in his statement this morning.
140. Despite this blatant defiance of the resolutions and
the authority of the Security Council by South Africa, its
representative has come here to give us advice. The repre-

sentative of the United Kingdom has responded to that
advice, and therefore the delegation of Egypt need not
return to the point.
141. The racist Pretoria Government has proved by its
acts of aggression that it will not abide by Council resolutions until the Council takes the steps provided for in the
Charter of the United Nations. Therefore, as I said at the
beginning of this statement, it is high time for action. The
Council must act decisively in order to regain its dignity. It
must take all the measures within its prerogatives to deal
with these repeated acts of aggression.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC TIOJYHHTh

H3&4HH5I

OPPAHH3AHHH

OB’bB~HHBHHb~

.

HAHk@i

kI3JIiuruff
0~MIXSi3UFiA
06’be#!ttinemrbrx Hamrft MOEHO K)'lTHTb B KHWiCHbIX
Mara3IiHaX
H~eHTCTBaXBOBCCXpaftOH~Mupa.H~o~TeCnp~Ku
06 83lWWXX
BBauICMKHHXUIOM
Marasmre srmi rtumnre no anpecy: Oprami3amr
06%eAImxHb!X
HattuB, Cexuna
l’tpOAaXeH3ACtIiSif8,
HbH)-tiopK
MB %WZBa.

no

COMO CONSEGUIB PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

90-61439-March

1995-l

,925
