A/77/818

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 April 2023
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 143

Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee
Rapporteur: Mr. Marinko Avramović (Bosnia and Herzegovina)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “Human resources management” and to
allocate it to the Fifth Committee.
2.
The Fifth Committee considered the item at its 26th and 28th meetings, on 6 and
31 March 2023. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee’s
consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records. 1
3.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following
documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on the ways forward in the
implementation of human resources management reforms for the period 2023–2026
(A/77/590);
(b) Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (A/77/728);
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on the overview of human resources
management reform for the period 2021–2022 (A/77/590/Add.1);
(d) Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (A/77/728/Add.1);
(e) Report of the Secretary-General on his practice in disciplinary matters and
cases of possible criminal behaviour, 1 January to 31 December 2021 ( A/77/606);
(f) Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (A/77/730);
__________________
1

23-06115 (E)

A/C.5/77/SR.26 and A/C.5/77/SR.28.

130423

*2306115*

A/77/818

(g) Report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat:
staff demographics (A/77/580);
(h) Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (A/77/729);
(i) Report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat:
gratis personnel, retired staff, consultants and individual contractors, and United
Nations Volunteers (A/77/578);
(j) Related report of the Advisory Committee on A dministrative and
Budgetary Questions (A/77/727);
(k) Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Ethics Office
(A/77/75);
(l) Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (A/77/545);
(m) Note by the Secretary-General drawing attention to the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit on the review of the ethics function within the United Nations system
(JIU/REP/2021/5) (A/77/258);
(n) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit on the review of the ethics function within the United Nations
system (JIU/REP/2021/15) (A/77/258/Add.1).

II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.5/77/L.31
4.
At its 28th meeting, on 31 March, the Committee had before it a draft resolution
entitled “Human resources management” (A/C.5/77/L.31), submitted by the Chair of
the Committee on the basis of informal consultations coordinated by the
representatives of Georgia, Malaysia and Portugal.
5.
At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.5/77/L.31
without a vote (see para. 6).

2/12

23-06115

A/77/818

III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee
6.
The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolution:

Human resources management
The General Assembly,
Recalling Articles 8, 97, and 100 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, which governs
the appointment, employment, and recruitment of staff,
Recalling further its resolutions 42/220 A of 21 December 1987, 49/222 A and B
of 23 December 1994 and 20 July 1995, 51/226 of 3 April 1997, 52/219 of
22 December 1997, 53/221 of 7 April 1999, 55/258 of 14 June 2001, 57/305 of
15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/287 of 13 April 2005, 60/1 of
16 September 2005, 60/238 of 23 December 2005, 60/254 of 8 May 2006, 60/260 of
8 May 2006, 61/244 of 22 December 2006, 62/247 of 3 April 2008, 63/250 of
24 December 2008, 65/247 of 24 December 2010, 66/234 of 24 December 2011,
67/255 of 12 April 2013, 68/252 of 27 December 2013, 68/265 of 9 April 2014, 70/244
of 23 December 2015 and 71/263 of 23 December 2016 as well as its other relevant
resolutions and decisions,
Having considered the relevant reports of the Secretary-General on human
resources management submitted to the General Assembly 1 and the related reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 2
Having also considered the note by the Secretary-General drawing attention to
the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the review of the ethics function in the
United Nations system, 3 as well as the comments of the Secretary-General and of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon, 4
1.
Reaffirms that the staff of the United Nations is an invaluable asset of the
Organization, and commends its contribution to furthering the purposes and principles
of the United Nations;
2.
Pays tribute to the memory of all staff members who have lost their lives
in the service of the Organization;
3.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
4.
Emphasizes the fundamental importance of the human resources
management reform in the United Nations as a contribution to the enha ncement of the
efficiency and effectiveness of the United Nations and of the international civil
service, and encourages continued transparency in its implementation;
5.
Notes the human resources framework and the Secretary-General’s
proposed ways forward in its implementation, and requests the Secretary-General to
refine the parameters, including clearly quantifiable targets, benchmarks and
timelines for measuring impact for the diversity, agility and accountability outcomes,
__________________

A/77/590, A/77/590/Add.1, A/77/580, A/77/578, A/77/75 and A/77/606.
A/77/728, A/77/728/Add.1, A/77/729, A/77/727, A/77/545 and A/77/730.
3
A/77/258.
4
A/77/258/Add.1.
1
2

23-06115

3/12

A/77/818

to adjust the implementation plans accordingly, and to report thereon, including
progress achieved, to the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed seventy ninth session;
6.
Takes note of paragraph 50 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 5
stresses the importance of a comprehensive human resources management strategy to
assist the Secretary-General in performing human resources functions in a holistic
and integrated manner and in ensuring the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Organization, requests the Secretary-General to take stock of his human resources
reform efforts and to submit for the consideration of the General Assembly at its
eightieth session a human resources strategy, building upon the successes and lessons
learned over the decade and bearing in mind the need to respond to the challenges for
the future;
7.
Notes that there is no separate recruitment policy in relation to posts
funded by extrabudgetary resources and posts funded by assessed contributions;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to make efforts to safeguard compliance
of the recruitment policy and process of the resident coordinator system with the Staff
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, as appropriate, and to ensure a
transparent selection process of the resident coordinator system, wit h the aim to treat
internal and external candidates equally;
9.
Recognizes the Secretary-General’s intent to update the Secretariat’s staff
selection system, including through the staff selection 2.0 programme, in accordance
with Articles 97 and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, to improve the overall
human resources management, to ensure a recruitment system that is effective, fair,
efficient and agile, and to enable the Organization to have a diverse workforce, and
requests the Secretary-General to provide detailed information on changes to staff
selection covering all phases of the recruitment process, including an analysis of the
impact on recruitment practices, projected timelines, resources required, the
designation of central and individual roles and responsibilities for the recruitment
process, and the transition from current applicant qualification requirements (work
experience and education) in the job openings to the inclusion of the knowledge, skills
and abilities required, with the aim to ensure merit-based selection, increase
objectivity, avoid bias and be fair to all applicants;
10. Reiterates that the Secretary-General has to ensure that the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity serve as the paramount
consideration in the employment of staff and in the determination of the conditions
of service, with due regard to the importance of recruiting staff on as wide a
geographical basis as possible, in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter;
11. Underlines the need for strategic workforce planning across the
Organization, encourages the Secretary-General to integrate all skills and capabilities
required to fulfil mandates and respond effectively to current and future challenges,
into all stages of staff recruitment and retention, and requests the Secretary-General
to intensify his efforts to anticipate future workforce needs and to report thereon in
its next overview report;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the ongoing human
resources management reforms and business transformation projects, to continue to
ensure the equal treatment of candidates with equivalent educational backgrounds
during the recruitment process, taking fully into account the fact that Member States
__________________
5

4/12

A/77/728.
23-06115

A/77/818

have different education systems and that no education system shall be considered the
standard to be applied by the Organization;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, when considering applicants for
vacancies, to give equal treatment of internal and external candidat es and to provide
the percentage of internal and external candidates selected in the context of future
reports;
14. Recalls paragraph 51 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 6 notes with
serious concern that the 120-day target for recruitment timelines continues not to be
met, and requests the Secretary-General to develop and undertake concrete measures
to increase efficiency and tackle the root causes of delays in its staff selection process,
based on concrete analysis of each stage of the recruitment process to reduce
recruitment timelines and meet the 120-day target;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to expand the
professional development opportunities provided to staff, including language training
and training in the six official languages, to meet the workforce capacity needs of the
Secretariat;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to assess the frequency, adequacy,
benefits, gaps and functioning of mandatory training in order to contribute to the
fulfilment of the mandates of the Organization;
17. Stresses the urgent need to nurture a culture of staff mobility and accelerate
the mobility process across the Organization, in particular movements between
Headquarters and field duty stations, in order to build an agile, adaptable and
motivated workforce required to effectively deliver on the mandates entrusted by the
General Assembly, and takes notes of the decision of the Secretary -General to
implement annual mobility exercises through a new, consolidated approach to staff
mobility, starting in 2023;
18. Recalls paragraph 49 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 7 reaffirms
the role of the General Assembly in providing guidance on the mobility framework,
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly, at the first part of its
resumed seventy-ninth session, details on the policy and progress of implementation
of the new consolidated mobility framework, including non-financial incentives at
the Secretariat and entity levels to encourage mobility and motivate staff to participate
in the programme, in particular movements between Headquarters and field duty
stations; the impact on the composition of the Secretariat, diversity targets and
external recruitment; cost implications and measures to mitigate future increased
resource requirements; linkage to career development; and an assessment of the
current policy of liens and its impact on mobility;
19. Emphasizes the importance of providing the General Assembly, in the
context of the human resources management overview reports, with periodic updates
on the progress made in the framework’s implementation, including information
related to any observed impact on recruitment trends, and its contribution to skill
development and career progression, as well as information on staff experience and
satisfaction with the framework;
20. Takes note of paragraph 15 of the Advisory Committee report, 8 notes the
efforts of the Secretary-General to recruit staff on as wide a geographical basis as
possible, in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter, and re quests the
__________________

Ibid.
Ibid.
8
A/77/729.
6
7

23-06115

5/12

A/77/818

Secretary-General to report on the ongoing efforts and progress achieved towards
geographical diversity across the Organization;
21. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure as wide a
geographical distribution of staff as possible at all levels, including at the Director
and higher levels, across all geographical posts of the Secretariat, and to report
thereon in his next overview report;
22. Notes that the system of desirable ranges is a mechanism with quantifiable
targets, and requests the Secretary-General to report on each Member State’s
representation status, desirable range and movement of geographical posts needed to
reach within range status, in his report on composition of the Secretariat;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to update the system of desirable ranges
in the Secretariat, with effect from 1 January 2024, incorporating the following
changes:
(a) Widen the posts subject to the system of desirable ranges to all regular
budget funded posts at the Professional and higher categories, including in special
political missions and peacekeeping operations, excluding language posts;
(b) Update annually the calculation of the lower and upper limits of the
desirable ranges for all Member States, using th e most updated base figure, and the
number of Member States;
(c)

Review the system of desirable ranges every five years;

24. Encourages the Secretary-General to work towards bringing each
unrepresented and underrepresented Member State within its desirable range by 2030;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all posts subject to the
system of desirable ranges are encumbered accordingly and that vacant posts are filled
expeditiously;
26. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 9 and
requests the Secretary-General to urge his senior managers to meet the geographical
targets contained in the senior managers’ compacts and report on progress achieved
in his report on the composition of the Secretariat;
27.

Takes note of paragraph 27 of the report of the Advisory Committee; 10

28. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his cooperation with all
Member States, in particular the unrepresented and underrepresented ones, including
through targeted outreach, with a view to attracting qualified candidates into the
selection processes of job openings in the Secretariat;
29. Reaffirms that the United Nations should have a workforce that is diverse
from a variety of perspectives and encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen the
Secretariat’s diversity efforts;
30. Encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen efforts to ensure that the
United Nations is a diverse workplace where all staff members and non -staff
personnel are treated with dignity and respect and take responsibi lity for maintaining
a workplace free of any form of discrimination, harassment, including sexual
harassment, and abuse of authority;
31. Takes note of paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 11
commends the efforts made by the Secretary-General to achieve gender parity in the
__________________

A/77/729.
A/77/728.
11
A/77/728/Add.1.
9

10

6/12

23-06115

A/77/818

Organization, in particular his appointments of female staff at senior levels, notes the
continuing low representation of women in field operations and the slow progress to
move towards parity in this area, and encourages the Secretary-General to increase
efforts to reach gender parity at all levels, in particular in areas further from reaching
gender parity such as field operations, by 2028, including through support and
innovative mechanisms such as talent pools and pipelines;
32. Notes the increase in the average age of staff in the United Nations
workforce, as well as the high forecasted level of retirements, stresses the need for an
accelerated process to rejuvenate the Organization, and requests the Secretary General to propose, for the consideration of the General Assembly at the first part of
its resumed seventy-ninth session, a comprehensive approach to recruiting and
retaining talent with new perspectives and the required skills, including through
outreach, the internship programme, the Junior Professional Officer Programme and
the young professionals programme, and by increasing the number of entry -level
Professional posts (P-1 to P-3) while reducing the number of senior-level posts (D-1
and above), through downward job reclassification or abolishment, as appropriate,
and by taking advantage of upcoming retirements, so as not to increase the overall
post resource requirements;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to assess the efficiency of the current
administrative practices of the young professionals programme and to report thereon
in the context of his next report, including on possible measures to improve it;
34. Reaffirms the need to respect the equality of the two working languages of
the Secretariat, further reaffirms the use of additional working languages in specific
duty stations as mandated, and in this regard requests the Secretary -General to ensure
that vacancy announcements specify the need for either of the working languages of
the Secretariat, unless the functions of the post require a specific working language;
35. Notes the significant disparities across official languages observed in
language requirements in the job openings published on Inspira, encourages the
development and the implementation of the guidelines on setting language
requirements in future job openings, and requests the Secretary -General to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session;
36. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to combat racism and racial
discrimination in the Organization, including the appointment of the Special Adviser
on Addressing Racism in the Workplace, and requests the Secretary -General to
continue to refine and implement the strategic action plan on addressing racism and
promoting dignity for all in the United Nations Secretariat, across the United Nations,
including in the recruitment and hiring processes;
37. Reiterates that the overarching objectives of a performance management
system are to measure performance, reward good performance and address
underperformance in a credible and effective manner, and requests the Secretary General to continue to strengthen performance management throughout the
Organization, including the performance appraisal system and improved performan ce
management skills of managers, to promote effectiveness and accountability,
including for underperformance, and to sustain a high performance and results orientated culture;
38. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that the culture of the
Organization incentivizes high performance and deals effectively with
underperformance, and that staff career progression is strongly linked to good
performance;

23-06115

7/12

A/77/818

39. Recalls paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 12
acknowledges the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General to support staff in
terms of mental health and well-being, and looks forward to receiving further details
on the implementation of those efforts in the next overview report;
40. Recalls the Secretary-General’s bulletin on flexible working
arrangements, encourages the Secretary-General to support managers in monitoring
staff attendance to ensure that the Organization continues to be responsive to Member
States and maintains the effective and efficient delivery of the work of the
Organization to assist legislative bodies in their work to carry out their decisions, and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed seventy eighth session;
41. Notes with appreciation the development of the online Secretariat
workforce portal as a complementary information tool to the annual reporting on the
composition of the Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General, as appropriate, to
ensure that the portal is accessible to all Member States, as well as the Adviso ry
Committee;
42. Requests the Secretary-General to focus his future reports on the
composition of the Secretariat on workforce data reflecting progress towards strategic
outcomes, including gender, geographical representation, and rejuvenation, and to
provide trend analysis and identify potential challenges in human resources
management;
43. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide in his future reports on the
overview of human resources management reform the number of applications per
regular job opening disaggregated by grade level in the Professional and higher and
Field Service categories for all Secretariat entities;
44. Recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 13 and
requests the Secretary-General to seek to understand the reasons behind the rates and
trends of resignations at certain age brackets and certain levels, including through
coordinating mandatory exit interviews across the Secretariat, and to provide
comprehensive data and information on resignations, including an analysis of
findings and trends along with proposed policy responses in future reports on the
composition of the Secretariat;
45. Requests the Secretary-General to include systematically, in the context of
future reports on the composition of the Secretariat, a detailed breakdown, with the
status of incumbency, of all posts and positions at the P-2 and higher levels;
46.

Takes note of paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee; 14

47. Welcomes efforts by the Secretary-General to implement measures aimed
at strengthening coherence, effectiveness and accountability in the management and
use of internship programmes in the United Nations system;
48. Takes note of paragraphs 7, 9 and 10 of the report of the Advisory
Committee; 15
49. Invites the executive heads of the United Nations system organizations,
under the leadership of the Secretary-General as chair of the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to work towards the establishment of more
coherent internship programmes for the United Nations system;
__________________

A/77/728/Add.1.
A/77/729.
14
A/77/727.
15
Ibid.
12
13

8/12

23-06115

A/77/818

50. Reaffirms that internships should have an educational value for their
participants;
51. Also reaffirms that Member States have different education systems and
that no education system shall be considered the standard to be applied by the
Organization;
52. Urges the Secretary-General to consider the United Nations internship
programme as an integral part of his ongoing reform of the human resources system
of the United Nations, and requests that a comprehensive re view on the following
elements be presented no later than the first part of the resumed seventy -ninth session,
taking into account, as appropriate:
(a) Development of a sustainable internship programme based on an
internship strategy and semi-structured training curriculum for interns, to maximize
their training experience and reinforce the learning objectives of the programme
which are, inter alia, to build a diverse pool of professionals with leadership skills
and provide experience in the programmes and activities of the United Nations;
(b) Strengthening of a transparent, merit-based intern recruitment process
through an objective review of all intern applicants who meet the criteria, to provide
equal opportunities for eligible candidates and to develop outreach mechanisms to
attract candidates particularly from unrepresented and underrepresented Member
States;
(c) Proposals, incorporating lessons learned, on remote working opportunities
in the United Nations internship programme, taking into account th e modality’s
inclusiveness and quality, educational purpose, outreach and practical considerations
for participants located in multiple time zones with varying access to information and
communications technology equipment and connectivity;
(d) Clear and measurable indicators for assessing the progress made towards
a United Nations internship programme diverse from geographical representation,
gender parity and disability perspectives, to the extent practicable, reflecting on best
practices;
(e) Proposals for a possible appropriate support scheme to support interns for
the duration of their internships, based on a review of funding and related
mechanisms, and good practices already in place in some organizations of the United
Nations system, including establishing a new category of non-staff personnel for
interns, as appropriate;
(f) Repealing of the provision prohibiting interns from applying for or being
appointed to any position in the Professional and higher categories or at the FS -6 and
FS-7 levels in the Field Service category six months following the expiration date
thereof;
(g) Analysis on the enhancement of the interns’ access to United Nations
justice mechanisms;
53. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the comprehensive review an
assessment of whether the restructured internship programme should be administered
centrally or remain fully decentralized;
54. Recalls paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 16 and
requests the Secretary-General to limit the reliance on retirees in order to exercise
better workforce succession planning and promote rejuvenation;
__________________
16

23-06115

Ibid.
9/12

A/77/818

55.

Takes note of paragraph 19 of the report of the Advisory Committee; 17

56. Recalls paragraph 34 of its resolution 71/263, stresses that the use of
consultants should be governed by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
in particular section VIII of its resolution 53/221, recalls paragraph 26 of the report
of the Advisory Committee, 18 notes with concern the continued increase in the use of
consultants, and requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to reduce the
considerable reliance on consultants, minimize the use of individual contractors,
utilize the internal expertise and skills in the Secretariat, and develop in -house
capacity;
57.

Takes note of paragraph 33 of the report of the Advisory Committee; 19

58. Notes with appreciation the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled
“Review of ethics function in the United Nations System”;
59. Commends the Ethics Office on its exceptional ongoing efforts to foster a
culture of ethics, integrity, transparency and accountability in the Organization, and
welcomes the efforts of the Office to increase awareness of ethics-related issues
through outreach, training and education;
60. Takes note of paragraphs 4 and 13 of the report of the Advisory
Committee; 20
61. Takes note of paragraph 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 21 and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all necessary measures to address
all potential conflicts of interest, including by refining the criteria, as appropriate,
regarding the type and level of information that should be disclosed by members of
staff, and to continue encouraging senior officials, who have not yet disclosed a
summary of their assets through the voluntary public disclosure initiative, to do so in
future cycles;
62. Encourages the Secretary-General, in his capacity as the Chair of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to promote
protection against retaliation across the system, underscores the importance of raising
awareness of the policy, as well as the efforts to continuously improve the framework
for protection from retaliation, and in this regard requests the Secretary -General to
continue to provide information on the implementation of the policy in his next report;
63. Recalls paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 22
emphasizes the need for appropriate levels of oversight, tracking and monitoring of
the receipt, custody and disposal of gifts within the global online registry and the
authority of individual heads of entities, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide an update thereon in his next report on the activities of the Ethics Office;
64. Welcomes the Ethics Office activities to increase awareness of ethicsrelated issues for all staff, and the upgrade of its website in the six official languages
of the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to propose measures to
enhance the Office’s work in the field for the consideration of the General Assembly;
65. Takes note of paragraphs 25, 27 and 30 of the report of the Advisory
Committee, 23 approves the recommendations for strengthening the independence of
__________________

Ibid.
Ibid.
19
Ibid.
20
A/77/545.
21
Ibid.
22
Ibid.
23
Ibid.
17
18

10/12

23-06115

A/77/818

the Ethics Office on direct presentation of the annual report by the Office to the
General Assembly and on an enhanced role of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee to strengthen the accountability framework, and decides to include in the
agenda of the seventy-eighth session an item entitled “Report on the activities of the
Ethics Office”;
66. Reaffirms the Organization’s zero tolerance approach to all cases of
misconduct, stresses the importance of ensuring trust and accountability in the system
of disciplinary measures, including through the consistent and transparent application
of sanctions, and requests the Secretary-General to submit for the consideration of
the General Assembly at the first part of its seventy-ninth session comprehensive
measures aimed at ensuring his zero-tolerance approach to all cases of misconduct,
covering elimination of barriers to reporting misconduct, independence of oversight
and investigations, and mechanisms to ensure administrative and criminal
accountability;
67. Takes note of paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 24
recognizes the importance of high standards of investigative functions carried out in
a credible, objective, factual and unbiased manner within the Organization, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake measures to improve its
investigative practices, to provide comprehensive disaggregated data on cases
processed, and an analysis thereon, in his future reports on disciplinary matters;
68. Notes the increase in time taken to dispose of cases, stresses the
importance of ensuring that cases are disposed of in an expeditious manner, and
requests the Secretary-General to propose additional measures to enhance the rate of
disposal of cases in his next report on disciplinary measures;
69. Recalls paragraph 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 25 and
requests the Secretary-General to lay out more clearly the criteria and internal
regulations applied in the determination of misconduct and imposed disciplinary
measures, including mitigating and aggravating circumstances, as well as the types
of misconduct related to separation and dismissal;
70. Invites the Secretary-General to incorporate assessments of senior
managers’ effectiveness in preventing and addressing misconduct in their
performance reviews;
71. Notes the importance of ensuring a working environment free from any
form of discrimination, including xenophobia, harassment, including sexual
harassment, and abuse of authority, further notes the efforts of the Secretary -General
to promote trust and accountability, and to ensure a victim-centred approach to
reported allegations, and requests the Secretary-General to undertake further
measures, throughout the disciplinary process in this regard, including to improve
information and support to victims;
72. Requests the Secretary-General, in coordination with the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board Task Force on Addressing Sexual Harassment within
the Organizations of the United Nations System, to identify more suitable
terminology to classify various forms of sexual misconduct in the United Nations
system based on victim input and best practice;
73. Welcomes the use of the Clear Check, requests the Secretary-General, in
his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board, to
encourage heads of participating entities to promptly record relevant data into Clear
Check to increase its utility, and further requests the Secretary -General to include an
__________________
24
25

23-06115

A/77/730.
Ibid.
11/12

A/77/818

assessment of whether the scope of entries in Clear Check could be extended to cover
other categories of misconduct and disciplinary sanctions, and to explore whether the
Clear Check database and the Misconduct Disclosure Scheme of the Steering
Committee for Humanitarian Response can complement each other, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session;
74. Welcomes the new Case Management Tracking System to track cases from
end-to-end and to capture the full lifespan of the case management process, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to analyse data and trends around
misconduct and disciplinary measures in order to inform future activities for
prevention and response and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy eighth session;
75. Recalls paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee, 26
emphasizes that the full recovery of the financial loss amount should be pursued, and
encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to improve the
quantification and the rate of recovery of losses;
76. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to make efforts to expand
internal and public awareness and visibility of his policies against prohibited conduct,
with a view to upholding the principle of integrity in the United Nations.

__________________
26

12/12

Ibid.
23-06115
