S/PV.7987

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7987th meeting

Thursday, 29 June 2017, 9.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/541)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-18878 (E)
*1718878*

S/PV.7987

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/541)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/541, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: The conflict in Syria continues to
grind on, day by day, month by month. It is a conflict
where there can be no victory on the battlefield, a
conflict which will not end by the use of force. All that
this relentless, senseless fighting provides are hollow
advances or retreats, leaving behind utter devastation
for the civilians left in its wake. I do not need to paint
a picture for Council members. Members have seen
them, along with the rest of the world. It is an outraged
world, not an indifferent world, an indignant, furious
world that cannot understand why the Security Council
cannot fix the conflict.
We must be clear: 13.5 million people are caught
in a protection crisis that threatens their lives on a
daily basis. It affects so many because we have seen
time and again a complete, disgraceful disregard for the
rules of war, which subjects civilians to the horrifying
reality of bombs raining down on schools, hospitals
and residential areas every day. The use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in urban areas is
unconscionable, with the utmost serious consequences
for civilians in the immediate and long term. We know
2/6

29/06/2017

this. Those fighting know this. Those who support
the different parties know it too. And certainly those
civilians who have suffered years of war know this.
When explosive weapons are used in populated
areas, 92 per cent of the people killed or injured are
civilians — 92 per cent. And those who might be lucky
enough to survive the bombs but whose homes are
destroyed and are forced to flee face a whole new set
of protection challenges, from mines and unexploded
ordnance, to forced conscription, sexual abuse and
violence, to restrictions on basic rights such as freedom
of movement. It is our duty as fellow human beings to
stand up and say, enough, to demand an end to these
practices, to stop the needless death and to help those
whose lives have already been destroyed.
Each month, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners do all in our power, in the face of extreme
difficulty, to reach those who are most in need. Again,
my admiration for the courage and persistence of the
humanitarian aid workers on the ground, from the
United Nations and all our international and particularly
national partners, knows no bounds, and I pay tribute to
them. They should not be a target, but, sadly, in Syria
today, they are.
So far this month we have reached the hard-to-reach
locations of Talbiseh and Al-Rastan, in northern Homs,
with convoys, and reached besieged east Harasta, in
rural Damascus. Despite our best efforts, we continue
to have supplies consistently removed from our trucks
before we can even deploy. Nearly 200,000 treatments
have been forcibly removed this year alone. The removal
of these treatments is the removal of life-saving aid for
those in need — treatments, medicines, a chance at
life — and it must be brought to an end. We must be
able to deliver based on need.
Further, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners continue to be delayed and blocked by
bureaucratic restrictions that limit our ability to reach
civilians living in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
Delays in facilitation letters continue to slow the
process for deploying inter-agency cross-line convoys.
This need not be a cause for delay; they are not for the
thousands of facilitation letters that are approved each
month to areas where regular programming deploys. For
example, the World Food Programme (WFP) requested
1,795 facilitation letters to provide aid, of which
only three did not receive a positive response from
authorities. Although the most egregious bureaucratic
17-18878

29/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East

restrictions are from the Government of Syria, we
are increasingly seeing other groups operating in
non-Government-controlled areas also implementing
procedures that slow the process or impinge upon
humanitarian principles.
I therefore call on all parties to the conflict
to allow needs-based, unhindered and sustained
access to humanitarian actors. They must also be
safe. I am also placing on the record, here before the
Council today — and asking it to do something about
it — my specific concern regarding recent security
threats against humanitarians delivering aid.
While we were eventually successful in delivering
to east Harasta on 19 June, the case of an attempted
convoy two days earlier illustrates the bureaucratic
and security challenges faced by the United Nations
and our humanitarian partners. Delays in loading the
convoy resulted in a late departure from the warehouse,
slowed further by long forced stops at checkpoints.
After they sat for hours at the last Government of Syria
checkpoint, the green light to remove the barriers and
allow the trucks to cross was given only as evening
approached. The security risk of waiting additional
hours in the darkness while the barriers were removed
was too great, so the decision was made to abort and
return the next day. At that point, the convoy came
under sniper fire as unknown gunmen lying in wait
attacked. A Syrian Arab Red Crescent driver was hit
and another grazed by sniper fire as the convoy began
its return to Damascus.
I can report that, thankfully, the injured driver
survived and is in stable condition. My thoughts and
best wishes go out to him and his family. I condemn such
acts in the strongest terms and call for accountability
for those responsible. Those who deliberately direct
attacks against humanitarian workers are committing
war crimes.
The impact of the shots fired goes beyond any single
person. They are an attack on the entire humanitarian
community and, ultimately, a clear effort to prevent
the delivery of aid to those in need. The safety of
humanitarians going about their work is critical because
in so many parts of Syria, they are the only lifeline for
survival for communities trapped, injured and deprived
by the conflict.
Changes in the access landscape have been
shaped by the signing of local agreements between
the Government of Syria and non-State armed

S/PV.7987

opposition groups. These are agreements reached
without the involvement of the United Nations. While
the result of these agreements often means increased
freedom of movement, commercial access and greater
humanitarian access, they should not be viewed as
entirely positive developments. They usually also
include the relocation of those who fear reprisal or
conscription, often to areas where they face serious
security and protection concerns.
As a result of these changes, two towns have been
removed from the list of besieged locations. The first is
the town of Madaya, in rural Damascus. Following an
agreement reached as part of the negotiations regarding
the objectionable tit-for-tat arrangements for the four
towns of Fo’ah, Kafraya, Madaya and Zabadani, access
has improved in Madaya. The United Nations was able
to conduct an assessment visit on 8 June, and the 25,000
to 30,000 civilians who remain in the town are now able
to move in and out of the town by public transportation
or private vehicle.
Secondly, the Al-Waer district of Homs city, where
I visited, across the line, in December 2015, is also
being removed from the besieged list. After reaching a
local agreement in March, more than 19,000 individuals
moved from the area to Idlib, Jarabulus and northern
rural Homs. On 20 May, the Governor of Homs
announced that the evacuation process was completed
and that the area was again under Government of Syria
control. As a result, access to the area has also been
reopened, and the United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and non-governmental organizations are able
to deliver to the area, in which an estimated 17,500
individuals remain.
There are now 11 besieged locations, with a total
population of 540,000. Of these, seven are besieged by
the Government of Syria, one by both the Government
of Syria and non-State armed opposition groups, two
by non-State armed opposition groups and one by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I call once
again for safe, unhindered and sustained access to all
those in need, in particular for these 540,000 people,
who are trapped and desperate for our assistance.
Notwithstanding the access challenges that remain
in Syria, I would also like to acknowledge an important
positive development on access. Earlier this month,
WFP was able to successfully deploy a convoy of trucks
from Aleppo, through Manbij and to Qamishli, in
Al-Hasakah governorate. This is a key development, as

17-188783/6

S/PV.7987

The situation in the Middle East

it will allow us to deliver at scale to north-east Syria, an
area that has been short of supplies since the closure of
the cross-border access point with Turkey in December
2015. While we have been able to deliver assistance
via an air bridge from Damascus, the operation was
expensive. The annual savings from moving the mode
of delivery from air to land are equivalent to the cost
of providing food aid for 100,000 people for one year.
And as needs increase, we should now be able to deliver
at scale.
This is particularly important with growing needs
in north-east Syria due to anti-ISIL operations in the
area. We have reports of civilian deaths by air strikes in
the region, including one that resulted in the deaths of a
reported 59 people, leaving another 70 wounded, in Abu
Kamal, in eastern Deir ez-Zor governorate, on 15 May.
At the same time, civilians in these areas face continued
threats from ISIL. The air strike in Abu Kamal was
followed by reported retributive attacks by ISIL against
those whom they accused of providing coordinates.
We have similar concerns in Raqqa city, where on
6 June the Syrian Democratic Forces, supported by
coalition forces, began an operation to take the city
from ISIL, and in the past few days have fully encircled
it. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights said yesterday that at least 173 people
had reportedly been killed by air and ground strikes
since 1 June. Conditions inside the city are reported to
be dire, with limited access to food, water and basic
services. While nearly 25,000 people have fled since the
latest phase of operations began, the number of those
remaining in the city is estimated to be between 50,000
and 100,000. People fleeing fighting in Raqqa face a
variety of risks, including punitive measures by ISIL,
threats posed by mine contamination, family separation,
forced recruitment at checkpoints and concerns for the
displaced who enter camps and whose identification is
taken away or withheld and their movement restricted.
People are terrified and do not know where to go for
safety. We must do more to see that the civilians who
are caught up in this fight are protected. I am sure that
members can imagine being caught up, through no fault
of one’s own, not knowing what decision to make, and
especially what decision to make for one’s children.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
are responding to the needs of those who leave as part
of its broader response in the north-eastern region.
Between 8 and 15 June, food assistance was delivered to
more than 94,000 people, while 24 tons of medicine were
4/6

29/06/2017

dispatched to hospitals in Al-Hasakah and Qamishli
towns, as well as to camps in Mabrouka, Ayn Issa and
Al-Karama in Raqqa and Al-Hasakah governorates.
The signing, on 4 May, of a memorandum on the
creation of de-escalation areas created an opportunity
to improve the situation of many civilians in Syria. It
is critical to ensure that de-escalation succeeds and
that we can see a sustained calm in those areas. The
temporary reduction of violence in some areas is a
positive development. However, others are seeing not
just continued fighting but even an increase. I am
particularly concerned about the situation in Daraa,
where intense aerial bombardment and fighting has
resulted in civilian deaths and further damage to
civilian infrastructure. The fighting is also getting
close to the southern border and has resulted in delays
to some cross-border humanitarian shipments from
Jordan. Despite the insecurity that has caused delays,
the United Nations and its partners have been able to
continue cross-border deliveries to those in need. As we
sit comfortably around this table, however, we should
never underestimate the sheer courage it takes for the
humanitarian aid workers there on the ground to persist
with such deliveries. We owe them protection, as well
as our limitless thanks and financial support.
I should also highlight the fact that we are delivering
aid to those in the Berm and have now reached 75 per
cent of the population at Ruqban since the second
cycle started, in early May. Our access to both Berm
areas is in large part owed to the strong support we
receive from the Government of Jordan. I would like
to thank the Jordanian authorities for their positive
collaboration. I look forward to their increased support
in ensuring that lifesaving assistance continues to be
delivered to the people in need. As the United Nations
and humanitarian partners are working on the ground
to reach those people, I remain hopeful that the results
of next week’s meeting in Astana on de-escalation will
bring about a positive development and see a sustained
reduction in the fighting and, along with that, improved
and unhindered humanitarian access to these areas.
In conclusion, I repeat my call to the Council to act
now to protect civilians. I urge those sitting around this
table who are active in the conflict to fully incorporate
the protection of civilians into their military planning,
and those with influence on the parties to the conflict to
prioritize the protection of civilians in all engagements
with them. These are legal obligations under the laws
of war, and they should not be bent, broken or avoided.
17-18878

29/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Accountability is key and, of course, wherever possible,
evidence is being collected, photographed, documented,
preserved and stored for use in the appropriate courts
in due course — preferably soon, so as to deter the
continued flagrant and even blasé disregard for life
and the law that we are seeing. I therefore call on all
Council members to do more to ensure humanitarian
access, thereby enabling us to reach those in need.
While the besieged population’s numbers have once
again decreased, their needs remain great, and those
who have moved to other hard-to-reach areas continue
to require our urgent and sustained support as well.
Immediate steps must be taken to preclude further
attacks on humanitarian workers. That is not solely a
matter of humanitarian protection; it is about ensuring
that those in need can continue to be reached. One
important step in that regard is to end the bureaucratic
delays that leave convoys vulnerable because they are
waiting at checkpoints or operating at night. Another
is to ensure there is no impunity for such attacks. I
also urge those with influence to identify and, where
possible, help to secure the release of the 29 United
Nations staff members who are missing or detained
in Syria.
Finally, and most important, we need to see a
sustained reduction in violence, which is so necessary
for progress on any front. Ending the fighting will
ease the burden on civilians and create an environment
conducive to assistance. Now is the time. It was the
time last month, the month before and the year before.
More delay, hauntingly, means more deaths, and more
people maimed, more injured and more scarred in body
and mind for the rest of their time on Earth. Will I be
saying the same thing next month? Yes, if we sit on our
hands or wring them impotently. This problem is in the
Council’s hands — but together, and jointly. I would
urge Council members to hold one another’s hands. Let
us not just say “no more”. In the name of humanity, let
us deliver no more death for Syrians.

S/PV.7987

courage at his humanitarian task, which we would like
to highlight and for which we are deeply grateful. We
are also grateful to his entire team, particularly the
humanitarian workers on the ground, who risk their
lives to bring aid to the civilians in need.
We condemn the recent attack of 17 June and would
like to express our solidarity with the Syrian Red Cross
staff who were injured. It is hard to understand how it
can be that months and years have passed while we have
continued to witness the frustration of OCHA, unable
to carry out its mandated task because of security
issues — or, even more incomprehensibly, owing to the
refusal of the Government itself to authorize it. That
is not a failure on OCHA’s part, or for United Nations
institutions generally, but it is a failure for the Security
Council, which has not been able to influence the parties
to the Syrian conflict — and by whom I mean all of the
actors in the conflict — to change their attitude and
enable relatively normal access for humanitarian aid
and its regular delivery.
We in this Chamber are so accustomed to
discussing this subject that we can forget the fact that
this is a human tragedy that Syria has been enduring
since 2011 — not just for the millions of refugees and
displaced persons that the conflict has created, but also
for the hundreds of thousands who have died or been
wounded and for the destruction that has been inflicted
on the country and that will take decades to rebuild. As
usual, it is the most vulnerable who are most affected,
including women, children and the elderly.

The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.

The protection of civilians in Syria has merely
been vapid rhetoric that all parties to the conflict
have continued to disregard and violate. The goals for
Syria have been clearly defined and must be gradually
achieved in order to be able to offer the Syrian people
a future full of promise, after so many years of
savagery. The first goal is, and must continue to be,
achieving a political solution that would end the crisis
and lead to a peaceful transition in Syria. The solution
must be negotiated by all Syrians and backed by the
international community. We trust that the good offices
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, will bring us closer to that goal.

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Mr. O’Brien once again for
his comprehensive briefing and for the years he has
put in at the helm of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), working with unceasing

In addition to the Geneva talks, the Astana process
is also necessary for reducing the level of violence in
Syria and, fortunately, the process has been yielding
positive results. We support the efforts of the three
guarantor countries and we believe that progress can

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.

17-188785/6

S/PV.7987

The situation in the Middle East

be made next week to consolidate the ceasefire so that
the seventh round of Geneva talks with the parties can
commence in a positive atmosphere.
Almost two months after the signing of the
memorandum that established the safe zones, we
have yet to receive official information on the
implementation of that agreement. We are concerned
about the fact that, to date, the United Nations has not
been granted unhindered access to those areas. That
would give some indication that the essential principles
of international humanitarian law are being respected,
such as humanitarian access, the prohibition of forced
displacement, and freedom of movement, so that people
can freely enter and leave those areas. The political
process and the cessation of hostilities are only two of
the ways to ensure that Syria begins a new chapter.
The third, equally important, issue continues to be
the humanitarian dimension. We are still far from an
encouraging outcome that could alleviate the suffering
of the civilian population in Syria. Once again, we call
for immediate, sustained and unhindered access to all
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. However, our main
goal must be to lift the unjustifiable and abhorrent siege
on those areas.
For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in Syria and
in any other conflict is the top priority. It is immoral to
target civilians because they support one or other of
the parties or because they find themselves in a certain
area that is controlled by one or other of the parties.
Delivering justice for the hundreds of thousands of
innocent victims in the conflict is essential to achieving
lasting peace in Syria and for the country and its entire
population to overcome the horrors of the war.
Uruguay supported the establishment of an
international impartial and independent mechanism
to investigate crimes committed in Syria and hopes

6/6

29/06/2017

that it can begin its work shortly. We also support the
request of Secretary-General António Guterres for the
situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court.
Despite the adoption, one year ago, of resolution 2286
(2016), we continue to bear witness to the destruction
of hospitals and health centres in Syria, which proves
that the parties to the conflict have disregarded the
resolution’s provisions, thereby depriving thousands of
people of their right to medical attention and leading
to hundreds of victims among medical and health-care
personnel. That is in serious violation of international
humanitarian law and amounts to war crimes. The
practice is also carried out on schools, markets and
all kinds of civilian infrastructure. We condemn such
attacks in Syria, Yemen and in any other place where
they occur.
In conclusion, Uruguay underscores that the full
and effective implementation of measures to ensure
the cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure and the facilitation of
administrative procedures to allow for humanitarian
access can, and must, make a major difference in the
lives of the Syrian people, who, month after month,
demand that the Security Council take concrete
action. It is therefore imperative that that commitment
be honoured as soon as possible. We trust that, as
has occurred on previous occasions, the Council can
overcome its differences and assume its responsibility
in order to guarantee international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.05 a.m.

17-18878
