THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

24 MAY

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation

,. . , . . ,. . . . ,. , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

1

(S/Agenda/2440)

in Namibia:

Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to theUnited
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

WPV. 2440

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council. numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolufions and Decisions of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2440th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 24 May 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. M. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma, President of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place
at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2440)
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr, Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Australia, Bangladesh, Benin, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the
Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kuwait,
Mali, Nigeria, Panama, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Yugoslavia and Zambia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Joseph (Australia),
Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. A&bade (Benin),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim
(Ethiopia), Mr. Slain (Gambia), Mr. -Kaba (Guinea),
Mr. Rao (India), Mr. Kusumaatmadjn (Indonesia), Sir
Egerton Richardson (Jamaica), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait),
Mr. Traore (Ma@), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Orores
Typaldos (Panama), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse
(Senegal), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Sailu (Sierra
Leone), Mr, von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Fonseka
(Sri Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr.
Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr, Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I
invite the representative of Mauritius to take a place at the
Council table.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Afghanistan, Botswana, Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, Kenya, Morocco, Mozambique, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the Upper Volta in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mauritius)
took a place at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I
invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the other members of the delegation of the
Council to take places at the Security Council table.
1

tion in southern Africa, the racist regime of Pretoria gave a
further demonstration of its disdain for the most basic
norms of international law by launching an air attack
against Mozambique-against
the worker population of
Maputo-taking
many lives and leaving dozens of
wounded, including workers, women and children.

with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif (Afghanistan), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Pelletier (Canada),
Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Wabuge
(Kenya), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Lobo(Mozambique), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda),Mr, Rupia (United Republicof
Tanzania) and Mr. Bassole(Upper Volta) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should also like to inform the members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 20 May from the Acting
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, which reads as follows:

12. The seriousness of the situation in Namibia and in
southern Africa in general, as well as the need to achieve
a prompt resolution of it, arouses the deepest concern of
the international community and has compelled the
Council, with its commitment to international peace and
security under the terms of the Charter of the United
Nations, to meet once again in order to try to achieve
what has thus far been impossible: the implementation of
Council resolution 435 (1978), considered to be the sole
legal basis for the achievement of a negotiated, peaceful
and just solution of the Namibian conflict.

“On behalf of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, I have the honour to request,
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to be
invited to participate in the Council’s consideration of
the item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia”‘.

13. The international community accepted resolution
435 (1978) in spite of everything, on the one hand convinced that the United Nations would veto any other
measure and on the other hand seduced by the sirensongs which promised that this time-for the first and,
perhaps, the only time in history-the intentions of the
colonialists were honest.

7. On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice,
therefore, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Radl Roa Kouri, Acting Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

14. Then the contact group of five Western countries
appeared on the scene. Soon, however-sooner than
might have been expected-the racist regime of Pretoria
began to impose the most unconscionable conditions, in
public and brazen alliance with Washington, which
meant the failure of the group’s efforts.
15. Since then, South Africa and the United States have
opposed with subtle, tenacious and systematic resistance
the United Nations plan for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), using devious tactics and manoeuvres
of all types aimed at delaying the negotiating process and
at prolonging indefinitely the illegal occupation of
Namibia and the outrageous plunder of its natural
wealth.

It was so decided.

8. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom French): Members of the Council have before them document S/15784,
containing the text of a letter dated 23 May from the representative of India addressed to the President of the
Council.

16. Washington and Pretoria imposed new, tougher
cond.itions one after another until they arrived at the
unacceptable idea of linking the independence of
Namibia to the withdrawal of the Cuban internationalist
forces, which are in Angola at the request of the Government of that country for the very purpose of defending
its territory from the aggression of South Africa,

9. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, Mr. Isidoro Malmierca, whom I welcome. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
10. Mr. MALMIERCA
(Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish):Mr. President, I should like, first of all, to express

17. South Africa has for many years now refused to
comply with the United Nations decisions on the independence of Namibia. Comrade Sam Nujoma, the President of SWAPO, reminded us of his words before the
Security Council in 1971 [158&h meeting]. When it was
the colonialist troops of a member State of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) that were in
Angola, north of the Namibian border, South Africa also
refused to withdraw from Namibia, although at that time
it made no attempt to establish a link between Angola
and the independence of Namibia.

my thanks to you and to the other members of the Council
for having given me the opportunity to make a statement
during the Council’s consideration of this important question. It is a pleasure, moreover, to do so under the presidency of a representative of an African country, who will
undoubtedly guide the work of this organ effectively.
11. Yesterday, on the very day the Security Council
began a series of meetings to consider once again the situa2

18. Then, in 1975, when the colonialist troops withdrew
from Angola, South Africa invaded the territory of independent Angola, and it was at that time that the Cuban
internationalist fighters went to Angola to contribute to
the defence of its independence and territorial integrity.
i
lg. Since then, South Africa has committed constant
acts of aggression against Angola and for almost two
years it has occupied part of Angolan territory.

That strategic alliance has encouraged the Pretoria racists,
who openly proclaim their right to attack and destabilize
the States of southern Africa and refuse to free Namibia
and to stop oppressing 20 million South Africans simply
because they are black.
25. The Namibian people are certainly not prepared to
stand by passively while others settle their future. The
Angolan people are not prepared to allow their territory
to be attacked and occupied by the Pretoria racists and
their counter-revolutionary followers. The international
community is not prepared to allow its laws to be violated with impunity. The gravity of the situation in
Namibia and throughout southern Africa in general and
its harmful consequences for world peace make that
impossible.

20. South Africa has no claim to anything; it must withdraw from Angola and it must withdraw from Namibia.
21. In recent days, various press sources have affirmed
that it is the United States rather than South Africa that is
insisting on linking the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola to the independence of Namibia. That position by
a member of the contact group-supposedly
established
to facilitate negotiations, not to complicate them with
new demands-also
indicates designs that originate
further away than Pretoria and are aimed at perpetuating
the very profitable exploitation of the Namibian people
and its territory.

26. Many resolutions, agreements, statements, measures and plans of action have been adopted by the international community within the framework of international
bodies, but the United States imperialists and the South
African racists have disregarded all of them,
27. The non-aligned countries, since the First Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Belgrade in September 1961, have
defended the inalienable right of the Namibian people to
self-determination and national independence in a united
Namibia, including Walvis Bay, the Penguin Islands and
the other offshore islands, in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations and of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and with their own agreements.

22. In this connection, Cuba has always rejected the
idea of linking the independence of Namibia to the presence of the Cuban internationalist forces in Angola. I
should like to refer here to the first and ninth points of the
Cuban-Angolan statement of 4 February 1982:
“The presence and the withdrawal of the Cuban
forces stationed in Angola constitutes a bilateral question between two sovereign States, the People’s Republic of Angola and the Republic of Cuba, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter.

28. The Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo in
August 1976

“If the self-sacrificing struggle of SWAPO, the sole
legitimate representative of the Namibian people, and
the demands of the international community succeeded
in bringing about a genuine solution to the problem of
Namibia, based on strict compliance with United
Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978), and
led to a truly independent Government and the total
withdrawal of the South African occupying troops to
the other side of the Orange River, thus considerably
diminishing the danger of aggression against Angola,
the Angolan and Cuban Governments would consider
the resumption of the implementation
of the programme for the gradual withdrawal of the Cuban
forces within a time-frame to be agreed upon by both
Governments.”

“congratulated the Government and people of Angola
for their heroic and victorious struggle against the
South African racist invaders and their allies, and commended the Republic of Cuba and other States which
assisted the people of Angola in frustrating the expansionist and colonialist strategy of South Africa’s racist
regime and of its allies,“’
I
29. That strategy, given new life today by the Pretoria
racists, is inexorably doomed to failure.
30. At the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
in September 1979, the Heads of State or Government:

23. How ironic it is that it is the self-proclaimed “champions of human rights” that are the firmest strategic ally
of the Pretoria racists! How can they be allies of those
who constantly violate the most basic human rights?
What is apartheid if not the most brutal violation of
human rights?

“stated once again that the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by the racist regime of South Africa
constitutes an aggression not only against the people of
Namibia but also against all the independent and sovereign peoples and States of Africa and the world and
represents a threat to international peace and security
and open defiance of the decisions and resolutions of
the United Nations on Namibia.“2

24. The strategic alliance between Reagan and Botha is
only conceivable because they share the same interests.
3

31. Similarly, the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, meeting at
New Delhi in March of this year,

38. We sincerely believe that the crucial time has come
for the Namibian people. Either the Council must fulfil
its duties vis-h-vis Namibia or the Namibian people will
continue and intensify the armed struggle, so greatly
feared by the imperialist countries, convinced as the
Namibian people are that their victory is certain. That is
not a threat but rather an ineluctable and irreversible law
of the history of mankind.

“most categorically rejected the linkage or parallelism
being drawn by the United States Administration
between the independence of Namibia and the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola”, considering
that “This continued insistence constitutes an unwarranted interference in the internal affairs of the People’s Republic of Angola,” and “strongly supported
,the position taken by the Front-Line States in this
regard, as contained in the Lusaka communique of 20
February 1983” [see S/15675 and Corr. 1 and 2, annex,

39. If we really want to help the Namibian people, the
front-line States and the South African people who are
being subjected to the most abominable policy of racial
discrimination, if we want to make a contribution to
international peace and security, the Council must fully
assume its responsibility for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

sect. I, para. 48.1

32. We have strongly denounced the illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of Namibia and declared that the
plundering of those resources by transnational companies
constitutes a grave violation of the Charter, and we have
requested the colonialist exploiters to put an end to such
activity, both in the continental Territory and in the
islands and adjacent waters.

40. The Council must set a deadline for the implementation of the new measures to be adopted to implement
that resolution.
41. If the fascist arrogance of the United States Administration and the racist intransigence of the South African regime persist in preventing a solution to the conflict,
then Chapter VII of the Charter provides for the necessary sanctions to compel the racist transgressor to implement the decisions of the Council, which reflect the
demand of all peoples.

33. Our countries have pledged to give moral, material,
financial, military, political, humanitarian and diplomatic
support to SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of
the Namibian people, so that it may intensify its struggle
on all fronts, especially the armed struggle, and we have
set up a Solidarity Fund for Namibia and encouraged all
the members of the Movement to make or increase
contributions.

42. The United States may time and again veto
attempts to resolve the Namibian problem, it may engage
in all sorts of manoeuvres, but what it will not be able to
do is prevent the triumph of the Namibian people sooner
or later.

34. The non-aligned countries have likewise denounced
the repression unleashed by the racist regime of South
Africa against the SWAP0 freedom fighters and have
demanded the immediate and unconditional release of all
political prisoners in Namibia and that they be recognized
as prisoners of war, under the provisions of the Geneva
Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War
of 12 August 194g3 and the Additional Protocol thereto.4

43. May this series of meetings of the Council not
become just one more to study the question of Namibia
and the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). Let us
heed the demands of the peoples, who anxiously wait
for us to fulfil our duty, by contributing to freeing the
Namibian people from their bloody and cruel Calvary and
by tying the hands of the Pretoria racists; who in their
madness are attempting to drag the people of southern
Africa into their new order of plunder and extermination,

35. The General Assembly, the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People
for Independence held in Paris in April and a series of
international, regional, governmental, non-governmental
and other organizations demonstrating solidarity on this
issue have spoken out in similar terms. This is a unanimous and universal demand for rejection of the so-called
linkage or parallelism which it has been sought to establish, for the liberation of Namibia and for peace in the
southern part of the Africa.n continent.

44. We have, at this series of meetings of the Council,
heard praise of South Africa; we have even heard talk of
nut trees [2439th meeting, para. 64-j; but we cannot close
our ears to the appeal of the people of Namibia, to the
demands of those who are fighting for the most precious
of possessions-freedom-or
to those who are taking up
the weapons of those who have fallen in the battle and
are fighting so that there may be no more victims of
apartheid either in Namibia or in southern Angola.

36. Hence the appeal by the Heads of State or Government of non-aligned countries, at their Seventh Conference, to the Security Council to meet, as soon as possible,
in order to consider further action on the implementation
of its plan for the independence of Namibia, thereby
assuming its primary responsibility for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). [Bid., pam. 49.1

45. Cuba hopes that the Council will fulfil its historic
duty by contributing to the rapid and unconditional independence of Namibia, thereby making an inestimable
contribution to peace.

37. Cuba, faithful to its principles and as a member of
the Non-Aligned Movement, is fulfilling the agreements
adopted at the New Delhi summit in speaking out here.

46. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom French): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zam4

and pressed before the Council by five prominent Wesiern countries with close political, economic and strategic
relations with South Africa. These countries have come
to be known as the W&tern contact group on Namibia.
The international community had repeatedly called upon
these countries to use their considerable leverage on
South Africa to bring about the independence of
Namibia. Their initiative in respect of resolution 435
(1978) was therefore interpreted as a response to the
numerous demands of the international community and
a demonstration of their willingness and readiness, at
long last, to take meaningful and practical action, within
the framework of the United Nations, to compel South
Africa to end its illegal occupation of and stranglehold
on Namibia.

bia, Mr. Goma, whom I welcome. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

47. Mr. GOMA (Zambia): Mr. President, on behalf of
the Zambian delegation, I wish to thank you and the
other members of the Council for giving us the opportunity to participate in this important debate on the question of Namibia. May the Council, under your able
guidance, make real and significant progress on this matter so that the freedom and independence of Namibia can
be secured without further delay.
48. This series of Council meetings on Namibia has been
convened in response to a virtually universal demand. For
quite some time now, there has been a strong international demand for action by the Council to ensure the
early implementation of its resolution 435 (1978) on the
independence of Namibia. The world community is exasperated, anxious and concerned over the delay in implementing this resolution, which provides a solid basis for a
peaceful negotiated settlement of the Namibian problem.
It wants movement and not continued stagnation on this
issue. It wants Namibia to be free and independent now
and the sad chapter of the outrageous illegal occupation
of that Territory by South Africa to be brought to a close.

53. We in Zambia welcomed this apparent change of
heart on the part of the most important allies of South
Africa. Together with the other front-line States, Nigeria
and SWAPO, we agreed to co-operate with them in order
to ensure the successof their initiative. The record of our
co-operation and constructive attitude is there for everyone to see; it speaks for itself. We did not despair or
give up even in the face of the most arrogant, provocative
and savage attitude of and actions by South Africa.
Instead, we persevered right up to the round of talks
involving senior officials of the contact group, on the one
hand, and those of the front-line States, Nigeria and
SWAPO, on the other, which took place here in New
York in July and August 1982, with the objective of
accelerating the process of implementing resolution 435
(1978). The impression we had at that time was not only
that the discussions were constructive, but also that significant progress had been made. As a consequence, the
parties to the talks held further discussions with the Secretariat with regard to the size, composition and deployment of the military component of the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). The only major
issue which remained unsettled was that of the electoral
system which was to be used in the United Nationssupervised Namibian elections. We were, however,
informed that this too would be made known soon. But
what has been the outcome?

49. This position of the international community has
been eloquently articulated at three recent major international conferences, namely, the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March, the International Conference in Support of the Front-line States, held at
Lisbon, also in March, and the International Conference
in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for
Independence, held in Paris in April. All these conferences requested that the Council meet on Namibia in
order that it might reassert itself and properly assume its
full responsibilities for the implementation of its resolution 435 (1978). The Secretary-General, in his report to
the Council [S/1.5776], also expressed his deep concern at
the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978).
50. Our main objective at this meeting is thus clear: we
want to find ways and means of securing the immediate
and unimpeded implementation of resolution 435 (1978),
in letter and in spirit. We are not seeking a confrontation
with any country or group of countries that, like ourselves, genuinely want to see Namibia free and independent quickly, and we hope that there will be none. We are
here not to embarrass anybody but to state the facts as we
know them and to press for real progress in the efforts for
the liberation and genuine independence of Namibia.

54. There is at present an impasse in the efforts to
secure Namibia’s independence. This impasse has been
caused by the injection by the United States of a linkage
between Namibia’s independence and the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola. We cannot but view with
grave concern and dismay the injection of this linkage
issue just at a time when the parties to the conflict had
resolved major misunderstandings and optimism concerning a settlement was at its highest. It is this linkage
which has blocked progress in the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978), thus thwarting the XJnited Nations
mandate and the aspirations of the Namibian people. It
is ironic that a member of the contact group is responsible for the present impasse. Rather than press for progress in the implementation of its own resolution, it has
introduced an extraneous issue which has had the very
opposite effect.

51. Resolution 435 (1978) was adopted by the Council
some five years ago. It was intended to be the basis for
Namibia’s independence within a period of one year. The
Namibian people should thus have been celebrating this
year the fourth anniversary of its independence.
52. The adoption of resolution 435 (1978) was significant not least for the fact that it was inspired, negotiated
5

60. Angola and my own country, Zambia, which do
not share a common border with South Africa, have
been and are victims of the South African regime’s acts
of aggression launched from Namibia. In this manner,
South African military forces occupied parts of Angolan
territory in the south and have remained there up to now
in spite of a world-wide demand for their withdrawal.
South Africa’s acts of aggression against other independent States in the region are a direct breach of international peace and, thus, a violation of the Charter.

55. The South African riaime is a master of nrevarication, procrastination and iniransigence with regard to the
question of the freedom and independence of Namibia.
Time and again it has pretended to be interested in a
negotiated settlement, only to use the negotiations to buy
time. Not unexpectedly, therefore, it has capitalized on
the linkage issue. Thus, the linkage issue has provided the
regime with yet another pretext for continuing its illegal
occupation of Namibia and thereby perpetuating the
oppression and repression of the innocent Namibian
people and the plunder of their natural resources.

61. In order to appease its supporters in the West and
the principal shareholders and profit-makers in Namibia
and South Africa, who all come from the West, the South
African regime continues to create a false alarm about a
so-called communist onslaught in southern Africa and
that a SWAP0 Government in a free and independent
Namibia would be a Soviet puppet. Regrettably, some
have been duped by this propaganda or have taken
advantage of it for their own global or domestic
purposes.

56. We in Zambia, the rest of the front-line States, other
African States, the non-aligned countries and other progressive countries and forces have categorically rejected
the claimed linkage between Namibia’s independence and
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola because the
issue is extraneous to and can only have a diversionary
impact on the Namibian question. We also reject it
because it introduces an ideological element into what is
plainly a decolonization question.
57. The question of Namibia is not about ideology. It is
not about an independent Namibia being close to or falling under the sphere of influence of one or the other
super-Power. The Namibian people are simply fighting
for their freedom and independence and not to become
communist or capitalist. Their struggle is legitimate and
in conformity with the letter and spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations. It is most outrageous to distort the
purpose and meaning of this struggle and to perceive and
project it in an ideological context. Namibia and its
people should not become a pawn in the super-Power
rivalries for spheres of influence.

62. Related to the actions designed to ensure South
Africa’s continued stranglehold on Namibia is the incidence of plunder and exploitation of the Territory’s rich
natural resources. There would appear to be a conscious
decision by South Africa, in collusion with powerful
Western economic enterprises, to deplete the rich natural
resources of Namibia before conceding its independence.
63. When all those circumstances are considered, we
are left with no other conclusion than that there is no
intention whatsoever on the part of South Africa to withdraw from Namibia and to see that Territory become
free and independent soon. Can the international community stand by and simply watch the South African
regime defiantly thwarting the United Nations mandate,
blocking the freedom and independence of Namibia, continuing to kill, maim and torture the innocent Namibian
people, wantonly committing gross violations of human
rights and arrogantly degrading fellow human beings on
grounds of colour and race in a Territory for which the
United Nations has direct responsibility until independence and, with impunity, committing international
crimes by engaging in acts of aggression and destabilizing
front-line and other independent African States in the
region and thereby seriously endangering international
peace and security? This is an intolerable situation and it
must be brought to an end quickly.

58. It is necessary to underscore the gravity of the present lack of progress on the Namibian question. The continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa is
one of the principal elements in that regime’s total strategy, which it is pursuing in defence of apartheid. This
entails, with respect to Namibia, procrastination and prevarication in regard to the implementation of resolution
435 (1978); continued bloodshed as men, women and
children are killed, maimed or seriously injured in the
armed conflict; continued savage oppression and repression of the Namibian people as evidenced by the innumerable Namibian patriots who are continually subjected to
harassment, arrest, imprisonment and torture by the illegal occupying authorities in a vain attempt to stifle their
resolve to be free and independent. In addition, vast
numbers of Namibians are victims of homelessness, as
they are obliged to flee their country to live as exiles or
refugees elsewhere.

64. This series of meetings of the Council is taking place
against the sombre background of a criminal South African attack against Mozambique in which innocent civilians have been killed and valuable property wantonly
destroyed. Zambia most strongly condemns this South
African aggression against Mozambique. South Africa
cannot and will not solve its internal problems by committing acts of aggression against neighbouring African
States. The oppressed peoples of South Africa are struggling and will continue to struggle within South Africa
itself until the abominable system of apartheid and
minority rule is eliminated. We therefore say the follow-

59. This is not all. The continued illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa also has an external dimension.
The Pretoria regime repeatedly commits wanton acts of
aggression and destabilization against independent African States in southern Africa from Namibian territory, in
the false hope of frustrating the support, based on principle, that these States give to the oppressed peoples of
Namibia and South Africa in their liberation struggles.
6

ing to the South African regime: “End your system of
rule and your problems will be
over.”

70. The purpose of this series of meetings is not the
promotion of a peaceful settlement of the question of
South West Africa. On the contrary, its main objective is
to undermine the delicate negotiations that are currently
under way.

apartheid and minority

65. At this juncture, I should like to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General for his lucid report to the Council concerning the question of Namibia. We also commend him
for his efforts in the quest to bring early independence to
Namibia. His report agrees with the aforementioned thesis in the following words:

71, The time has come to remind the United Nations
that South Africa has never accepted the United Nations
view that South Africa’s presence in the Territory is illegal, nor has the International Court of Justice ever delivered a binding judgement to the effect that South
Africa’s right to administer the Territory has been terminated. As far as South Africa is concerned, it continues
to administer the Territory legally and in conformity
with the spirit of the lapsed Mandate from the League of
Nations. However, as a purely practical political consideration, in the search for an internationally acceptable
settlement South Africa agreed with the proposition put
to it by the contact group in March 1978 that all sides,
including the United Nations, should “set on one side the
long-standing legal disputes that have bedevilled consideration of this question for 30 years”. It would seem that
the United Nations, by its spurious claims, wishes to
revert to the legal arguments that characterized the first
30 years of this dispute.

“It is evident that the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is having a destructive impact not only
on Namibia itself but also on the prospect of a peaceful
and prosperous future for the region as a whole. The
delay also has an adverse effect on international relations in a wider sphere, adding to the prevailing sense
of frustration and mistrust, with all that that implies
for peace and security in the region.” [Ibid, para. 16.1
66. There is therefore an urgent need to break the current stalemate over Namibia which has been brought
about by the linkage issue. It cannot be over-emphasized
that resolution 435 (1978) provides a valid and adequate
basis for a peaceful and negotiated settlement of the Namibian problem. We call upon the Council to recommit
itself to resolution 435 (1978) and to take decisive action
aimed at the speedy and scrupulous implementation of
that resolution. We further call upon all States to strive
for its immediate implementation in letter and in spirit. It
is also important that the central role of the United
Nations to ensure that Namibia attains its freedom and
genuine independence should not be undermined under
any pretext. Accordingly, it is essential that the hand of
the Secretary-General be strengthened so that he can
move expeditiously and effectively with regard to the process for implementing the resolution. We appeal to all
States to give him their full co-operation,

72. During the past five years, South Africa has persistently continued the search for an internationally acceptable settlement. It was South Africa which, on 25 April
1978, first accepted the Western proposal, some months
before the equivocal response of SWAPO, which contained conditions that almost wrecked the settlement
initiative at its very commencement.
73. It was South Africa which, on 22 December 1978,
after having first consulted with the elected representatives of the people of the Territory, informed the
Secretary-General of its decision “to co-operate in the
expeditious implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978)“. [S/12983, annex I.]

67. As I said at the beginning of my statement, we have
not come here to provoke any confrontation with any
country or group of countries. We are not here to make
any exaggerated demands on the Council and its
members. We have come to have the Namibian question
placed in its proper perspective and to generate a momentum for real progress in the implementation of resolution
435 (1978). It is therefore our hope that, at the end of the
day, this will have proved to be a fruitful Council meeting
characterized by a constructive spirit, realism and great
courage to take those steps that can and will truly advance
the freedom and genuine independence of Namibia.

74. It was South Africa which, on 6 February 1979,
advised the Secretary-General that early implementation
was imperative, and which urged the United Nations that
the emplacement of UNTAG, even if it only involved
certain advance units, should commence not later than
the end of February 1979.
75. It was not South Africa which created the obstacles
that have, since February 1979, frustrated agreement on
a peaceful settlement.

68. The PRESIDENT
(intdrprefation jhom French): The
next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

76. It was not South Africa which brazenly altered the
independence proposal on 26 February 1979 to remove
basic guarantees for the security of the people of South
West Africa. It was officials of the Secretariat who did
this, at the insistence of SWAP0 and with the connivance of representatives of certain countries. My Government has in its possession the documentary evidence to
substantiate this claim. It will be recalled that, on 21
February 1979, telegraphic clarifications were despatched from the Secretary-General’s office to a number

69. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): I should
like to join preceding speakers in congratulating you, Sir,
on your assumption of the office of President of the Council and to express our confidence that you will conduct
these proceedings with due impartiality.
7

‘, ,?
,,,
x
iI 1;;
,,$
“ ‘rQy

of Governments which conflicted directly with the express
understandings that had previously been reached between
South Africa and. the contact group. In terms of these
clarifications, SWAP0 would be given bases inside South
West Africa which it had never had, and the military component of UNTAG would no longer be required to monitor the restriction of SWAP0 to basesoutside South West
Africa. Apparently SWAP0 now accepts restriction as to
base and monitoring by UNTAG, but in February 1979
its refusal to do so directly impeded the negotiations and
led to an impasse of long duration.

81. In the mean time, another threat to the stability and
the process of self-determination in South West Africaand indeed throughout southern Africa-is casting its
ominous shadow across our subcontinent, yet another
peril for the peace of southern Africa, which is growing
with each passing month and which has not been of
South Africa’s making. I refer to the increasing and
threatening presence of the surrogate forces of an expansionist and imperia1 super-Power in our region. As the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of South Africa recently
stated in the South African Parliament:

77. It was not South Africa which created well-founded
doubts in the minds of the people of the Territory concerning the United Nations bias in favour of SWAPO. It
was the United Nations itself, through the massive material, political and propaganda assistance it extended-and
indeed continues to extend-to SWAPO. Indeed, this series of meetings of the Council is a cynical demonstration
of United Nations bias in favour of SWAPO. However, I
should like to add that the more constructive tone
reflected in the Secretary-General’s report [S/1577ci] has
not gone unnoticed.

“There is an unquestionable de facto linkage between
the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola and the
settlement of the South West African question. It is
ludicrous to suggest that the introduction of the hostile
and expansionist surrogates of a super-Power into the
southern African region will not have the most farreaching implications for the security of all of the countries of the region, particularly when one considers:

78. I should also like at this stage to register my appreciation for the reference yesterday [2439th meeting] by the
representative of the United Kingdom to South Africa’s
positive role in the negotiations leading to the independence of Zimbabwe.

“(2) The record of the surrogate, Cuba, for subversion and the fomentation of revolution in Central
America, South America and Africa;

“(1) The doctrine of the super-Power, the Soviet
Union, which openly proclaims the necessity for the
world-wide exportation of communism;

“(3) The threat which Soviet- and Cuban-supported elements have already posed to a country in the
region, that is, the Shaba invasion of Zaire.”

79. It was not South Africa which aroused fears that the
people of South West Africa would be subjected to intimidation during the election campaign. It was SWAP0
which did so through its cold-blooded campaign of terrorism, which has left more than 1,300 civilians dead and at
least 25 prominent local politicians assassinated. SWAP0
has added to these apprehensions with statements which it
has made over the Voice of Namibia in which it has
declared that “the liquidation of traitors may have to be
intensified if the revolution is to succeed”. In addition, the
instructions issued to terrorists who recently attempted
to infiltrate into the Territory included orders to kill
members of the civilian population indiscriminately, to
kill political leaders opposed to SWAP0 and to lay landmines as widely as possible.

82. It was these concerns which ultimately led to the
impasse at the Geneva pre-implementation
meeting in
January 1981 and which for some time left the whole
settlement concept dead in the water.
83. It was against this background that the United States
Government approached the South African Government in
the early part of 1981 to learn whether the South African
Government would be prepared to participate in a new
initiative in search of a settlement based on resolution 435
(1978). It will be recalled that the United States proposed a
phased initiative in an attempt to address these concerns
and to dismantle the obstacles, There is a widespread misapprehension in the international community that there has
been some form of collusion between South Africa and the
United States over South West Africa. Nothing could be
further from the truth. It was only with considerable apprehension that South Africa agreed to certain proposals
which were put to it by the current United States Administration. However, despite its deep-seated misgivings, it
agreed to adopt a flexible approach with a view to finding
peaceful solutions to the problems of South West Africa
and southern Africa.

80. It was not South Africa which created the deepest
misgivings among the people of South West Africa concerning the continuation of fundamental constitutional
rights after independence. It was SWAP0 with its terrorist practices and Marxist principles and threats to discipline political opponents t,hat has done so. As Mr.
Nujoma has said in recent years:
“We do not fight for majority rule, we fight in order
to take over the power in Namibia for the benefit of the
people of Namibia. We are revolutionaries.

84. On 26 January 1982, South Africa informed the
contact group that it had accepted the revised constitutional principles which the five had presented to it on 17
December 1981. On two subsequent occasions, in an
attempt to expedite the independence process, South
Africa agreed to amendments to the proposed electoral
system which other parties had demanded. Nevertheless,

“We believe that a really socialistic State in Namibia
can only be enforced by means of violent revolution.
“Cuba is the example for revolution. The Cuban
revolution is our revolution, It is the revolution of suppressed people.”
8

owing to SWAP0 intransigence, it was not until 12 July
1982 that the contact group was able to report to the
Secretary-General that all parties had accepted the principles. [See S/15287.]

was arranged for 23 February 1983, but a week before
the discussions were due to take place, SWAP0 launched
its largest-ever offensive against South West Africa, with
the knowledge and support of the Angolan Government.
South Africa nevertheless decided to send a delegation to
the Cape Verde Islands, led by the South African
Director-General for Foreign Affairs and Information,
to make it clear to Angola that it and SWAP0 would
have to reciprocate the military restraint which had been
manifested by South Africa if there was to be any progress with the peace initiative.

85. There should be no mistake concerning the seriousness of South Africa’s attitude to these negotiations.
South Africa does not regard the proposals which have
been made and the undertakings which have been given as
so many pieces of paper to be blown away willy-nilly by
SWAP0 and the international community when they
have served their propaganda purpose.

92. The South African delegation also emphasized that
a lasting settlement would require the withdrawal of
Cuban forces. Within this context, South Africa is prepared to hold further talks with Angola. Indeed, South
Africa is still awaiting Angola’s reaction to a recent letter
in which this position was set out,

86. As a result of its bitter experiences in the past, South
Africa has developed a deeply sceptical attitude towards
the United Nations in its dealings with the international
community over South West Africa. South Africa will,
accordingly, not be content with words and paper undertakings. It is seeking firm and concrete signs that the
United Nations is prepared to give serious attention to the
justifiable concerns of the people of South West Africa
and to the legitimate interests of South Africa in a stable
and peaceful southern Africa.

93. Much has been said of South Africa’s armed forces
along the borders of South West Africa, Once again, the
situation which has arisen has not been of South Africa’s
making. We would much prefer peaceful coexistence
with all our neighbours. We have repeatedly invited our
neighbours to enter into non-aggression pacts and we
have suggested that they discuss with us matters of
mutual concern,

87. How can we reconcile the supposed commitment of
SWAP0 to the constitutional principles with its totalitarian rantings at the recent Paris Conference and, what is
more, with the expulsion of a representative of one of the
South West Africa political parties from that Conference?

94. AS the Council is no doubt aware, the Governments
of Mozambique and South Africa agreed to follow up
bilateral ministerial talks which had taken place on 17
December 1982 with a second round of ministerial discussions on 5 May 1983. However, the Government of
Mozambique deemed it fit to send a propaganda story
into the world a few days prior to the scheduled meeting
to the effect that the South African Government had
trained and instructed a South African citizen by the
name of Petrus Benjamin Schoeman, inter ah& to assassinate the President of Mozambique. It must be assumed
that this story was intended to give substance to allegations which the Council has already heard this morning,
that South Africa was destabilizing its neighbours in
southern Africa.

88. How can we reconcile the search for peace implicit
in these negotiations with the unilateral escalation by
SWAP0 of its terrorist attacks against the people of the
Territory? Only last February, SWAP0 launched its
largest-ever offensive against the people of the Territory,
despite the fact that intensive efforts were at that very
time under way to try to bring peace to the region. The
SWAP0 attack, which failed in all its objectives, involved
600 to 850 specially trained terrorists, divided into 12 to
14 groups. Despite the failure of its last initiative,
SWAP0 is even now in the process of mustering its forces
for yet another desperate attack against the civilian population of the Territory.
89. How can we reconcile the requirement of impartiality with the continuing United Nations activities in support of SWAP0 as most recently manifested at the Paris
Conference?

95, When confronted by the South African Government’s determination not to continue with bilateral discussions before the facts regarding Mr. Schoeman had
been established, the Mozambique delegation agreed to a
team of South African policemen proceeding to Maputo
to obtain Mr. Schoeman’s fingerprints. These fingerprints established beyond any doubt whatsoever that the
person held by the Mozambican authorities had a criminal record spanning a period from 22 March 196 I, when
he was 14 years of age, to 5 January 1976, when he was
declared a habitual criminal. Mr. Schoeman wasreleased
on parole by the South African authorities on 20 January
1982, but he broke his parole conditions soon after his
release and has subsequently been sought by the South
African police in this connection as well as in connection
with allegations of theft allegedly committed after his
release.

90. South Africa has also attempted to play a constructive role in removing the last major obstacle to the realization of a peaceful settlement: that is, the withdrawal of
Cuban forces from Angola. South Africa felt that it could
make a positive contribution in this regard by attempting
to establish peace in the border area between South West
Africa and Angola.
91. Members of the Council will recall that representatives of South Africa and Angola met at ministerial level
in the Cape Verde Islands on 7 and 8 December 1982, and
during that meeting South Africa made certain practical
proposals for the establishment of peace in the border
area. A second round of talks, also at ministerial level,
9

96. By their own admission, the Mozambique authorities had detained Mr. Schoeman in custody for more than
a year, since approximately the time when he was being
sought by the South African police. It is clear that Mr.
Schoeman could have been paraded before the international press at any time over a period of more than a year,
and it is equally clear that Mr. Schoeman is one of life’s
unfortunate cases in urgent need of sympathetic and
human care.

dilemmas in which we find ourselves. If we fail to do
this, the drift towards confrontation and conflagration
in southern Africa will become inevitable. Invective
and acrimonious exchanges and eventually hatred,
suspicion and mistrust will accumulate and will
become a driving force towards a situation of general
war in southern Africa, and no winner will emerge
from such a conflict situation.”
“That is why to my mind the choice is quite clear. It
is imminent. South West Africa is only a part of the
southern Africa scene. It is, as far as I am concerned,
the tip of the iceberg. The bulk is underneath and
much more dangerous. I believe the Angolans, the
Zambians, the people of Zimbabwe and the people of
Mozambique are tired of the turbulence of our region.
If that is the case, then I believe that there rests an
historic responsibility on all the leaders of southern
Africa to get together and objectively and constructively review the whole situation in southern Africa. I
believe the time for this is ripe.”

97. But despite the irrefutable evidence that Schoeman
is nothing more than a common criminal and despite
Maputo’s unambiguous acknowledgement of this fact,
the Government of Mozambique nevertheless had the gall
to use him in yet another of its propaganda set-pieces, this
time by displaying him in its capital, as recently as last
Saturday, before a crowd of 50,000 people as a “member
of the Mozambique National Resistance”. This charade
has exposed to the world community the lengths to which
certain elements will go to smear South Africa with the
label of destabilization.

101. Now that choice still exists. I trust and hope that
the Security Council will not consider any action or set
any deadlines which might force southern Africa in the
direction of confrontation and of an escalation of conflict. The Council should be under no illusions as to who
would suffer most. It would not be the super-Powers or
the United Nations which would have to pay the price for
unleashing the dogs of war upon our region. It would be
all the peoples of southern Africa, of all the countries of
our region.

98. However, an attitude has developed in the international community, largely as a result of the perverse positions adopted by the Organization, that South Africa and
those who are under its legitimate protection may be
attacked across international borders with impunity. Let
there be no mistake about South Africa’s reaction. We
shall defend ourselves and the people of South West
Africa with all the means at our disposal. Those who
harbour terrorists, those who attempt to destabilize our
society, must understand that South Africa will not take
this lying down. We would not have it so, but the choice is
theirs.

102. But the world must also understand that the South
African Government will not bow to threats. We shall
not be bound by deadlines or held hostage by intimidation. We shall make our own decisions according to our
perception of our responsibilities and interests and this
means that in our international dealings we shall continue to deal fairly with all nations in a spirit of goodneighbourliness and respect for the rights of all peoples
to self-determination. We shall continue to make our
essential contribution to international commerce. We
shall meet our obligations and we shall pay our debts.
Where we can, we shall continue to help our neighbours
who commit themselves to peaceful coexistence and constructive co-operation. Inside our country we shall continue to maintain order and stability and we shall carry
on with the process of controlled reform. We believe that
there are more than enough moderate people and people
of good will within our country, within South West
Africa and within our region to assure us all of peace and
prosperity.

99. From the foregoing it should be clear that the obstacles to an international settlement of the South West
Africa question have not been of South Africa’s making,
On the contrary, South Africa has consistently worked for
the creation of circumstances which will permit the people
of South West Africa to determine their own future in
conditions of impartiality, secure from terrorist and other
forms of intimidation, confident of the continuation of
their basic constitutional and civil rights, and assured that
their country will not fall prey to the predatory expansion
of the Soviet Union and its surrogates. South Africa has
no intention of deviating from this course.
100. The recent terrorist outrage in Pretoria and South
Africa’s subsequent retaliation against African National
Congress of South Africa targets in Mozambique graphically illustrate the urgency of the choice which must be
made in southern Africa between the dangers of escalating confrontation and the benefits of peace and cooperation. As the South African Minister of Foreign
Affairs stated in Parliament on 17 September 1981:

103. But at the same time we shall continue to resist
radical alien and malevolent interference in our affairs.
We shall not permit surrogate forces to influence developments in our region and we shall not tolerate the
expansion of Soviet imperialism on our borders. We
have lost patience with those in the international community who incessantly work for our destruction, who call
for our isolation and incite terrorist violence against us
and who then throw up their hands in amazement and

“We therefore all have a dilemma, the rest of Africa
and South Africa, and the time is approaching that we
must face the facts as they are, without demanding
confessions. Southern Africa is not a house of confession. What is required is a realistic appraisal of the
10

horror when we have the temerity to defend ourselves. We
shall continue to work for peace, prosperity and selfdetermination in our own country and in South West
Africa. But let there be no doubt: those who threaten us
increase the chances of confrontation and conflict
throughout our region and those who attack us, or who
assist others to attack us, do so at their most dire peril.

not our intention in this debate to dwell on the history of
South Africa’s aggression in southern Africa. The records
of that aggression speak for themselves and we do not
need to labour the point. Even friends of South Africa
agree with us on this sad history of the racist rCgime. We
have come here with one main objective-the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) on the independence of
Namibia.

104. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Kenya. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

110. It is now five years since the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia was endorsed by the
Council in resolution 435 (1978). At the time, we hoped
that South Africa had regained its senses and was ready
to co-operate in arranging for the peaceful transition to
independence of Namibia. Instead of moving towards
the implementation of the United Nations plan, South
Africa has intensified its war against the liberation
forces, the forces of SWAP0 and the neighbouring
States, particularly Angola and Mozambique. Instead
of implementing the United Nations plan, South Africa
has moved in to convert Namibia into an armed camp,
a military base and a springboard from which it has
carried out unprovoked attacks against neighbouring
countries.

105. Mr. WABUGE (Kenya): I wish to take this opportunity to convey greetings and best wishes to all the
members of the Council from Mr. Daniel arap Moi, President of the Republic of Kenya and current Chairman of
the OAU. It is his hope that the Council will with firmness
take the necessary steps to ensure that its resolution 435
(1978) is fully implemented.
106. At this juncture permit me to expressKenya’s gratitude to the Council for agreeing to extend an invitation to
my country to address the Council on such an important
issue as the one under discussion.

111. The events of yesterday are a vivid example of
what we have been saying over the years. The air attack
carried out in the early hours of yesterday morning
against Mozambique clearly shows how the racist regime
is responding to the international demand for its withdrawal from Namibia. The air raids against Mozambique
stand condemned by the entire world community. Such
acts of aggression will only harden the resolve and the
determination of the freedom fighters to continue the
armed struggle. Indeed, Africa and the entire world community are bound to ask what it is that South Africa
wants.

107. I am happy to be addressing the Council at a time
when you are presiding over its deliberations, particularly
since the issue under consideration is of capital importance to Africa, a region of which your country is an
eminent member. I am confident that your distinguished
career as a diplomat and statesman and your wealth of
experience in tackling difficult issues will greatly assist the
work of the Council in making realistic and genuine progress towards the final solution of the problem of the total
decolonization of Namibia. Allow me also to express
Kenya’s thanks to the other members of the Council for
their great devotion and dedication in discharging the
enormous responsibilities in connection with Namibia’s
independence entrusted to them by the international
community.

112. As I have said, we have come before the Council
with one main objective: the implementation
of the
United Nations plan as called for in its resolution 435
(1978). We have all agreed that this plan remains the only
basis for peaceful transition to independence by
Namibia. Since the adoption of the plan in 1978, Africa
and, indeed, the rest of the world have waited with anxious impatience for the implementation of the plan. We
were told by those close to South Africa and by those
who had offered themselves as negotiators for that country that it was ready to accept the implementation of the
United Nations plan.

108. The Council has been convened at the request of
the non-aligned countries. When the Seventh Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries met at New Delhi in March this year, it called upon
the Security Council to meet as soon as possible in order
to consider further action on the implementation of the
plan for Namibia’s independence. It made that call
because it believed that the situation in Namibia had
reached a critical stage and that the international community must discharge its obligation under the Charter of the
United Nations to ensure the implementation
of the
Council resolution on Namibia, which has been too long
delayed.

113. For our part, we had no illusions about South
Africa’s sincerity in all these negotiations. The African
States, together with SWAPO, had serious doubts
regarding South Africa’s sincerity in these negotiations.
Our fears and apprehensions were proved right only last
summer when we thought that the contact group had
prevailed upon South Africa to accept the plan. Last
summer, our hopes were raised and there were great
expectations that at last the plan would be set in motion.
We were told by those negotiating for South Africa,
namely, the contact group, that finally an agreement had

109. In the 37 years of United Nations history, voluminous records have accumulated of continued aggression
by South Africa against the people of Namibia and the
neighbouring countries. The United Nations also has
voluminous records of its resolutions, decisions and
recommendations on the decolonization of Namibia. It is
11

been reached to begin the implementation of the United
Nations plan. We were not surprised at all when, soon
after the so-called negotiations with South Africa, we
began to get signals of something different from what we
had been given to understand by the contact group. It
became clear that, as before, South Africa was playing its
usua1 game of delaying tactics. Instead of implementing
the plan, South Africa is now making an unrealistic, unrelated and unacceptable demand of an independent neighbouring State, Angola.

117. The international community must continue its
onerous responsibility for Namibia. It is precisely for this
reason that we are meeting here to request the Security
Council to renew-not to change or modify-its
mandate to the Secretary-General and to proceed with the
task of implementing resolution 435 (1978) and the plan
approved therein. We feel compelled to demand at this
meeting that a draft resolution be adopted by the Council in which the Secretary-General will be requested to
submit his report on the progress of the implementation
plan before the opening of the thirty-eighth session of the
General Assembly. We make this demand in view of the
fact that the problem of Namibia has been stalemated
since 1978. It is our belief that the Council should now
move to implement its own resolution, a move which is
much overdue. Our special appeal goes to those States
which have the power and the means to influence South
Africa to assist us and the Secretary-General in this exercise of implementation without complicating an already
complex problem.

114. It is very pertinent at this time to say that Africa
welcomed the initiatives of the contact group in our negotiations with South Africa. We, however, should like to
stress the point that those who have assumed the responsibility for negotiating with South Africa and have received
co-operation and support from SWAP0 should do so
genuinely and stop sending confusing and conflicting signals to South Africa.
115. We are discussing the implementation
of the
United Nations plan according to resolution 435 (1978).
this plan needs no other modifications or conditions on
the part of any other State. We therefore cannot and will
not accept any notion of linking the implementation of
this plan with the internal affairs of Angola. Namibians
are fighting for self-determination, to liberate their own
country. Angolans are fighting to preserve their own territorial integrity and sovereignty against the brutal aggression by South Africa. We must concede to the Angolans
the right to seek help whenever they feel they need it. In
fact, it is our view that when Namibia becomes independent, the threat to Angola’s sovereignty coming from
South Africa will be removed. We therefore urge the contact group, particularly those of its members with power
and influence over South Africa, not to encourage it to
erect unrelated and unjustifiable obstacles to the implementation of the plan. Let it be understood by South
Africa and the contact group that at the time resolution 435 (1978) was debated and adopted and during the
subsequent negotiations under United Nations auspices,
Angola, as a sovereign State, had welcomed Cuban troops
and no one at that time raised the question of linkage. Let
the contact group, if it is serious and honest about the
implementation of the plan, drop the idea in order to enable the Secretary-General to implement resolution 435
(1978).

120. This series of meetings of the Council were called
to consider an issue of crucial importance, an issue which
has long been a major preoccupation of the Organization
and especially of the Council.

116. We have come here today before the Council to
urge the international community to renew our mandate
to the Secretary-General for the speedy implementation
of the long-overdue plan for the independence of
Namibia. In our view, the time has come for the United
Nations to act decisively; the time is now. In all our deliberations for the liberation of Namibia, we have been
patient. We have been flexible enough. We have been
reasonable. We have made significant concessions in
order to accommodate South Africa. And what has South
Africa done in return for all these genuine gestures? It has
taken advantage of our patience and moderation by escalating the conflict. It is, therefore, not difficult to see the
cause of our frustration and the reasons for our
impatience.

121. Over the past 35 years, the international community has been addressing itself to the cause of selfdetermination and independence of the Namibian people. Throughout those years, it has pronounced itself
on this question in no uncertain terms and always in the
hope that legitimacy will supersede illegality, that collective efforts will replace unilateral actions and that international law will prevail over arbitrary rule. It would
seem redundant to recall the multitude of resolutions
passed by the General Assembly and this very Council,
the various advisory opinions of the International Court
of Justice, the decisions of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the actions of other authoritative international forums, such as the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the OAU. In addition to these, numerous

118. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
last speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Mr. Mochtar Kusumaatmadja. I welcome him and
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
119. Mr. KUSUMAATMADJA
(Indonesia): I should
like to express my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, and to
the members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to participate in the present deliberations on the
question of Namibia. In congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, I should also like to assure you of my delegation’s high regard for your qualities of statesmanship and
diplomatic skill, which will certainly be indispensable to
the success of our common efforts. Indeed, it is most
fitting that an eminent son of Africa is presiding over this
important series of meetings, the outcome of which will no
doubt decisively affect the course of future events in the
long-troubled region of southern Africa.

12

extraordinary international meetings have been held,
among which were the ninth special session of the General
Assembly, held from 24 April to 3 May 1978, the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa, held
in Paris from 20 to 27 May 1981, and the recently concluded International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence.

tions and subsequent actions. All those decisions are
aimed at compelling South Africa to comply with its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and are
directly addressed to the Security Council.
127. One of the most important conclusions which
emerged from that Conference was that South Africa’s
colonial domination and exploitation of Namibia, its
attempts to impose fraudulent constitutional and political schemes and its policies of internal repression and
external aggression against neighbouring States have
reached such proportions that they have placed international peace and security in imminent jeopardy. The
front-line States-Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe-have borne
the brunt of South Africa’s repeated acts of armed
aggression and attempts at military, political and economic destabilization, and even Seychelles has been the
target of a crude armed intervention by a mercenary
force. In fact, only yesterday, South Africa again
unleashed a military attaclc against Mozambique. Such a
continuing threat to the States of the region cannot be
tolerated and should be forcefully addressed by the
Council.

122. My delegation, therefore, is not in this chamber to
reiterate in any great detail the case for Namibian independence; nor are we here solely to reaffirm the established and unambiguous stand of the overwhelming
majority of mankind on this issue. Our purpose is to
apprise the Council of our considered view that the last
opportunity to effect an orderly and peaceful transfer of
sovereign power to the Namibian people in the context of
the independence of Namibia may soon be forgone unless
the Council decides to act here and now.
123. Indonesia is not alone in this view, as 101 Heads of
State or Government at the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, meeting at New Delhi in March 1983, unanimously underscored the imperative need to bring this critical question
before the Security Council for an expeditious resolution.

128. We are of the firmview that the only way to make
progress towards peace and stability in the region is
through the expeditious implementation of resolutions
385 (1976) and 435 (1978). Any further delay or vacillation in opposing South Africa’s manoeuvres to obstruct
the implementation of the United Nations plan can only
lead to further escalation of violence and bloodshed. The
Council must unambiguously make it clear that the question of Namibia is one of decolonization and reject any
attempt to link Namibian independence to extraneous
issues, as that will not only retard but also distort the
decolonization process. Given the continuing deadlock
in the implementation of the plan, owing to South African intransigence and the apparent inability of the contact group to overcome the obstacles in its path, the
Council should now resume its central role in putting
into effect resolution 435 (1978). It should do so by establishing its own time-frame for action and by charging the
Secretary-General with a greater and more direct role in
the negotiations among the parties concerned.

124. The Secretary-General in his report [S/15776] has
equally underlined the destructive impact which any
further delay in the achievement of Namibian independence will have not only on Namibia itself but also on the
wider prospects of peace and security for the region as a
whole. I should like here to express Indonesia’s deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his dedicated
efforts and the strong personal commitment he has shown
to the Namibian cause.
125. It sould be recalled that, after so many arduous
years of effort, a peaceful and comprehensive settlement
appeared temptingly within our reach when, in 1978,
agreement was achieved on a United Nations plan for
Namibia, in accordance with resolutions 385 (1976) and
435 (1978). The optimism that accompanied that major
breakthrough was soon to dissipate, however, upon realization that South Africa’s initial acceptance of the plan
was cynically based on mnlaflde intent. Indeed, since the
plan’s inception, South Africa has used every dilatory
manoeuvre to obstruct and thwart progress towards its
implementation. It is no exaggeration to state, therefore,
that the situation in Namibia today is significantly more
oppressive and volatile than it was five years ago.

129. Another pernicious development that the Council
must also effectively address is the flagrant and wilful
violation by certain States of the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa imposed by resolution 418
(1977). What is particularly ominous is the continuing
collaboration between some Member States and the
racist regime in the nuclear field. Such assistance has
contributed substantially to bolstering the South African
war machine and has enabled it to proceed with the total
militarization of the Territory.

126. We do not fail to note the insidious array of measures and policies instituted by the Pretoria regime to perpetuate its illegal control over the Territory. All of these
have been comprehensively detailed in the Paris Declaration on Namibia and the Report of the Committee of the
Whole and Programme of Action adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held just last month.s At
this time, however, I shall limit my remarks to some salient decisions adopted by that Conference which my delegation believes should form the basis of our delibera-

130. Strict compliance with the arms embargo against
South Africa must be ensured. This can best be achieved
through an already existing Council mechanism established under resolution 421 (1977) but which, regrettably,
has remained ineffective. I arn referring to the Committee
13

of the Security Council, the specific mandate of which is
to ensure scrupulous compliance with the mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa. Its work must be
enhanced, more resources should be provided to it and,
above all, detected violations must be acted upon as a
matter of priority by the Council.
131, In addition to the use of overt military force against
the front-line States and SWAPO, the sole and authentic
representative of the Namibian people, South Africa has
continued its attempts to destroy the territorial integrity
and undermine the economic viability of Namibia.. The
Council must therefore take firm action against the continuing economic collaboration between certain States or
their transnational corporations and the South African
occupation regime which has accelerated the already
extensive illicit plundering of Namibia’s natural wealth, in
complete violation of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibiaa Equally, the status of
Walvis Bay and the Penguin and other offshore islands
should not be questioned or be open to negotiation. They
are an integral and inseparable part of Namibian territory, the integrity of which must be maintained.
132. The racist regime’s illegal occupation of Namibia
has als@been further entrenched through a sinister policy
of internal social and political fragmentation and by the
imposition of puppet regimes. At the same time, South
Africa’s inhuman practice of apartheid has been consciously and ruthlessly extended to Namibia, immeasurably increasing the degradation and suffering of the
people.
133. My Government views the disastrous developments in southern Africa with such concern that we have
made it a matter of urgent national policy to seek immediate and effective Council action against South Africa,
The support of my Government for the valiant struggle of
the people of Namibia, under the leadership of SWAPO,
and for the front-line States has never been in doubt. We
have always scrupulously abided by the mandatory arms
embargo, the oil embargo and all voluntary sanctions and
boycotts against South Africa. Indonesia has not established, nor will it establish, relations of any kind with the
racist Pretoria regime until Namibia and the people of
South Africa have fully achieved true emancipation and
independence and the odious policy of apartheid is for
ever abolished. We continue to view the United Nations
plan as the only viable and comprehensive framework for
a peaceful transfer of power to the Namibian people and
we call for its immediate implementation without any
further modifications or.qualifications.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

cQ300

134. Developments in southern Africa are fraught with
dangerous consequences, not only for Namibia and the
region but also beyond. For this reason the Paris Conference held last month adopted a Declaration and Programme of Actions which, in the view of my delegation,
are as rational as they are realistic. We firmly believe that
the Council should respond positively to all of the provisions in these documents addressed to it, since the unmistakable reality is that the threat of sanctions and the
invocation of partial or voluntary sanctions have proved
to be insufficient, and the only course left open is the
imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions by
the Council in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter.
135. The obdurate refusal by South Africa to comply
with its obligations under the Charter has not only
undermined the credibility of the United Nations; it
poses a challenge to the international legal system as
well. The question of the decolonization of Namibia,
therefore, transcends the achievement of the legitimate
national rights of the Namibian people and impinges
upon the principles and cherished values of all civilized
nations.
136. This series of meetings of the Security Council is a
pivotal one. The decisions that will be taken here will
undoubtedly have a decisive impact on the future course
of events in southern Africa, as the spectre of intensified
armed conflict is looming ominously on the horizon.
137. The inevitability
of Namibian independence is
beyond any doubt. Our fervent hope is that it will come
about through a process of negotiation rather than after
prolonged and uncontrollable upheaval and confrontation. As I stated in the beginning, the prospect for a
peaceful transition towards Namibian independence is
within our reach, but only if the Council lives up to its
responsibility under the Charter and decides to act decisively and act now.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
NOTES

’ A/31/197,
annex I, para. 44.
2 A/34/542,
annex I, para. 63
3 United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 972.
4 Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
’ Report of the Internafional
Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian
People for Independence,
Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(AICONF.
120/13), part three.
6 See Official Records of the Generul Assembly, Thirty-flJh
Session,
Supplement No. 24, Vol. I, annex II.

-90~60205-March

1991-2,050
