A/65/PV.67

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

67

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 15 December 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Lucas
(Luxembourg), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/344)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.31)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/65/82,
A/65/290 and A/65/356)
Draft resolutions (A/65/L.45, A/65/L.47 and
A/65/L.48)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/77)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.46)
(c) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/341)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.25)

(d) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/65/335 and
A/65/357)
Mr. Rossi (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
year 2010 has been marked by two major humanitarian
disasters: the earthquake in Haiti on 12 January and the
floods during the summer in Pakistan. These two
events highlighted both the work and limitations of the
humanitarian system in general and the capacities of
United Nations agencies to respond to humanitarian
needs.
In this context, Switzerland welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report entitled “Strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations” (A/65/82). That document
shows that there has been considerable progress and
that a great deal remains to be done.
With regard to the progress that has been made,
Switzerland would like to make four observations.
First, Switzerland welcomes the Secretary-General’s
conclusions and recommendations. In particular, we
support the recommendations relating specifically to
humanitarian principles, humanitarian access, efforts to
combat sexual violence and the need for humanitarian
actors to operate in line with accepted norms. We noted
with concern that there is still no guarantee of swift,
unobstructed access to victims in many cases. This is a
major obstacle to the effectiveness of assistance and
the protection of civilians. All parties concerned must
respect international humanitarian law and humanitarian

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-69525 (E)

*1069525*

A/65/PV.67

principles and ensure access to civilian populations in
need.
Secondly, we underscore the need to harmonize
needs assessments, as stated in paragraph 54 of the
Secretary-General’s report. That will be crucial for
enabling United Nations humanitarian interventions to
better focus on the specific needs of victims.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that the United Nations
and its partners continue to harmonize and integrate
their respective needs assessments. We encourage
United Nations agencies to continue their work in this
area. There have even been instances of different
reports and figures being issued for the same
operations. In that regard, harmonization would
improve the coherence and effectiveness of
information management among agencies and,
ultimately, the credibility of United Nations institutions
in this area.
Our third observation concerns the recruitment of
staff. Rapid recruitment and intervention are crucially
important in urgent humanitarian situations. With
regard to recruitment in the field, we are quite in
favour of the idea contained in paragraph 62 of the
report with regard to the establishment of an
emergency response roster. Such an instrument could
facilitate rapid recruitment on the ground by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
By allowing for the deployment of qualified staff
familiar with the region, this measure would also
enable us to speed up and improve the quality of the
United Nations humanitarian response. In the same
vein, Switzerland vigorously supports greater
systematic cooperation between OCHA and the
Department of Field Support.
Our fourth point relates to disaster prevention.
The first half of 2010 was marked by several severe
earthquakes, which affected millions of people and
caused damage in the billions of dollars. The
earthquake that struck Haiti on 12 January affected
3 million people; the consequences of the disaster in
Pakistan were beyond measure.
My delegation is convinced that better advance
planning based on clearly defined disaster-management
plans at the local, regional and national levels could
improve emergency response. In that context,
Switzerland
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation calling on Member States to consider
adopting investment targets. We also encourage

2

Member States, together with the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, to define
guiding principles for public development assistance to
be invested in disaster risk reduction, including the
drafting of the relevant reports. This recommendation
was underscored by the Secretary-General in his report.
I would like to raise two further points with
regard to the remaining challenges. First, the report
makes several references to civil-military coordination.
Discussions on the military role in humanitarian
response have taken on greater importance this year.
Civil-military coordination is of increasing interest in
relation to humanitarian affairs, raising a number of
questions such as the maintenance of humanitarian
space, roles and responsibilities in the command
structure and the role of the United Nations.
Another question that arises in this context is the
issue of private military and security firms. It would be
useful for the United Nations to take a position on this
issue, which represents a major challenge in the
implementation of international humanitarian law. In
that regard, we welcome the encouraging progress
represented by the signing of the International Code of
Conduct for Private Security Service Providers in
Geneva on 9 November 2010.
Finally, with regard to funding for humanitarian
action, existing resources are not enough to meet
growing humanitarian needs. While we recognize the
significant efforts that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has made to improve
effectiveness and transparency, Switzerland suggests
that the United Nations further step up its efforts to
secure funding and contributions from other sources,
including the private sector and foundations.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Today’s debate
obviously provides an essential opportunity to review
the challenges that the United Nations system has
faced in responding to humanitarian crises over the
past year and to reflect on how we need to work
together to strengthen the international humanitarian
system in 2011 and beyond.
Nineteen years ago, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 46/182 on the coordination of
humanitarian assistance. As we know, the resolution
sets out vital principles and priorities that are as
important today as they were in 1991, including the

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.

issues that fuel cycles
vulnerability to disasters.

Over the past two decades, we have worked
together as the international community to improve the
coordination and effectiveness of humanitarian
responses. Real progress has been made over the past
few years. The cluster system is beginning to
demonstrate its value, as highlighted by the cluster
evaluation finalized earlier this year — although we
have to recognize that we have not done enough in
relation to clusters. We must continue our efforts to
ensure that they actually work effectively on the
ground.

We also need to increase our focus on disaster
risk reduction and preparedness. This week, Australia
and Mozambique chaired the launch of an important
new United Nations-World Bank report entitled
Natural Hazards, UnNatural Disasters, which analyses
the economics of disaster risk reduction. The report
outlines the results of accumulated and new research
demonstrating that prevention pays dividends, if done
right, and that prevention, in fact, need not cost more.
It sets out a compelling case for action to manage the
risks of the future and reduce the human and economic
costs of disasters. It is a study I would recommend to
Member States as being of great utility in enabling
informed policy choices by Governments, humanitarian
and development partners and the private sector.

The Central Emergency Response Fund is now
well established as an essential mechanism to facilitate
timely response. As announced yesterday, Australia
will continue to increase our contributions to the Fund
over the coming years.
We have also seen large investments in national
disaster preparedness and coordination mechanisms,
which enable more rapid and effective response, led by
national Governments themselves. The international
community and the United Nations need to take further
steps to recognize and support those national capacities
wherever possible.
Progress has been made, but the coordination of
the humanitarian response continues to be one of the
most challenging tasks facing the United Nations
system and facing us as Member States. Globally,
humanitarian needs continue to rise, as we are all
aware. We are also all increasingly aware of the
perilous linkages between climate change and more
frequent and severe weather events.
The scale and magnitude of the crises this year in
Pakistan and Haiti in particular have demonstrated the
essential need to further strengthen the effectiveness
and accountability of our humanitarian response. We
must continue to take account of the lessons learned
from Pakistan and Haiti in order to strengthen our
response in the future.
Such crises also remind us that, while the
immediate causes of humanitarian crises may be all too
clear, more needs to be done to recognize and address
the links between humanitarian crises and
development. We must coordinate development efforts
and humanitarian action to address the underlying

10-69525

of

armed

conflict

and

The third session of the Global Platform for
Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Geneva from
8 to 13 May 2011, will be an important opportunity for
the international community to focus on strengthening
disaster preparedness and risk reduction.
In times of crisis, people who live already
precarious
existences
due
to
poverty
and
discrimination are easily pushed to the edge of survival
by a humanitarian crisis. It is the most vulnerable in
society who experience the greatest hardships and
exclusion from humanitarian and development efforts.
This includes, in particular, women and girls, who are
very vulnerable in times of crisis. It also includes
persons with disabilities, who make up to 20 per cent
of the poorest individuals in developing countries and
are the largest and most disadvantaged minority in the
world. For every child killed in conflict, three are
injured, resulting in permanent impairments that can
lead to disability.
Women and girls with disabilities experience
multiple forms of discrimination, which places them at
higher risk of gender-based violence, sexual abuse,
neglect, maltreatment and exploitation than their
counterparts and women without disabilities. This is
unacceptable.
We take seriously our obligations under the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
in particular article 32, on international cooperation.
We are working with humanitarian partners to ensure
that persons with disabilities are included equally in,
and benefit from, all aspects of humanitarian policy,

3

A/65/PV.67

planning and response. We would urge all Member
States, the humanitarian community and the United
Nations system to align all aspects of humanitarian
assistance with the principles and objectives of that
Convention.
We are pleased to support the adoption today of a
number of draft resolutions, including those on
emergency and reconstruction assistance to Haiti, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and other
countries affected by Hurricane Tomas, and on
assistance to the Palestinian people. We are a sponsor
of all those draft resolutions.
In respect of the Palestinian people, I am
particularly pleased to note the announcement by our
Foreign Minister in Ramallah yesterday that Australia
will increase its assistance, providing three years of
predictable funding totalling up to $18 million to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). This investment
builds on the $90 million we have provided to UNRWA
over the past few years. We will also provide up to 50
postgraduate scholarships over the next few years to
meet Palestinian priorities. These scholarships are
aimed at giving more Palestinians the skills needed to
run an effective future Palestinian State — a State we
expect to come into existence within the next year. We
will also provide an extra $20 million this year to help
the Palestinian Authority through the World Bank.
In closing, Australia would like to acknowledge
the courage and commitment of humanitarian aid
workers, who work tirelessly and often fearlessly in
some of the most remote and dangerous parts of the
world to deliver humanitarian assistance. Their
protection is of paramount concern and we express our
great appreciation for their work in ever more
challenging environments.
We also reaffirm our support to Under-SecretaryGeneral Amos and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs team as they continue their vital
work to build a more effective and accountable
humanitarian system.
Australia itself lives in the midst of one of the
most disaster-prone parts of the world. Disaster
preparedness and humanitarian assistance have always
been among the most compelling priorities for
Australia’s international assistance. That will be an
even greater priority for us in the future; it has to be.

4

Mrs. Bruell-Melchior (Monaco) (spoke in
French): The Principality of Monaco has a longstanding humanitarian commitment that stretches back
more than 50 years. Its dedication to helping the most
vulnerable and people in emergency situations has been
seen throughout the years in policies making
humanitarian assistance one of our priorities. We
provide humanitarian assistance in response to natural
or man-made disaster situations with the permission of
the countries affected and guided by the principles and
norms of international humanitarian and human rights
law, on the one hand, and the basic principles of
neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence, as
enshrined in resolution 46/182, on the other hand. It
therefore falls to States whose populations require
humanitarian assistance to ensure that such assistance
can be provided in a timely manner, free from risks and
obstacles, in order to minimize the impact of disasters
on victims and to ensure the safety of humanitarian
personnel.
In that connection, my delegation shares the
concern of the Secretary-General with regard to the
alarming rise in threats and attacks against United
Nations and related personnel, who have become
political targets and subjects of crimes that far too
often include terrorism, kidnapping, harassment or
other forms of intimidation.
It is therefore imperative that the provisions of
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the Specialized Agencies and the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol —
whose entry into force on 19 August we welcome — be
taken into consideration during negotiations on
headquarters agreements and in defining mission
mandates.
Although my delegation warmly welcomes the
measures taken to improve the security management
system — which are based in particular on the
recommendations contained in the Brahimi report (see
A/55/305) and include the adoption of a new system of
security levels defined on the basis of a structured risk
assessment of security on the ground as well as the
drafting of guidelines on acceptable risk and the
establishment of the Executive Group on Security —
we are no less mindful of the fate of locally recruited
staff.

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

The exposure of staff of non-governmental
organizations to such security risks — people who are
often responsible for providing humanitarian assistance
on the ground — highlights the need to develop the
“Saving Lives Together” strategy, whose objective is to
enhance cooperation on security between United
Nations entities and civil society, in particular through
exchanges of information and the dissemination of best
practices in that area.
My delegation supports all efforts to combat both
acts of sexual violence and other forms of genderbased violence in emergency humanitarian situations,
as well as to enhance coordination at all levels to
achieve that goal.
In the light of humanitarian needs, which have
continued to grow around the world this year and have
left 48 million people in need of emergency assistance,
there is also an increasing need to mobilize financial
resources. Given the scope and the intensity of natural
disasters in 2010, the international community has
faced record levels of disbursements.
At the beginning of the week, the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator reported on the historic
funding provided by the Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF) to respond to climate emergencies,
earthquakes and drought. The Principality of Monaco
took part in the CERF pledging conference and has
been honoured to contribute to the Fund since its
inception. Furthermore, in the light of increasing
needs, the Government of Monaco has decided that its
budget for humanitarian assistance will increase by
250 per cent between now and 2012, accounting for
almost 10 per cent of our official development
assistance.
The emergency plan that the Principality intends
to develop over the next few years will be based on the
following three principles: the provision of financial
support through general response funds as well as
through the competent United Nations agencies, such
as the World Food Programme, the World Health
Organization and UNICEF; the gradual provision of
assistance on the ground through qualified personnel
and supplies to meet the needs of affected populations;
and the establishment of reconstruction, rehabilitation
or prevention programmes in the period following a
crisis. This new vision seeks to make humanitarian
assistance part of a long-term strategy and to meet

10-69525

development objectives when the vulnerability
threshold of some populations is crossed.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our
Government’s gratitude to humanitarian personnel,
who work under difficult and often perilous conditions
to carry out their noble task. I assure the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of our full
support.
Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the holding of this debate,
which provides us an annual opportunity to consider
the challenges in the humanitarian sphere and the role
played by the United Nations in this area. My
delegation would also like to express its gratitude for
the leadership of the United Nations in coordinating
emergency humanitarian assistance. We reiterate our
commitment to strengthening the mechanisms available
to the Organization for rapid and reliable aid response.
In previous debates, my delegation has expressed
its concern over the complexity of humanitarian issues,
which are exacerbated by numerous challenges and
crises. Such a situation impedes safe access for
humanitarian workers, thereby hampering the ability to
reach those who require humanitarian assistance. It
also has an impact on our preventive capacity, which
we must strengthen in order to reduce the vulnerability
of at-risk communities.
In the same vein, Mexico wishes to touch on two
issues that it believes are crucial to the coordination of
humanitarian assistance. First, allow me to refer to
capacity-building for emergency response. For my
country, building capacities for prevention, response
and the transition to development is a key condition for
effective and efficient coordination. We therefore
welcome the prominence that this issue has gained in
our dialogue, as reflected in today’s framework draft
resolution, entitled “Strengthening of the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations” (A/65/L.45), which repeatedly refers to this
issue.
Mexico recognizes that capacity-building must be
undertaken in the interest of States, as they are
responsible for organizing, coordinating and providing
humanitarian assistance in emergencies. This is an
ongoing opportunity in which we must all invest,
because it does not matter when or where a human
need arises: all needs are interdependent and, with

5

A/65/PV.67

appropriate capacities, can become part of a virtuous
circle.
Next year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 46/182, on the strengthening of
the coordination of humanitarian assistance. That
resolution is today both a cornerstone and an
obligatory frame of reference for all of us. Mexico
believes that, on the eve of that commemoration, we
have an opportunity to reflect further on ways to
strengthen the ambit for humanitarian work. My
delegation believes that such a debate should serve to
expand our assessment of preventive aspects, which is
the second point to which I wish to refer.
We firmly believe in the cost-benefit advantage
of prevention. We are therefore convinced that we must
create the infrastructure and the tools that will
contribute to reaching that goal. Mexico believes it is
important to have a fund that will encourage, promote
and finance projects to prevent humanitarian crises —
one that gradually minimizes use of the Central
Emergency Response Fund.
In
conclusion,
Mexico
underscores
its
commitment to strengthening the scope for
humanitarian efforts. We reiterate our support for the
efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and of Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos, whose leadership will help us to achieve
the goals that unite us today.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): It is indeed an
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Governments of Sweden and India. At the outset, we
would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
reports that have been prepared for discussion under
the agenda item we are debating.
Natural disasters and humanitarian emergencies
disrupt progress and destroy the hard-earned fruits of
painstaking development efforts, often pushing nations
back by several decades in their quest for progress. In
the context of human vulnerabilities to emergencies,
the economically and socially weaker segments of the
population are the ones that are most seriously
affected.
The magnitude and scale of some of the
unprecedented natural disasters that the world has
witnessed this year, their catastrophic impact and the
tragedy and trauma resulting from them have again
underscored, as never before, the key role of the United

6

Nations to support the relief efforts of an affected
country. Along with natural disasters, the vagaries of
the financial and economic situation in many countries
continue to exacerbate the vulnerabilities of millions of
people. Therefore, the necessity for the coordination
and effective delivery of humanitarian assistance can
hardly be overemphasized.
Sweden and India reiterate the full commitment
of their respective Governments to resolution 46/182.
Humanitarian assistance must be provided in
accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality. It is relevant to recall here that the
guiding principles enjoin that the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity of States must be
fully respected and that humanitarian assistance should
be provided with the consent of the affected country
and, in principle, on the basis of an appeal by that
country.
The core of resolution 46/182 is a call for
international solidarity. India and Sweden believe that
the capabilities and role of the United Nations are
central in that regard, and that the coordination and
delivery of international humanitarian assistance need
to be further strengthened. Innovations such as the
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), the cluster
system and stronger humanitarian coordinators have
improved the effectiveness of international response,
but much remains to be done to be able to meet
increasing needs. That would mean an augmentation of
the operational coordination capacities of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, improved
delivery of humanitarian assistance by relevant United
Nations funds and programmes and greater
accountability to stakeholders.
India and Sweden are happy to note that the work
of CERF in mobilizing resources and implementing its
mandate continues to be very effective and more
relevant five years after the establishment of the Fund.
CERF has strengthened its operation and plays an
important role in supporting relief operations. The fact
that CERF disbursements for 2010 are likely to surpass
the $400 million mark this year again indicates the
important role played by the Fund. We are also happy
to see the Fund acquiring a greater profile and role in
rapid response to humanitarian emergencies, as
witnessed in particular in Haiti and Pakistan, which
resulted in greatly minimizing the humanitarian
disaster.

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

Disaster management has to be a holistic process
to effectively handle all elements of the pre-disaster to
post-disaster phases, from prevention, mitigation and
preparedness to response, rehabilitation, reconstruction
and recovery. India and Sweden believe that prevention
is better than cure. We must therefore devote greater
attention and resources to disaster risk reduction and
disaster preparedness, which need to be mainstreamed
into development policies.
Sweden and India are gravely concerned about
recent security incidents, and firmly and resolutely
condemn the deliberate targeting of humanitarian and
United Nations personnel.
Sweden and India also believe that emergency
response must be an inclusive process. Communities,
civil society and the private sector all have important
roles to play. We must act in partnership to exploit and
augment synergies. By supporting local and national
recovery processes at an early stage, we should strive
to close the gap between relief and development and to
transform emergencies into opportunities for sustained
development. India and Sweden are convinced of the
need to continue international engagement in the postdisaster period, restore livelihoods, build resilience and
reduce vulnerability. We hope that the international
community will focus on meeting that need, even as we
address emergency relief issues.
Cooperation to strengthen local, national and
regional capacities in the areas of emergency response,
disaster risk reduction and disaster preparedness will
benefit all. In a globalized world, each nation has
capabilities, resources, experiences and knowledge that
can be used in partnership by all nations and the
international community for their mutual benefit.
Mechanisms that tap those capacities and disseminate
best practices and knowledge must therefore be given
high priority by the United Nations.
International cooperation in disaster and
humanitarian relief is the praxis of the ancient Indian
belief that the world is one family. That is what
breathes life into international solidarity and gives
meaning to the idea of multilateralism in the lives of
ordinary people.
Before I conclude, on behalf of the Governments
and people of Sweden and India, allow me to wish to
everyone present here the very best for the coming
festival season and the new year.

10-69525

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): In
recent years, the world has suffered natural disasters of
unprecedented proportions, with a particular impact on
the populations of developing countries. In the light of
that situation, humanitarian assistance becomes
extremely important.
The challenges we are facing are not limited
solely to the economic, environment and social
spheres,
but
increasingly
require
effective
coordination, which must be consistent with patterns of
cooperation that meet the needs identified by States
and are developed in the context of the guiding
principles contained in resolution 46/182, which the
Assembly adopted in 1991.
Response
and
reaction
to
humanitarian
emergencies can be summarized in three concepts,
first, the central role of the affected State in initiating,
organizing, coordinating and implementing humanitarian
assistance; secondly, the necessary authorization and
leadership in coordinating the actions of all
humanitarian actors; and thirdly, the principles of
neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence,
which should be duly observed.
The delegation of Colombia supports all efforts to
improve the coordination and effectiveness of
humanitarian assistance provided by the United
Nations system and other relevant actors of the
international community, and is ready to actively
participate in all discussions on the issue.
Colombia views humanitarian assistance from a
comprehensive perspective that include efforts in
support of the process of rebuilding the social fabric of
affected populations that also help to develop a lasting
physical and economic infrastructure once a crisis has
been overcome.
In the context of response and assistance to
natural disasters, Colombia believes that emergency
humanitarian assistance must be temporary and should
promote measures that go beyond relief and strengthen
local prevention and disaster relief capacities. In that
context, international cooperation must be strengthened
so as to systematically integrate risk management and
reduction measures into development and poverty
reduction policies and strategies. In that context, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, Colombia is
contributing to the preparation of the draft resolution
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian

7

A/65/PV.67

assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”.

people. Hundreds have lost their lives, while others
have been injured and many are missing.

Given that the devastating effects of Hurricane
Tomas and a cholera epidemic are exacerbating the 12
January earthquake in Haiti, our actions and
commitments on behalf of that country must be
strengthened and must truly materialize. For Colombia,
the United Nations operation in Haiti should become a
real development operation that meets the country’s
needs and achieves concrete results.

Despite all our national efforts and an investment
of over $530 million to date, we have been forced to
declare — as our President has done — a state of
economic, social and environmental emergency. We
appeal for international solidarity to face the
consequences of the atypical winter conditions that are
affecting Colombia.

Colombia has firmly supported Haiti with actions
amounting to $18 million. We have sent more than 650
experts and have provided logistical support for the
benefit of more than 850,000 Haitians. In addition, we
have made progress in meeting our financial
commitments by allocating $4 million to the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund, which is administered by the
World Bank.
My delegation warmly welcomes the initiative of
Brazil to promote the draft resolution entitled
“Humanitarian
assistance,
emergency
relief,
rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction in response
to the humanitarian emergency in Haiti, including the
devastating effects of the earthquake” (A/65/L.47),
because that draft resolution reaffirms the commitment
of all Member States and the international community
to provide support and assistance for that country’s
recovery, reconstruction and transition to sustainable
development.
Moreover, I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our sympathy and solidarity with all of the
Caribbean countries that suffered the impact of
Hurricane Tomas. It is for that reason that my
delegation supports the adoption of draft resolution
A/65/L.48, entitled “Emergency and reconstruction
assistance to Haiti, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and other countries affected by Hurricane
Tomas”.
In conclusion, climate change has proven to be
the most relevant factor in natural disasters. That
makes Colombia a particularly vulnerable country. My
country has experienced the highest average number of
natural disasters related to climate in Latin America
over the past 30 years. We currently face an
unparalleled emergency in the wake of such weather
events as heavy rains, which have caused flooding and
landslides that to date have affected nearly 2 million

8

In that regard, I wish to thank the United Nations
system and the international community for their
solidarity and support, which we hope to be able to
continue to count on.
Mr. McClay (New Zealand): The massive
demands on the international humanitarian system over
the past year have involved all of us — Governments,
the United Nations, the Red Cross Movement,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil
society.
In 2010, the world has grappled with the
immensity of the floods in Pakistan and the earthquake
in Haiti — two of the most catastrophic natural
disasters in recent years. However, there were many
other smaller but still serious disasters, with severe
consequences for countries and their populations, as
well as a number of protracted, and often overlooked,
crises that continue to require humanitarian support
from the international community.
New Zealand supports the United Nations in its
leadership
and
coordination
of
international
humanitarian action in both preparedness and response.
More specifically, we endorse the central role of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). As Chair of the OCHA Donor Support Group
(ODSG), New Zealand looks forward to hosting the
annual OCHA/ODSG high-level meeting in June next
year and to welcoming Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos to New Zealand.
New Zealand is a strong supporter of the Good
Humanitarian Donorship Principles and will continue
to provide unearmarked, core funding to the United
Nations and other agencies to provide predictable and
flexible support. Even in the currently tight fiscal
environment, with a range of competing priorities, for
2011 we have maintained last year’s level of core
funding to our United Nations partners and increased
our contribution to the Central Emergency Response

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

Fund (CERF). New Zealand will continue to support
CERF to assist in providing rapid, effective and
equitable response to humanitarian crises, large and
small, and will be as responsive as possible to specific
humanitarian appeals.
New Zealand welcomes recent efforts to
strengthen United Nations humanitarian leadership and
coordination in-country. We encourage further work to
ensure that clusters are put in place quickly and that
they can communicate effectively with relevant
players, including other clusters, local and
international NGOs, national Governments and the
military.
Against a background of shrinking humanitarian
space and increasing security risks to humanitarian
personnel, we endorse the work of the Department of
Safety and Security and of individual agencies to
strengthen security approaches and systems.
New Zealand supports moves to make the
humanitarian system less driven by shocks and more
by needs and vulnerability. As the international
community becomes more effective in risk reduction
and preparedness, we can better deal with complex
situations where chronic and acute vulnerability
already exist.
It remains critical for the international
community to do much more — and urgently — in
mitigation and adaption to deal with the effects of
climate change. The small island nations of the Pacific
and other regions are among the most vulnerable to
those effects and to the potential impact of climatedriven disasters. The international community must
invest more in early recovery to bridge the gap
between life-saving humanitarian work and longerterm development.
At the same time, as many Member States
confront acute fiscal constraints, the international
humanitarian system faces record pressures and
demands. Our elected legislators, taxpayers and other
domestic stakeholders expect increased accountability
and performance from all our development and
humanitarian partners. It is therefore essential that the
work of the United Nations, including its individual
agencies, is relevant and effective, and that it
demonstrates tangible results and value for money.
This work can only be carried out with local civil
society, national and international NGOs, the Red

10-69525

Cross and, in particular, the private sector, all of which
have much to offer and all of which we welcome to the
partnership. It is also essential that this work supports
gender equality and the empowerment of women.
We urge all Governments and other parties to
ensure that the United Nations and other organizations
involved with humanitarian assistance have full,
unrestricted and timely access to the victims of crises
and disasters and to those in need of humanitarian
assistance.
In every situation where humanitarian assistance
is provided, our collective and individual goal must be
to prevent and alleviate human suffering, regardless of
location — a goal that deserves our full support. New
Zealand therefore joins those who declare today their
full commitment to the international humanitarian
system.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
associates itself with the statement made this morning
by the Permanent Representative of Yemen on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
The delegation of Chile would like to express its
gratitude for the reports of the Secretary-General
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations” (A/65/82), “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development” (A/65/356), “Central
Emergency
Response
Fund”
(A/65/290)
and
“Humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation for
selected countries and regions” (A/65/335).
We welcome the information provided in those
reports and appreciate the fact that those documents are
forward-looking and draw attention to the main trends
and challenges faced in providing humanitarian
assistance, which require our attention. We believe
that, in particular, the report entitled “Strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations” calls for us to reflect on how
better to manage those challenges.
Emergency humanitarian assistance ultimately
seeks to alleviate the suffering of those whose lives are
threatened or have been affected by natural disasters or
complex emergencies and their aftermath. The focus of
our response is our concern for the individual and the
individual’s rights; humanitarian action is therefore

9

A/65/PV.67

based on the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
Certainly, States bear the primary responsibility
for providing humanitarian assistance to populations
on their territory; but it is a fact that some situations,
given their frequency or magnitude or institutional
limitations, require the support of the international
community if the enormous challenges they pose are to
be met. Preserving the apolitical and impartial nature
of humanitarian work is not just one of the
fundamental pillars of effective international action,
but also an essential prerequisite for transparency in
humanitarian response and international cooperation.
There is no doubt that these elements are particularly
important to maintaining the credibility and universal
value of humanitarian action.
We welcome the growing multilateral response to
humanitarian emergencies in which the United Nations
— with its capacity, experience, legitimacy and
presence on the ground — has a central role to play in
coordinating international assistance in support of
national authorities. The Central Emergency Response
Fund has undoubtedly become a central tool in that
system, allowing it to respond rapidly to sudden
emergencies and to provide a sustained response in
instances of underfunding. Given their understanding
of local realities and proximity to affected countries,
regional and subregional organizations also have a very
significant role to play.
In the preparation of, response and follow-up to
the subsequent phases of recovery and reconstruction,
we must consider the special needs of the groups that
are most vulnerable in these situations: women,
children, persons with disabilities and the elderly. As a
State party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities and a sponsor of resolution 64/290 on
the right to education in emergency situations, Chile
reiterates that the 2010 “Minimum standards for
education: preparedness, response, recovery” handbook
of the Inter-Agency Network for Education in
Emergencies is an important tool to assist in
reconstruction efforts in countries affected by natural
disasters. I underscore the priority it attaches to
focusing on persons with disabilities — including the
importance of considering the needs of individuals
with physical, mental and visual disabilities — when
designing educational centres, including water and
sanitation facilities.

10

One of the main challenges to ensuring
international aid effectiveness is to ensure the
coherence and coordination of international efforts.
Adequate coordination of the existing local capacities
of organizations, communities and productive sectors
should be at the heart of all of our efforts. Similarly,
recent experience has highlighted the major role to be
played by civil society and the private sector both in
affected countries and in other nations. Civil society
organizations are often the first to mobilize and come
to the assistance of affected populations. Moreover, we
have seen that many people will respond to the
suffering of others and are able to mobilize
considerable resources for communities within their
own countries and in others affected by humanitarian
emergencies.
Finally, we must not forget that local
communities and organizations themselves provide
support to individuals who have lost everything or
have been displaced. Similarly, the private sector has
great capacity to contribute and respond to
emergencies by mobilizing resources, providing
necessary services and materials in the response,
recovery and rehabilitation phases, and by generating
employment and reactivating the economy, which is
essential to the subsequent reconstruction phase.
Adequate attention to the capacity of these sectors will
lead to a more sustainable and inclusive humanitarian
response, which is essential to close coordination of all
the sectors involved.
In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention the
necessary interrelationship between humanitarian
assistance, national capacity response and the
development of the affected countries.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): The devastating
earthquake in Haiti, the flood disaster in Pakistan and
several other emergency crises have made 2010 a
demanding year for the humanitarian response system.
Together with the financial crisis, these emergencies
have given the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Valerie
Amos, a most challenging start. After her first two
months in office, Norway is confident that she is up to
the task. We are committed to supporting the new
Under-Secretary-General in her efforts to strengthen
the international humanitarian system and in her role as
spokesperson for principled humanitarian action.
We must use the experiences from Haiti and
Pakistan to improve the international humanitarian

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

response system, take the lessons into account, and
learn from them. Overall, the United Nations response
to the earthquake in Haiti was acceptable, given the
difficult circumstances. However, the leadership was
too weak, inter-cluster coordination was fragile and
support to the Government was generally insufficient.
The recent outbreak of cholera shows that the need to
deliver services will continue for months to come and
that the cluster system needs to be gradually merged
into broader sector coordination under the leadership of
the Haitian Government.
The floods in Pakistan have been another major
challenge. Although millions of people have been
assisted, the relief effort has not been coordinated well
enough, and the Pakistan Emergency Response Fund
did not respond as quickly and flexibly as anticipated.
Improved delivery and coordination of humanitarian
assistance in the field will be a priority for Norway
when we take on the role of Chair of the Donor
Support Group of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) from July 2011. Norway
aims to engage with a broad cross-regional group of
Member States to seek advice on how to strengthen
OCHA’s effectiveness and field presence.
Recent devastating natural disasters have
demonstrated the vulnerability of huge populations,
especially in rural communities and informal urban
settlements. Urgent and flexible responses to these
disasters are crucial to saving lives and property, but
such disasters also remind us of the need to focus on
prevention, preparedness and the adaptation of policies
and measures. These processes must be locally owned,
the central role of the State recognized, and necessary
tools must be in place. It is anticipated that the growing
number and increasing severity of climate-related
natural disasters will challenge current settlement
patterns and lead to increased forced displacement. In
June 2011, Norway will host the Nansen Conference on
Climate Change and Displacement in the Twenty-first
Century, which will explore some of these challenges
and address possible future protection gaps.
As humanitarian needs continue to increase due
to armed conflict, natural disasters and global
structural challenges, it is crucial that we ensure a
rapid, flexible and effective response to the affected
populations, many of which are among the world’s
most poor and deprived. The full implementation of
international humanitarian law, including access to

10-69525

vulnerable groups and security for humanitarian
personnel, is crucial.
To ensure that a timely and effective response
reaches the victims of humanitarian crises, there is a
need to further strengthen United Nations-led
coordination and to hold the United Nations
accountable. To this end, we must ensure adequate
funding for OCHA. While we are pleased that
contributions to the consolidated appeals have
increased and that new countries have joined the ranks
of the Central Emergency Response Fund donors, we
strongly believe that more countries could and should
contribute more, particularly in order to support
OCHA’s crucial role. Currently, 95 per cent of OCHA’s
funding is provided by voluntary contributions from 39
Member States. Only the remaining 5 per cent comes
from the United Nations regular budget — a
percentage that is dramatically lower than for other
offices and departments in the Secretariat and by no
means enough to cover even the most essential
responsibilities mandated by Member States. This is
neither acceptable nor sustainable. Consequently,
contributions to OCHA from the regular budget need to
be increased.
Finally, let me underscore that strengthened
delivery systems in the field, better preparedness and
recognition of the role of the State and increased and
more predictable funding for OCHA will be key
humanitarian priorities for Norway in 2011 and
beyond. We look forward to cooperating closely with
all Member States to achieve these goals.
Ms. Miguel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Saint Lucia on
behalf of the main sponsors of draft resolution
A/65/L.48. We are deeply grateful to the sponsors for
their solidarity with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
and the other States affected by Hurricane Tomas.
On 30 October, Hurricane Tomas made landfall in
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The brunt of the
hurricane’s impact was felt on the northern half of
Saint Vincent — the largest island in our archipelagic
State. The northern half of Saint Vincent is also our
agricultural heartland and home to stubborn pockets of
rural poverty. Over the space of a few short hours,
more than 1,200 homes were severely damaged. Many
of these homes were destroyed or rendered
uninhabitable. Over 1,200 persons were evacuated to

11

A/65/PV.67

hurricane shelters, where many remain more than six
weeks later. Roads, bridges, schools, Government
buildings and other infrastructure have been severely
damaged.
According
to
our
National
Emergency
Management Organisation, there is widespread
devastation in the banana industry and the tree crop
and vegetable sectors are badly affected. Independent
assessors have determined that banana cultivation in
the northern half of the State was 100 per cent
destroyed. The banana industry is a vital pillar of our
economy, and the hurricane has delivered a devastating
blow to the national economy and the livelihoods of
hundreds of farmers and their families. Estimates have
placed the immediate cost of the damage to homes,
infrastructure and agriculture in the hundreds of
millions of dollars. The medium- and long-term costs
of the hurricane are even greater.
The draft resolution correctly notes that the
Caribbean region is extremely vulnerable to the
physical and economic impacts of tropical storms and
hurricanes. Unfortunately, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines fears that our vulnerability is steadily
increasing. Our Atlantic hurricane season once lasted
five months and ended on 31 October. Weather patterns
have forced an extension of the hurricane season by a
full month. Moreover, according to the United States
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), the hurricane season of 2010 was one of the
busiest on record. This year has seen 19 storms, 12 of
which became hurricanes. According to NOAA, 2010
was the eleventh above-normal Atlantic hurricane
season in the past 15 years. It follows that our region’s
vulnerability to these events is similarly above normal.
Clearly, with 73 per cent of recent Atlantic hurricane
seasons being categorized as above normal, we may
have to re-evaluate what constitutes a normal hurricane
season.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes this
opportunity to express its gratitude to the
Governments, institutions and organizations that have
assisted us in our time of extreme need. In particular,
we wish to thank the Governments of Australia, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, the Cayman
Islands, the Commonwealth of Dominica, the European
Union, Guyana, Japan, Taiwan, Trinidad and Tobago
and the United States, in addition to the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.

12

Our Government’s Operation Recovery and
Reconstruction is under way. We are rebuilding homes.
We are working with farmers to help them to replant
and survive a season without a harvest. We are
strengthening our social safety net to assist those who
have been most affected by the hurricane. And we are
rebuilding our basic infrastructure with an eye towards
our increasing vulnerability to hurricanes and rising
sea levels.
Even as we thank all those who have assisted us
to date in our recovery, we continue to stress the
importance of the draft resolution’s call for “continued
effective humanitarian, technical and financial
assistance” to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and all
of the other countries unfortunately affected by
Hurricane Tomas. We hope that draft resolution
A/65/L.48 will be adopted by consensus.
Mr. Dornig (Liechtenstein): The coordination of
humanitarian assistance is a core activity of the United
Nations. Let me therefore join others in reiterating our
full support for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the work of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos. We welcome the latest report of
the Secretary-General (A/65/82), which highlights the
current threats and challenges in this field and provides
us with an overview of the progress made with regard
to the coordination of humanitarian assistance.
The ability to deliver humanitarian assistance to
populations in need is increasingly jeopardized by the
growing number of deliberate attacks on humanitarian
workers, facilities and vehicles. The changing nature of
armed conflicts, which is often characterized by an
increase in criminality and banditry, plays an important
role in this regard. In addition, in many conflict
situations around the world, humanitarian actors are no
longer perceived as neutral and attacks on them are
political in nature.
To increase the acceptance of humanitarian
assistance in high-risk environments its delivery must
be dissociated from political and military goals and
underpinned by a constant outreach to community
leaders and local authorities. In order to improve the
safety and security of those delivering humanitarian
assistance, any humanitarian response strategy should
be complemented by appropriate and sufficiently
funded security management. Liechtenstein therefore
supports the new United Nations security management

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

approach, which is aimed at supporting humanitarian
operations more effectively.
We welcome further efforts made to increase the
security collaboration between the United Nations,
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations by enhancing the “Saving Lives
Together” framework, which Liechtenstein has
supported from the beginning. Furthermore, we call on
all States to become parties to the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel and
its Additional Protocol, which entered into force this
year.
As a small country, Liechtenstein’s policy of
humanitarian assistance is based on a niche approach,
with an emphasis on underfunded appeals and specific
topics. The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
gives us the opportunity to implement this policy in a
consistent manner. During these times of financial and
economic constraints, Liechtenstein reiterates its
commitment to adequate and predictable funding for
humanitarian assistance. We agree with others that it is
imperative for OCHA and the CERF secretariat to
receive sufficient funds to fulfil their mandates,
including from the regular United Nations budget.
The number of internally displaced persons has
further increased this year to 27 million. The assistance
they receive often fails to address the different
vulnerabilities of women, girls, boys and men. Women
are particularly vulnerable in situations of
displacement, as they are often forced to adopt new
strategies to provide for themselves and their families.
As a result, they sometimes have no choice but to
travel to unsafe areas to find work, trade sex for food
or become sex workers. Greater efforts are needed to
address the link between gender-based violence and
livelihoods in displacement settings.
Access to fuel and firewood and their use in
humanitarian settings pose a variety of serious risks.
Women and girls are often raped and assaulted during
the collection of firewood outside their camps.
Cooking over indoor fires releases toxic smoke,
causing respiratory infections that kill more people
every year — especially babies and young children —
than malaria. Furthermore, the collection of firewood
exacerbates environmental degradation. We are pleased
to see that this year’s draft resolution on the
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations

10-69525

(A/65/L.45) addresses these important issues more
clearly than in the past, in particular by referring to
relevant national and international initiatives. We
particularly welcome the multisectoral guidance tools
endorsed by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee in
this regard. These instruments will help humanitarian
actors to address the issue of safe access to cooking
fuel from the start of every emergency.
Mr. McNee (Canada): The year 2010 has been
one of significant challenges for the international
humanitarian community. With the devastating
earthquake in Haiti, extreme flooding in Pakistan and
other serious disasters in Benin, Chile and Indonesia,
our response capacity has at times been stretched to the
limit. Working in collaboration with national and local
Governments, the international community continues
to deal with the aftermath of these disasters. The recent
outbreak of cholera in Haiti further highlights the
importance of sustained commitment to effective and
coherent international humanitarian action.
These crises, combined with ongoing complex
emergencies in Afghanistan, the Sudan, Somalia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, directly
threaten and affect the lives of millions of people. And
more challenges lie ahead. Migration, increasing levels
of urbanization, the proliferation of humanitarian
actors and increasing restrictions on humanitarian
space make the task of responding to humanitarian
needs even more complex.
All of this raises an important question. Are we,
the international community, well prepared to address
not only current humanitarian emergencies but also
future trends and challenges? Five years after the
implementation of the 2005 Humanitarian Response
Review, and as we take stock of lessons learned from
our responses to recent crises, the time is ripe for
deeper reflection on this question.
Canada places high priority on efforts to
strengthen the response capacity of the international
humanitarian system. Canada continues to advocate for
enhancing cluster coordination, developing flexible
financing mechanisms and strengthening the role and
capacities of resident and humanitarian coordinators.
Canada has provided concrete political and financial
support for all key elements of the humanitarian reform
agenda. Clearly, thanks to the dedication of
humanitarian actors globally, much progress has been
achieved. However, the crises of the past year have

13

A/65/PV.67

highlighted both strengths and areas where more work
is required. It is essential that the international
community continue to reinforce the capacity of the
international humanitarian system, including by
implementing lessons learned from recent crises. Allow
me to highlight a number of areas where the
Government of Canada believes our collective
attention and support is required.
First, a well-coordinated approach is key to
ensuring the delivery of timely and effective
humanitarian response while avoiding the duplication
of efforts. In this regard, Canada strongly supports the
role of the cluster coordination system, but some
challenges remain, particularly in the implementation
of inter-cluster coordination. It will be important for
cluster leads, working with resident and humanitarian
coordinators and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), to identify current gaps
in inter-cluster coordination and practical solutions to
address this issue.
Secondly, recent large-scale disasters, as
experienced in Haiti and Pakistan, have highlighted the
importance of addressing the issue of surge capacity.
The type, scale and frequency of natural disasters
require that the international community be able to
quickly deploy qualified staff as a means to bolstering
capacities on the ground. Canada is encouraged by
ongoing efforts within the United Nations to improve
standby rosters, prioritize contingency planning,
enhance training opportunities and better address dutyof-care issues, and urges the United Nations to
continue to prioritize this work.
(spoke in French)
Thirdly, needs assessments are the foundation of
our efforts to provide more appropriate and effective
humanitarian responses, while ensuring that the
allocation of resources is targeted. OCHA has made
encouraging progress in recent years to develop the
tools and to recruit and train the personnel required to
conduct more coordinated and accurate needs
assessments. Canada strongly supports efforts to
facilitate
evidence-based
decision-making,
and
considers them to be a key step towards strengthening
humanitarian responses.
Fourthly, Canada strongly encourages the United
Nations to strengthen its partnerships with host
Governments and local actors who are on the ground
providing life-saving assistance from the moment a

14

crisis occurs. It is important to pursue this dialogue and
to work closely with local communities, including
them in all stages of planning and decision-making
processes. This was a lesson learned from the Haiti
earthquake. OCHA’s continued outreach and advocacy
activities will be instrumental in reinforcing
partnerships between host Governments, local actors,
the international humanitarian community and the
private sector.
In closing, Madame, you can count on Canada’s
commitment to working in close collaboration with
OCHA and other humanitarian partners, as well as with
Member States, to strengthen the response capacity of
the international humanitarian system. Our collective
focus and commitment are needed to address the
challenges that lie ahead. Together we must ensure that
our actions are results-driven and lead to more
effective international humanitarian action on behalf of
those in need worldwide. It is with them in mind that
we find the true meaning and purpose of our critical
task.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/2 of
19 October 1994, I now give the floor to the Observer
of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
Mr. Jilani (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies): Thank you, Madame
President, for giving me the opportunity to address the
General Assembly on behalf of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC).
The scale and severity of some of the recent
disasters, including the two major disasters that hit
Haiti and Pakistan within the same year, have put a lot
of strain on the global response capacity of the
humanitarian system. Nevertheless, this was not the
first time that the humanitarian community has had to
face such a challenge. In 2004 and 2005, the
humanitarian community had to respond to two major
disasters within the span of less than 10 months. These
were the Indian Ocean tsunami and the Pakistan
earthquake. In both cases, some of the most critical
constraints that faced the humanitarian system were the
availability of adequate human resources and the
timely deployment of teams and equipment.
For the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, as demonstrated by our response operations

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

in Haiti and Pakistan, the investment in the
preparedness and maintenance of a highly trained,
qualified and committed national volunteer and staff
base is a worthy one. In this context, some of our key
messages to Member States and partners are the
following.
First, overall investment in risk reduction and
preparedness is essential and cost-effective in
mitigating the human toll of disasters. At the same
time, serious investment in the preparedness and
maintenance of highly qualified and experienced
human resources, staff and volunteers alike, as well as
the maintenance of the specialized emergency response
units, is a critical investment for effective response
preparedness.
Secondly, supporting and strengthening the
capacity of local actors on the ground as the first
responders, which can be amplified by international
response efforts, is the best and most effective model.
Thirdly, the availability of adequate, predictable
and timely funding is critical to an effective
humanitarian response, as indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/65/82). The IFRC utilizes a reserve
emergency fund known as the Disaster Relief
Emergency Fund, which provides for immediate lifesaving disaster response. In 2009, the Fund was
utilized to respond to 96 disasters in every region of
the world, benefiting over 20 million people — more
than twice as many as in the previous year.
Fourthly, communicating with beneficiaries is
another critical element of an effective disaster
response mechanism, as we have learned from these
disasters. In Haiti we have broken innovative new
ground, in partnership with the private sector, through
the use of short message service technology, local
radios and social media. Such technologies make it
easier to communicate with beneficiaries and engage
them so they can fully participate in shaping our
response.
While these large-scale disasters caused great
losses and suffering and have rightfully captured the
attention of the media and the public, many
communities around the world are suffering the effects
of small- and medium-scale disasters, including slowonset disasters. These smaller-scale and more frequent
disasters are often forgotten. They erode people’s
livelihoods, increase vulnerabilities and undermine

10-69525

sustainable development and our collective efforts to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Today, the IFRC has more than 52 active appeals,
representing a need for more than 1.8 billion Swiss
francs. These active appeals cover disasters of all
scales and in all corners of the world, such as the West
African floods, where heavy rains and flooding
displaced hundreds of thousands of people, destroyed
public infrastructure, washed away crops and drowned
livestock. In the past two months alone, millions of
people have been affected by floods, hurricanes and
other climate-related disasters in all regions of the
world.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our
commitment to work and enhance coordination with
other humanitarian actors, including the United
Nations and other international organizations, nongovernmental organizations and civil society, while
emphasizing that our commitment to our fundamental
principles provides the best available means to gain the
confidence of all in order to have access to those in
need.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 45/6 of
16 October 1990, I now give the floor to the Observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Füllemann (International Committee of the
Red Cross): The International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) is pleased to address the Assembly on
the subject of humanitarian coordination.
In 2010, without forgetting other humanitarian
crises, the scale of the tragic disasters in Haiti and
Pakistan and the enormous difficulties encountered in
providing timely, quality assistance and protection
once again reminded the international community and
humanitarian actors of the challenges of humanitarian
response and the constant need to improve
humanitarian coordination. These improvements are
owed to those affected by humanitarian crises.
The ICRC has adopted a pragmatic approach
towards coordination and engages with mechanisms
that recognize that coordination is not an end in itself,
but is rather a means to providing better and more
timely
humanitarian
services.
Humanitarian
coordination should take place first and foremost in the
field. It should be reality-based and action-oriented. In
other words, the ICRC remains committed to

15

A/65/PV.67

coordination based on each organization’s existing
skills, available capabilities in the context concerned,
access and funding, rather than on future probable
ones.
Within the scope of the fundamental principles of
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement — in particular humanity, neutrality,
independence and impartiality — the ICRC has
supported the existing coordination mechanisms and
coordinated its operations with the various
humanitarian actors — in particular its natural partners,
the national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies —
in the countries where it works. The ICRC will,
however, refrain from any coordination that would
hamper its own capacity to be a credible, neutral and
independent organization that carries out strictly
humanitarian activities. In situations of armed conflict,
the ICRC’s capacity to access the people in need, as
well as the security of its staff, depend on the various
parties to the conflict accepting ICRC action.
Therefore, and in the light of those principles, the
ICRC has to carefully consider the risks when deciding
how to coordinate its activities outside the Movement
with organizations that intend to integrate humanitarian
operations with political and military objectives.
Humanitarian action and political-military action
should be kept separate, as the blurring of those lines
puts the security of humanitarian personnel and the
capacity to access people in need at risk.
The ICRC recognizes the role and responsibilities
assumed by host States to provide protection and
assistance to their own populations when affected by
man-made or natural disasters. The ICRC tailors its
response to humanitarian needs by taking into account
the capacities of the authorities in control of the
territory where it wants to operate and avoiding the
substitution or duplication of their work. In a
transparent and, when necessary, confidential manner,
all necessary information is shared with the relevant
actors, allowing them to have a clear understanding of
the ICRC’s findings and operations. However, because
of its mandate and, consequently, its activities in
situations of armed conflict and other situations of
violence, the ICRC needs States and non-State actors to
respect its neutrality, independence and impartiality to
enable access to all persons affected by such situations.
Contemporary humanitarian action has to
integrate local responsibilities and capacities in a more

16

decisive manner. Current humanitarian crises challenge
the adequacy of humanitarian response based on the
sole intervention of international organizations.
Coordination efforts should ensure that humanitarian
response is founded on existing private and public
national capacities. The ICRC has learned that an
effective humanitarian response depends on creating
genuine
partnerships
between
national
and
international efforts.
For the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, such partnerships are key to the
effectiveness of its overall response. In emergencies,
national societies remain the ICRC’s primary partners
in operation. The ICRC, in conjunction with the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, builds upon the capacities of
national societies, ensuring, as needed, financial
support and/or the transfer of expertise and
technologies to enable national societies to respond to
emergencies, either alone or in partnership with the
ICRC. If those partnerships are to be successful, they
must be based on equality and mutual respect. Finally,
the ICRC’s partnership within the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement is made possible only if national
societies respect and are allowed to respect the
fundamental principles of the Movement, in particular
those of independence, neutrality and impartiality.
Because of the complexity of humanitarian
action, the ICRC remains committed to coordinating its
activities with all humanitarian actors in the United
Nations coordination mechanism, with the aim of
providing the best possible protection and assistance to
people and ensuring that the humanitarian response
supports the autonomous resilience and recovery
capacities of the people affected by armed conflict and
other situations of violence. Indeed, the limit of that
commitment is the ICRC’s capacity to access the
people in need and to ensure the security of its staff.
That commitment will be possible only with the
support of States for the mandate and working
modalities of the ICRC.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 47/4 of
16 October 1992, I now call on the observer for the
International Organization for Migration.
Mrs. Klein Solomon (International Organization
for Migration): The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) is pleased to take the floor today with

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

reference to the report of the Secretary-General on the
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
(A/65/82).
The year 2010 has proved to be another year of
great challenges for emergency humanitarian assistance
due to crises in many countries demanding the
collaboration and partnership of a broad and growing
range of humanitarian actors. The report of the
Secretary-General offers a valuable opportunity to take
stock of progress made and to draw lessons for the
future with respect to new means of working together.
Collaboration and coordination are most relevant
to IOM’s operational work in situations of population
displacement and sudden population movements. The
issue of internal displacement is multifaceted,
requiring many organizations to work on different
aspects and to collaborate to meet the protection,
assistance and recovery needs of internally displaced
persons (IDPs). Several years into the implementation
of the cluster approach, including specifically its use in
response to the earthquake in Haiti, we have been able
to see tangible results in terms of collaboration and
coordination.
In that regard, inter-cluster coordination and
strong humanitarian leadership are key areas where
improvements are necessary for the cluster system to
achieve its full potential. One of IOM’s chief
responsibilities in emergency efforts around the world
is as the global cluster lead for camp coordination and
camp management in natural disasters. IOM recognizes
that camps should be established during a humanitarian
emergency only as a last resort and that IDPs should be
encouraged to stay with host families and to return
home when it is safe and feasible.
Nevertheless, ensuring that IDP sites have
adequate camp management support in those situations
where camps are needed is a key priority for IOM. The
cluster continues to work towards increasing its
capacity to support camp management agencies and to
expand coverage into IDP sites that do not have
dedicated camp management agencies. IOM’s camp
coordination and camp management initiatives work to
actualize such cluster strategies in various responses
around the world, including in the Philippines,
Ethiopia, Nepal, Timor-Leste and, as mentioned earlier,
Haiti. Areas of focus are strengthening community
resilience,
facilitating
accurate
information

10-69525

dissemination regarding the sites and the affected
populations,
addressing
gender-based
violence,
supporting partners carrying out camp coordination and
camp management responsibilities in IDP sites,
including national civil society and local authorities,
ensuring that uniform standards are met and liaising
and working with local governments and affected
populations.
However, humanitarian response is not limited to
humanitarian actors. It must be led by and coordinated
with the full engagement of Governments. Because of
the multidimensional and cross-cutting issues in
humanitarian response, such as those relating to
gender, land ownership, rubble removal and urban
planning, national Governments are critical and
necessary stakeholders in that response. Without their
direction and leadership on key issues, the
humanitarian system may be hampered in delivering its
most effective response in support of Governments.
Search capacity is a particular challenge in
emergency response and the coordination of
humanitarian assistance, as evidenced this year in Haiti
and Pakistan. Although all agencies provided
outstanding search support in response to those
emergencies, the scale of the disasters tested even
those surge limits. Standard procedures for the rapid
recruitment of staff for emergency response and
administrative procedures for procurement and
logistical support have to be further improved to
increase the effectiveness and timeliness of
humanitarian response. Equally important, beyond the
emergency response, all organizations need to provide
long-term dedicated engagement with the proper,
experienced and adequately supported staff.
Finally, the Secretary-General’s report touches on
another topic of great concern — climate change and
environmental degradation. This year, both have had
serious consequences for millions of people and their
countries and will continue to do so for communities in
the near and distant future. In that respect, IOM would
like to echo the Secretary-General’s call for a shift
from a shock-driven towards a more needs-based and
vulnerability-led response. In particular, we would like
to highlight that gradual environmental changes, such
as drought and desertification, appear to be a less
obvious push factor for migration than extreme
environmental events.

17

A/65/PV.67

However, those gradual processes are expected to
trigger most environmental migration in the longer
term. While all countries are at risk, developing
countries are more vulnerable given that they have far
fewer resources and capacities at their disposal to cope
with and adapt to climate change and environmental
degradation. Overall, environmental migration is likely
to be mainly internal, with a smaller proportion taking
place between neighbouring countries and even smaller
numbers migrating long distances. It is essential that
relevant national and regional policies and strategies,
including humanitarian, development and adaptation
ones, factor in environmental migration.
To conclude, IOM is committed to those most
vulnerable in times of crisis and remains dedicated to
working resourcefully and proficiently with its InterAgency Standing Committee partners. We would also
like to take this opportunity to offer our support to the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Baroness Valerie
Amos, as well as our appreciation to our partners and
supporters, in particular the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for their unwavering
commitment to the improvement of humanitarian
response capacities.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/65/L.25, A/65/L.31, A/65/L.45, A/65/L.46, A/65/L.47
and A/65/L.48.
One representative has asked to speak in
explanation of position. I would remind him that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Israel.
Mr. Weissbrod (Israel): I wish to announce that
Israel will join the consensus on draft resolution
A/65/L.46, entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian
people”.
In contrast to too many resolutions of the General
Assembly regarding our region, the draft resolution
before us is basically constructive in its approach. It
seeks to assist the Palestinian people in increasing their
economic and development capacity, a goal to which
Israel remains dedicated and has supported for many
years.

18

Israel’s commitment to that objective can be seen
through the significant measures that we have taken
over the course of the past year to improve life in the
West Bank. Despite continued security risks, we have
removed hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints.
During the first nine months of 2010, the Allenby
Bridge, which has extended its hours of operation until
midnight, saw passenger traffic increase by 13 per cent
and vehicular traffic by 16 per cent compared to the
same period in 2009.
Such measures are showing clear results, which is
clearly illustrated by the figures provided by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank. In the first six months of 2010 alone, real gross
domestic product growth amounted to 9 per cent in the
West Bank and 16 per cent in Gaza, and continues at an
exceptional pace.
The Palestinian population recognizes that
improvement in their situation. According to the most
recent survey of the International Peace Institute, 57
per cent of Palestinians in the West Bank believe that
matters in their community are headed in the right
direction. That is more than double the number of
Palestinians who answered that way in the same poll
last year.
In Gaza, Israel has taken significant steps to
improve the situation of the Palestinian population,
which remains captive to the Hamas terrorist
organization. Despite continued terrorist attacks
emanating from the Gaza Strip, Israel’s Government
took the significant decision on 17 June to liberalize
the system by which civilian goods enter the area and
to expand the inflow of materials for projects under the
supervision of international organizations. As a result,
the number of truckloads entering the Gaza Strip has
increased by 92 per cent since June. Also, Israel has so
far approved 78 international projects, including new
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
various other projects. The Israeli Cabinet took further
measures on 8 December, allowing for an expedited
flow of exports out of the Gaza Strip.
Today’s discussion on humanitarian assistance to
the Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank should not
occur in a vacuum. We must not forget that Gaza
continues to be an area from which rockets are daily
fired at Israeli towns and civilians. It is a place where
terrorists launch attacks at border crossings and

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

continue to stockpile arms and munitions in violation
of international law. On the very same day that Israel
took measures to increase the flow of exports from the
Gaza Strip, rockets and mortars were fired on Israeli
towns, causing injury to a civilian.
Thus, any discussion of humanitarian assistance
in our region must address the critical issue of security,
which is integral to the well-being of Palestinians and
Israelis alike. As such, Israel welcomes the ninth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution, which
reads:
“Emphasizing the importance of the safety
and well-being of all people, in particular women
and children, in the whole Middle East region,
the promotion of which is facilitated, inter alia, in
a stable and secure environment.” (A/65/L.46, p. 2)
That paragraph represents a modest start to delineating
the integral relationship between security on the
ground and the welfare of the people in our region.
However, Israel still has reservations regarding
certain aspects of the draft resolution, in particular its
discussion of the policy of assistance to the Gaza Strip,
which does not reflect Israel’s security needs with
regard to delivering assistance and other issues. Any
resolution on the region should be very clear about the
security risks inherent to Gaza that Israel continues to
face on a daily basis. In addition, the draft resolution’s
description of the humanitarian situation facing the
Palestinians does not reflect the facts on the ground or
the growth figures measured by the IMF, the World
Bank and numerous other organizations. We should not
take that growth for granted or dismiss the significant
measures taken by Israel to improve the Palestinian
economy, but rather give it the appropriate credit,
especially if we consider the security challenges that
Israel faces.
Despite such concerns and others, Israel joins the
consensus on the draft resolution in support of the
broadest principles of assistance to and the
development of the Palestinian people. Israel calls on
the Palestinians to return to negotiations in order to
reach a peace agreement. Achieving peace is a twoway, not a one-way, street. We stress that only through
bilateral negotiations that address the concerns of both
sides can we achieve the vision of two States living
side by side in peace and security.

10-69525

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/65/L.25.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/65/L.25, entitled “Strengthening of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts to
study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Pursuant to paragraph 19 of the draft resolution,
the General Assembly would request the President of
the General Assembly to convene, on 26 April 2011, a
special commemorative meeting of the Assembly in
observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Chernobyl catastrophe. It is understood that the special
commemorative meeting of the Assembly in
observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Chernobyl catastrophe on 26 April 2011, referred to in
paragraph 19, would be part of the programme of the
General Assembly, using its entitlements to meet
within normal working hours, that is, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
and 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. Furthermore, as there is no
indication of new documentation requirements for the
event in 2011, it is assumed that additional document
services are not required. Accordingly, should the
General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/65/L.25, no
additional requirements would arise under the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011.
The attention of delegations is drawn to the
provisions of section VI of resolution 45/248 B of 21
December 1990, in which the Assembly reaffirmed that
the Fifth Committee was the appropriate Main
Committee of the Assembly entrusted with
responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters, and reaffirmed also the role of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take decision on draft resolution
A/65/L.25, entitled “Strengthening of international
cooperation and coordination of efforts to study,
mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”.

19

A/65/PV.67

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): Since the
introduction of draft resolution A/65/L.25, the
following countries have become sponsors: Andorra,
Australia, China, Ecuador, Greece, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Israel, Malta, Monaco, the Netherlands, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Serbia, Thailand and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/65/L.25?
Draft resolution A/65/L.25
(resolution 65/131).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.31, entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): Since the
introduction of draft resolution A/65/L.31, the
following
countries
have
become
sponsors:
Bangladesh, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Haiti
and the United States of America.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/65/L.31?
Draft resolution A/65/L.31
(resolution 65/132).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.45, entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): Since the
introduction of draft resolution A/65/L.45, the
following
countries
have
become
sponsors:
Bangladesh, Belize, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Georgia, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Israel, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania,

20

Montenegro, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, Thailand and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/65/L.45?
Draft resolution A/65/L.45
(resolution 65/133).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.46, entitled “Assistance to the
Palestinian people”.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): Since the
introduction of draft resolution A/65/L.46, the
following countries have become sponsors: Andorra,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cape
Verde, Chile, Georgia, Guinea, Honduras, Lichtenstein,
Mali, Namibia, New Zealand, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and Turkey.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that is the decision of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/65/L.46?
Draft resolution A/65/L.46
(resolution 65/134).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution
A/65/L.47,
entitled
“Humanitarian
assistance, emergency relief, rehabilitation, recovery
and reconstruction in response to the humanitarian
emergency in Haiti, including the devastating effects of
the earthquake”.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): Since the
introduction of draft resolution A/65/L.47, the
following countries have become sponsors: Algeria,
Australia, the Bahamas, Bangladesh, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
the Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
France, Georgia, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, India,

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia,
Lithuania,
Malta,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Yemen.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.47?
Draft resolution A/65/L.47
(resolution 65/135).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.48, entitled “Emergency and
reconstruction assistance to Haiti, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and other countries
affected by Hurricane Tomas”.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): Since the
introduction of draft resolution A/65/L.48, the
following
countries
have
become
sponsors:
Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Colombia, Ecuador, Egypt, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Lithuania, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Togo, Turkey and the United States of America.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/65/L.48?
Draft resolution A/65/L.48
(resolution 65/136).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of position
on the resolutions just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

10-69525

Mr. Vermaerke (Belgium): Allow me to thank
you at this stage of the proceedings, Madame
President, for your efficient conduct of this meeting of
the General Assembly on humanitarian issues.
The European Union (EU) welcomes the adoption
by consensus of resolution 65/135 on humanitarian
assistance, emergency relief, rehabilitation, recovery
and reconstruction in response to the humanitarian
emergency in Haiti, including the devastating effects of
the earthquake. We thank Brazil for its initiative.
Eleven months after the earthquake, the situation on
the ground is still very concerning, particularly since
the country was hit by Hurricane Tomas on 5 and
6 November and is now experiencing a cholera
outbreak that has already claimed more than 2,000
lives.
Today’s resolution demonstrates the close
attention that the General Assembly is paying to the
situation in Haiti. We welcome the elements included
in the text on the efforts made by all actors to take part
in the humanitarian response under the Government’s
leadership and the overall coordinating role of the
United Nations, in particular the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The resolution
acknowledges the contribution of the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement, as well as of civil
society
organizations.
The
European
Union
understands that the General Assembly, in adopting the
resolution, acknowledges the valuable work of all nongovernmental organizations, and that the reference to
faith-based organizations is specific to the context of
the humanitarian response in Haiti.
The European Union also appreciates the
elements of the resolution relating to the vulnerable
situation of internally displaced persons who have now
lived in camps for nearly a year, and for whom a
durable and sustainable solution must be found. In this
regard, we were glad to hear last week from the
International Organization for Migration that some
500,000 internally displaced people, out of a peak
population of 1.5 million over the summer months,
have now left the camps. We also welcome the
attention brought by the resolution to the need to
address the issue of sexual and gender-based violence,
and the invitation to humanitarian and development
actors to promote gender mainstreaming in all
assistance and recovery processes for Haiti.

21

A/65/PV.67

The continued solidarity of the international
community with the Haitian people remains absolutely
essential for the continuation of both the humanitarian
response and the reconstruction efforts. The EU stands
ready to further support Haiti in this critical and
difficult moment.
Mr. Takashima (Japan): I take the floor in
connection with resolution 65/131. Japan welcomes its
adoption and applauds Belarus, Russia and Ukraine for
their efforts to promote its adoption. As one of the
principal contributors to the efforts of the international
community to minimize and mitigate the consequences
of the Chernobyl disaster, Japan was pleased to join the
consensus and to co-sponsor the resolution once again.
Japan would also like to express the hope that
this ongoing work, including the reconstruction of a
shelter facility and related safety projects at Chernobyl
described in paragraph 6 of the resolution, which is
funded by voluntary contributions, will continue to
receive sufficient assistance from the international
community. Japan takes this opportunity to stress the
need for the main actors to strengthen their efforts to
complete such projects, and for the international
community to provide broader support for this
important work.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Hijazi (Palestine): Allow me to begin by
thanking Member States for supporting resolution
65/134, on assistance to the Palestinian people, which
the Assembly just adopted by consensus. The
resolution comes at a particularly important time for
the Palestinian people, who are preparing for the
inevitable end to the 43 years of illegitimate
occupation. It comes at a time when the Palestinian
Authority is taking the final, critical steps towards
realizing the Palestinian people’s legitimate rights and
building the institutions of a sovereign, independent
State of Palestine.
We call once again on all Member States to step
up their valuable support and to be true to the
principles this Organization stands for. We also call on
them to protect their investment in peace by exercising
their moral and legal authority, and by compelling the
occupying Power to heed the international consensus,
cease its colonization and end its occupation of
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
constitutes the only impediment to peace in our region

22

and obstructs Palestinian development and selfdetermination.
It would be a very positive demonstration of
genuine goodwill and intentions if the occupying
Power were to cease its systematic aggression, its
illegal exploitation of the Palestinian people’s natural
resources and its destruction of their livelihoods and
development projects. Here I wish to recall that Israel,
as an occupying Power, has an obligation under
international humanitarian law to attend to the needs of
the population under its occupation, and that
international humanitarian law also prohibits collective
punishment and considers it a war crime.
While the Israeli representative tried to paint a
rosy picture of the situation in the West Bank, in the
occupied Palestinian territory, allow me to point out
that what is happening is completely the opposite.
Currently, Israel’s actions in Jerusalem and its siege of
1.5 million Palestinians in Gaza, as well as its crippling
of the Palestinian economy’s potential in the West
Bank with its siege and roadblocks, to which all
international reports attest, compound the fact that the
West Bank growth to which the Israeli representative
referred would have been much better had the illegal
Israeli actions and the reckless violence of settlers who
terrorize the civilians and farmers in the West Bank
ended. These are the realities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and once again I remind the
Assembly of the sobering conclusion of the latest
report of the World Bank in this regard:
“Unless action is taken in the near future to
address the remaining obstacles to private sector
development and sustainable growth, the
Palestinian Authority will remain donordependent and its institutions, no matter how
robust, will not be able to underpin a viable
State.”
It is customary for the Israeli delegation to bring
up the issue of terrorism because it assumes that
allegations of terrorism will be treated as sacrosanct. In
this case in particular, the crushing actions of terror
that the Israeli occupation and illegal settlers have
committed against the Palestinian people are far too
evident to be in dispute or allow such inaccurate
arguments to be accepted.
Israel, the occupying Power, translates this policy
of terror into the destruction of Palestinian property,
infrastructure, public buildings and economic

10-69525

A/65/PV.67

institutions, as well as the wilful killing of scores of
civilians, thus causing the Palestinian people to suffer
and requiring the urgent disbursement of international
assistance. Just last month, the occupying Power razed
a road that was recently built with international
assistance.

Obviously, none of these objects of Israeli
aggression could possibly pose a threat to the security
of any State, let alone that of a State armed to the teeth
like Israel. Indeed, it is these acts of sabotage and
destruction with extremely devastating repercussions
that counter the argument of Israel’s security needs.

As for the so-called security needs of the State of
Israel, it is quite surprising to see those needs used
once more as justification for war crimes and gross
violations of international law, when such attempts
have failed in the past. Additionally, it is counterintuitive to accept this argument, given the Israeli
actions on the ground. For how does Peace Street in the
village of Qarawat Bani Hassan threaten Israeli
security if destroying it is justified under this pretext?
How could water and sewage networks possibly
threaten the security of Israel and thereby justify their
destruction and the refusal to allow them to be rebuilt?
Exactly how does power supply, which is a lifeline for
Gaza’s hospitals, water wells and other vital
infrastructure, pose a threat to the security of Israel?

Finally, once again, Palestine expresses its
gratitude for the principled assistance of countries and
international organizations. We call on them to step up
their valuable support for the Palestinian people in its
homestretch to freedom, which is nearing its victorious
end.
The Acting President (spoke in French): On
behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to take
this opportunity once again to thank Mr. Herman
Schaper, Permanent Representative of the Netherlands,
for coordinating the consultations and negotiations on
the resolutions adopted under agenda item 69.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-items (a) to (d) of agenda item 69.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

10-69525

23
