General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

42

(XXIII) of 17 December 1968, 2525 (XXIV) of

5 December 1969, 2690 (XXV) of 11 December 1970
and 2812 (XXVI) of 14 Decembe,r 1971,
Decides to preserve the original functions of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1973, in accordance with the measures set
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
2321 (XXJil).

this matter, taking into ,account the status of implementation of the Action Plan and future developments
in the field of the environment, and report its views
and recommendations to the General Assembly so that
the Assembly can take a decision on all aspects of the
matter not later than at its twenty-ninth session.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2995 (XXVII). Co-operation between States in
the field of the environment
2994 (XXVII). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the international

community to take action to preserve and enhance the
environment and, in particular, the need for continuous
international co-operation to this end,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXHI) of 3 December 1968, 2581 (XXJV) of 15 December 1969,
2657 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2849 (XXVI) and
2850 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,8 a held at
Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972, and the report of
the Secretary-General thereon,H
Expressing its satisfaction that the Conference and
the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment succeeded in
focusing the attention of Governments and public
opinion on the need for prompt action in the field of
the environment,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment;
2. Drcn,vs the attention of Governments and the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programn;ie85 to the Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment:86 and refers
the Action Plan for the Human Environment87 to the
Governing Council for appropriate action;
3. Drcn,vs the attention of Governments to the recommendations for action at the national level referred
to them by the Conference for their consideration and
such action as they might deem appropriate;
4. Designates 5 Jane as World Environment Day
and urges Governments and the organizations in the
United Nations system to undertake on th·at day every
year world-'Wide activities reaffirming their concern for
the preservation and enhancement of the environment,
with a view to deepening environmental awareness and
to pursuing the determination expressed at the Conference;
5. Takes note with appreciation of resolution 4 (I)
of 15 June 197238 adopted by the Conference on the
convening of a second United Nations Con,ference on
the Human Environment and refers this matter to the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme with the request that the Council study
33 A/CONF.48/14

and Corr.1.

The General Assembly,
Having considered principle 20 as contained in the

dr·aft text of a preamble and principles of the declaration on the human environment, 80 referred to it for
consideration by the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 entitled "Development and environment",
Bearing in mind that, in exercising their sovereignty
over their natural resources, States must seek, through
effective bilateral and multilateral co-operation or
through regional machinery, to preserve and improve
the environment,
1. Emphasizes that, in the ex,ploration, exploitation
and development of their natural resources, States must
not produce significant harmful effects in zones situated
outside thek national jurisdiction;
2. Recognizes that co-operation between States in
the field of the environment, including co-operation
towards the implementation of principles 21 and 22
of the Declaration of the United Nations Conference
on· the Human Environment,40 will be effectively
achieved if official and public knowledge is provided
of the technical data relating to the work to be carried
out by States within their national jurisdiction, with a
view to avoiding significant harm that may occur in
the environment of the adjacent area;
3. Further recognizes that the technical data referred
to in paragraph 2 above will be given and received in
the best spirit of co-operation and good-neighbourliness,
without this being construed as enabling each State to
delay or impede the programmes and projects of exploration, exploitation and development of the natural
resources of the St,ates in whose territories such programmes and projects are carried out.
2112 th plena.ry meeting
15 December 1972

2996 (XXVII). International responsibility 0£
States in regard to the environment
The General Assembly,
Recalling principles 21 and 22 of the Declaration

of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment41 concerning the international responsibility of States in regard to the environment,
Bearing in mind that those principles lay down the
basic rules governing this matter,

:H A/8783 and Add. l, Add.1/Corr.1 and Add.2.

35 See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect.
30 A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.1, chap, I.

37 Ibid.,

38 Ibid.,

chap. II.
chap. N.

I.

20 See A/CONF.48/4, annex. See also A/CONF.48/14 and
Corr.1, chap. X, sect. D.
40 A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.I, chap. I.
4 1 Jbid.

Resolution!! adopted on the rep,ol"I!!. of the Sttond Co111mlllee

Declares that no resolution adopted at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly can ~ect
principles 21 and 22 of the DeclMa.tion of the Umted
Natl.ons Conference on the Human. Environment.
2112th plenary ,neeting
JS December 1972

2997 (XXVII). Institutional tmd financial arrangements for international environmental co•
operation

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need for prompt and effective
implementation by Governments and the international
community of measures designed to safeguard and
enhance the environment for the benefit of pre.sent
and future generations of man,
Recognizing that responsibility for action to protect
and enhance the environment resti; primarily with
Governments and, in the first instance, can be exercise.cl
more effectively at the nationial. and regional levels,
Recognizing further that environmental problems of
broad international significance fall within the competence of the United Nations system,
Bearing in mind that international co~operative programmes in the field of the environment must be undertaken with due respect for the sovereign rights of
States and in conformity with the Charter of tbe United
Nations ,and principles of international. law,
Mindful of the sectoral responsibilities of the organizations in the United Nations system,
Conscious of the significance of regional and subregional co-operation :in the field cYf the environment and
of the important role of the regional economic commissions and other regional inter-governmental organizations,
Emphasizing that problems of the envlronment constitute a new and important area for mtem·ational cooperation and that the comple~ity and interdependence
of such problems require new approaches,
Recognizing that the relevant international scientific
and other professional communities can make an important contribution to international co-operation in the
field of the environment,

Conscious of the ne~ for processes within the United
Nations system which would effectively assist developing countries to implement environmental policies and
programmes that are compatible with their development
plans and to paTticipate meaningfully in international
environmental programmes,

Convinced that, in order to be effective, international
co-operation in the .field of the environment requires
additional financial and technical ~esources 1
Aware of the urgent need for a permanent institutional arrangement within the United Nations system
-for the protection and improvement of the environment1
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Conference on the Human

Environment,a
42 A/8783

and Add.I, Add.1/Corr.1 and Add.2.

I
GOVERNING COUNCIL OF THE UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME

1. Decides to establish a Governing Council of tht

United Nations En~ironment Programme composed ol

fifty-eight members. elected by the General Assemblj
for three-year terms on the following basis:
(a) Sixteen seats for African States;
(b) Thirteen seats for Asian States;
(c) Six seats for Eastern European Statesj
( d) Ten seats for Latin American States;
(e) Thirteen seats for Western European and other

States;
2. Decides that the Governing Council shall have
tlte following main Junctions and responsibilities:
(a) To promote international co-operation in the

ne:ld of the envjronmen t and to recommend, as appro-priate, policies to this end;
(h) To provide gene ml policy guidance for the
direction and co-orclim1tion of environmental programmes within the United Nations system;
(c) To receive an<l review the periodic reports of
tile Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, refo1Ied to in section II, paragraph 2,
betow, on the implementation of environmental pro-

grammes within the United Notions system;
(d) To keep under review the world environmental

situation in order to e11Sure that emerging environmenta.I problems of wide international significa-nce
rec~ive appropriate and adequate consideration by

Governments;
(e) To promote the contribution of the relevant
international scientific and other professional communities to the acquisition, assessment and exchange
of environmental knowledge and information and, as
app.topriate, to the technical aspects of the formu1ation
and implementation of environmental programmes
within the United Nations system;
(I) To maintain under <:ontinuing review the impact

of national and international environmental policies
and measures on developing co1Jntries, as well as the
problem of additional costs that may be incurred by
aeveloping countries in the implementation of environmental programmes and projects, and to ensure that
such programm~ and pro1ects shall be compatible with
the development plans and priorities of those countries;
(g) To review and approve annually the programme
of utilization of resources of the Environment Fund
referred to in section III below;
3. Decides that the Governing Council shall report
annually to the General Assembly through the Economic
and Social Council, which will transmit to the Assembly
such comments on the report as it may deem necessary,
particularly with regard to questions of co-ordination
and to the relationship of...environmental policies and
programmes within the Ufiited Nations system to overall economic and social policies and priorities;

II
ENVIR01'1MENT SF.CRBT ARIA.T

1. Decides that n small secretariat shall be established in the United Nations to serve as a focal point
for en-vironmental action and co-ordination witllin the
