United Nations

S/PV.6622

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6622

nd meeting
Monday, 26 September 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Ziade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Laher
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-51341 (E)

*1151341*

S/PV.6622

Assembly, at which participants officially welcomed
the National Transitional Council of Libya as the
legitimate delegation representing the Libyan people at
the United Nations. Participants also expressed full
support to the interim authorities in Libya, led by NTC
President Mr. Mustafa Abdel Jalil.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37
of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Jibril, Chairman of the
National Transitional Council Executive Office of
Libya, and request the Protocol Officer to escort him to
a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Jibril, Chairman of the Executive Office of
the National Transitional Council of Libya, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and Ambassador José
Filipe Moraes Cabral, Permanent Representative of
Portugal, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to once
again brief the Council on the situation in Libya.
I will focus on what the United Nations has been
doing since the adoption of resolution 2009 (2011) on
16 September and a brief update on the current
situation. I must say that I am also delighted to see
Mr. Mahmoud Jibril, Chairman of the Executive
Committee of the National Transitional Council (NTC),
here with us today.
As Council members are aware, the SecretaryGeneral convened a high-level meeting on Libya in
New York on 20 September on the margins of General

2

At that meeting, President Jalil pledged to uphold
the principles of human rights and establish a society
based on tolerance and co-existence. The NTC has
repeatedly and publicly embraced essential principles
of tolerance, moderation, reconciliation, human rights,
and the rule of law, and in particular the rights of
women and migrant workers. Mr. Jalil thanked the
international community for its support and outlined
the United Nations support for the early establishment
of the State and resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011). He also highlighted the main challenges ahead,
such as removing any pockets of resistance, addressing
reconstruction needs and compensating families of
those killed, injured or maimed.
Special Representative Martin returned last week
to Tripoli, where the presence of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya is being established. I can
report that the capital city displays remarkable
normality, with its infrastructure overwhelmingly intact
and public servants back in their offices, even while
Government appointments are awaited, banks and
shops open, businesses re-establish themselves, most
children are back in school, and traffic is once again
quite heavy.
However, fighting continues in Sirte, Bani Walid
and a few other pockets of resistance in the country,
with NATO continuing its military operations in Sirte
over the weekend. Some civilians have fled the areas of
fighting. The humanitarian country team is working
with the Libyan authorities to enhance support in
conflict areas. An assessment of the needs in the area
around Bani Walid is to take place tomorrow, with
follow-up missions to Sabha and Sirte in the coming
days. The leadership of the NTC continues its efforts to
restore security and peace in other areas, but recent
reports have shown that the security situation in some
parts of the country remains fragile, as demonstrated
by the attack by pro-Al-Qadhafi forces on the town of
Ghadamis near the Algerian border.
The challenges faced by the NTC are many. I
would like to mention four here today.

11-51341

S/PV.6622

First, it is essential that steps to address national
reconciliation and unity and to ensure that all military
groups are brought under a unified command and the
political authority of the NTC be carried out quickly.
The formation of a new inclusive interim Government
that reflects the full diversity of Libyan society will be
a crucial step in this direction. We hope that, despite
the difficulties, the new Libyan Government will soon
be announced and, with the support of the new United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and other partners,
will begin working on these critical issues.
Secondly, it is imperative that the NTC and the
international community establish control over the
large stocks of sophisticated arms, including groundto-air missiles, amassed by the Al-Qadhafi
Government. The spread of these weapons and the
danger that they could fall into the hands of terrorists
are matters of grave concern.
Re-establishing control over chemical weapons
material is of paramount importance. In a letter to the
Secretary-General dated 5 September, the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Ahmet Üzümcü,
reported that it had become apparent during a recent
meeting of the OPCW Executive Council that the risk
to the safety of the category-1 chemical weapon
stockpiles had increased as a result of the rapidly
changing situation in the country. As members will
recall, in December 2009 the Conference of State
Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction granted
Libya an extension of its deadline to complete
destruction of remaining category-1 chemical weapons
to 15 May 2011. However, inspectors from the OPCW
who had been on site to monitor destruction activities
departed Libya on 8 February 2011 and destruction
activities were halted.
On 22 September, news reports stated that forces
associated with the (NTC) had discovered a depot of
chemical weapons materials located in the area of
Al-Jufrah, approximately 435 miles south of Tripoli,
that had been previously undeclared. OPCW is working
on confirming this information.
It remains important for the NTC to take
necessary steps to ensure the safety of all remaining
chemical weapon stockpiles in Libya and, as the
situation in the country allows, resume destruction

11-51341

activities in cooperation with the OPCW and other
agencies. The NTC may now wish to invite inspectors
back to the sites.
Thirdly, reports of the uncovering of a mass grave
near the infamous Abu Salim prison in Tripoli, with
some 1,270 remains reportedly of prisoners killed in
June 1996, indicate further the enormity of the human
rights crimes perpetrated by the former regime against
its own people. It is essential that the Libyan
authorities secure this and other grave sites so that the
fate of disappeared persons may be clarified as forensic
expertise is available and evidence is preserved for
future accountability mechanisms. At the same time,
every effort must be made to prevent reprisal attacks
on members or supporters of the former regime. All
countries must cooperate with the International
Criminal Court to ensure that those indicted are
apprehended if they leave or have left Libya.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General has repeatedly
expressed his concern over the welfare of African
migrants and third-country nationals. The United
Nations continues to facilitate the evacuation of
people — over 200,000 since the beginning of the
crisis — while many more who require assistance
remain in the country and in transit camps. We also
urge the early processing of those in detention and the
security of those who continue to work in Libya.
Let me briefly turn to the status of our
deployment to Libya.
Following the unanimous adoption of resolution
2009 (2011) of 16 September, which mandated the
establishment of UNSMIL, the Secretary-General
announced on 19 September the appointment of
Mr. Ian Martin as his Special Representative and
Mr. Georg
Charpentier
as
Deputy
Special
Representative. Mr. Charpentier has also been
designated as Resident Coordinator ad interim and as
Humanitarian Coordinator.
Essential personnel are already deployed in
Tripoli. The senior management of the Mission —
including the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the Deputy Special Representative, the Chief
of Staff, the Chief Political Advisor, the Chief Police
Advisor and the Chief of Mission Support — are in
place, with political officers in Benghazi as well as in
Tripoli.

3

S/PV.6622

The Chief of my Department’s Electoral
Assistance
Division
accompanied
Special
Representative Martin to Tripoli last week for meetings
with members of the NTC and other Libyan
interlocutors. The first electoral experts will arrive in
Libya this week to further assess electoral needs and to
discuss assistance necessary to support Libyan national
efforts. In the coming days, senior human rights
experts will follow up with the Libyan transitional
authorities and civil society on human rights priorities,
including on issues relating to transitional justice.
With the assistance of the Department of Safety
and Security and the Department of Field Support,
initial security and logistical constraints are being
overcome. Meanwhile, discussions are under way with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a status-of-mission
agreement that establishes the rights and privileges of
United Nations personnel in Libya.
UNSMIL has also begun to implement one of its
key mandated tasks to, “coordinate support that may be
requested from other multilateral and bilateral actors”
(resolution 2009 (2011), para. 12 (f)). On
20 September, following the high-level meeting on
Libya, a technical coordination meeting was held,
co-chaired by Mr. Ahmed Jehani, Chairman of the
Libya NTC stabilization team, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ian Martin.
Mr. Jehani reiterated the NTC’s request that the
international community coordinate its assistance to
Libya under the leadership of the United Nations and
in the areas of priority identified by the interim
authorities. He was unequivocal in stressing the fact
that the assessment of transitional requirements would
be conducted under the leadership of the NTC. A first
meeting of the friends of Libya in Tripoli will be
convened this week.
On the humanitarian front, since mid-August at
least 60,000 new displacements of Libyans have been
recorded as fighting intensified around Sirte and Bani
Walid. Requests for humanitarian support received
from local authorities indicate urgent humanitarian
needs for water, health items, food and some non-food
assistance. Humanitarian efforts are ongoing in areas
where they are most needed. United Nations agencies
have delivered food assistance to 117,000 vulnerable
people, including internally displaced persons (IDPs)
from Bani Walid, southern Libya, Sirte and Tawarga,
and to migrant workers. Food stocks have been
pre-positioned in Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata, ready

4

for distribution to currently inaccessible areas when the
situation permits. Additionally, water is being trucked
to some 40,000 displaced people from Bani Walid.
Medical kits have been deployed to IDP-affected areas
that are sufficient to cover those populations for the
next three months. These services will be continued
until more sustainable solutions are identified.
We are also concerned about reports of forced
displacements of groups of civilians among the
Tawergha and Gwaliosh peoples, who have been
perceived as loyal to Al-Qadhafi. NTC efforts must
become effective in ensuring that all armed forces
respect the rights of civilian populations of any
background and that international humanitarian law is
fully respected.
Libya faces many challenges in the post-conflict
phase, but I am confident that the Libyan people will
overcome them with our collective support and
assistance. The three-month mandate given to the
United Nations Mission offers us an opportunity to
provide immediate assistance and advice to the NTC
and to engage with Libyan civil society. It will also
provide time to assure that any long-term mission that
the Secretary-General may propose to the Security
Council can be designed to provide effective assistance
to the Libyan people for the longer term and to closely
reflect Libyan ownership and Libyan wishes. We look
forward to the NTC forming an interim Government in
the near future and assigning interlocutors to enable us
to engage with them and to provide the required
assistance and advice, as needed, in the priority areas
that have identified.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Moraes
Cabral.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, I
would like to welcome Mr. Jibril to the Council’s
meeting today.
In accordance with paragraph 24 of resolution
1970 (2011), of 26 February, I have the honour to
report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to that resolution. The
report covers the period from 28 June to 26 September.
Allow me to begin by noting that by its resolution
2009 (2011), adopted just 10 days ago (see S/PV.6620),
the Council modified the measures previously imposed

11-51341

S/PV.6622

in relation to Libya. Among other things, the Council
introduced additional exceptions to the arms embargo,
removed the names of the Libyan National Oil
Corporation and the Zueitina Oil Company from the
asset freeze list, while partially relaxing the financial
restrictions in connection with the other listed entities
and lifting the ban on flights of Libyan aircraft. The
Committee will thus be monitoring those measures, as
modified.
During the reporting period, the Committee
convened three informal consultations — on 7 July,
18 July and 14 September. Those informal
consultations were aimed to discuss the scope and
application of the arms embargo; to hear a briefing by
the Office far the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on the potential impact of sanctions on the civilian
population in Libya; to hear a presentation by the Panel
of Experts on its interim report and to go over pending
requests for guidance from Member States.
I would like to elaborate further on the informal
consultations of 14 September. Following a recap of its
findings up to 11 August, the Panel presented
11 recommendations, with four relating to the assets
freeze, six relating to the arms embargo and one
relating to a procedural matter concerning
communication with the Committee. In the discussion
that ensued, it was stressed, among other things, that
the Panel could assist the Committee by closely
monitoring the soon-to-be modified asset freeze, the
illicit flows of arms out of Libya and the
implementation of the travel ban. The Panel was asked
to look both backwards and forward in investigating
incidents of non-compliance.
It was also suggested that the Panel build a
cooperative relationship with the new Libyan
Government and establish some form of coordination
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. The
Panel, on its part, emphasized the importance of
continual access to Libya for the effectiveness of its
work, with which the members of the Committee
agreed.
The Committee has dealt with a number of
written communications from Member States, most of
which relate to the financial restrictions. In sum, the
Committee expressed no objection to 11 notifications
pertaining to the asset freeze under the basic expenses
provision set out in paragraph 19(a) of resolution 1970
(2011). It approved 41 requests for an exception to that

11-51341

measure, under the extraordinary expenses provision
set out in paragraph 19(b) of the resolution; it
acknowledged receipt of one notification under the lien
or judgment provision set out in paragraph 19(c) of the
resolution; and it acknowledged receipt of 10
notifications under the prior contracts provision set out
in paragraph 21 of the same resolution.
I should like to highlight here that in its
resolution 2009 (2011), the Council recalled its
determination to ensure that assets frozen pursuant to
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) shall as soon
as possible be made available to and for the benefit of
the people of Libya, and welcomed steps taken by the
Committee and Member States in that regard. Indeed,
under the extraordinary expenses provision, more than
$16 billion has already been unfrozen through the
Committee for the humanitarian needs of the Libyan
people.
Moreover, in paragraph 19 of resolution 2009
(2011), the Council decided that the Committee shall,
in consultation with the Libyan authorities, lift the
designation of the Libyan Arab Foreign Bank, the
Libyan Investment Authority and the Libyan Africa
Investment Portfolio as soon as practical; and the
members of the Committee will be working towards
this goal
With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
approved five requests for an exception to that
measure, in accordance with paragraph 9(a) of
resolution 1970 (2011), and acknowledged one
notification pursuant to paragraph 9(b) of the
resolution. In the context of the enforcement of the
embargo, the Committee has thus far received a total of
22 reports of inspections of cargo on board vessels
heading to Libya.
Finally, during the period under review the
Committee has answered seven requests for guidance
on aspects of the asset freeze and it has received 21
reports from Member States on the implementation of
this measure, as well as the arms embargo and travel
ban, thereby bringing the total number of such reports
to 51.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Moraes Cabral for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahmoud Jibril,
Chairman of the Executive Office of the National
Transitional Council.

5

S/PV.6622

Mr. Jibril (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
first of all to warmly thank the Security Council on
behalf of my country’s delegation and of the National
Transitional Council (NTC), the sole legitimate
representative of the Libyan people. We are very
grateful for the Council’s adoption of two historic
resolutions, which have clearly contributed to the
protection of the lives of thousands of innocent
civilians. Thanks to those two resolutions, we — with
God’s grace — have been able to protect and save
those civilians.
Resolution 1973 (2011) in particular has helped
us in that endeavour. Although many would consider it
to be in implementation of the United Nations Charter,
from a strictly juridical point of view, the resolution
was — for us certainly — in implementation of an
ethical law rather than of the Charter itself. The
consensus that was reached by the international
community under that resolution and the ensuing
international campaign to protect civilians in my
country represent, in our view, an overwhelming
victory for the rule of international ethics. It is a
precedent that we hope will be followed by others and
by initiatives to protect innocent civilians, wherever
they are and every time they are the target of crimes of
genocide or crimes against humanity, perpetrated by
dictators wherever they are.
Although some people think that the Al-Qadhafi
regime fell with the fall of the capital and other cities,
it is still true that the mission is far from accomplished.
Al-Qadhafi’s battalions continue to kill innocent
civilians in three distinct regions of our country — in
Sirte, in Bani Walid and yesterday in Ghadamis — and
therefore the very foundations of resolution 1973
(2011) remain valid. In that regard, we would like to
thank NATO for its decision to extend its mission for
an additional 90 days.
Secondly, Al-Qadhafi is still at large and
possesses huge amounts of money and gold. The
simple fact that he is still free and that he has such
wealth at his disposal means that he is still capable of
destabilizing the situation, not only within my country
but also in the Sahel region and the African desert. It is
no exaggeration to say that even beyond the African
continent, Al-Qadhafi, with the means and assets has
available to him, could resume his terrorist practices by
distributing arms across the continent in order to
justify his prediction that his absence from the political

6

stage would be synonymous with the expansion of
Al-Qaida and extremism throughout Africa.
I want to draw the Council’s attention to that real
threat, because his active existence is a force to be
dealt with. He and his sons are able to move freely, and
that could lead to greater destabilization in the region
until they and their acolytes are apprehended. For that
reason, his arrest is imperative to re-establishing
stability throughout the region, not only within Libya.
The third factor for instability that I would like to
mention — known to everyone here — is the spread of
weapons not only in my country, but in neighbouring
countries too. One of the main tasks of the NTC and
the provisional Government will be to collect those
arms and prevent their further distribution. That will be
a first step towards stabilizing the situation, not only in
the capital but also in all Libyan towns and cities.
Rumours and recently published reports of the
presence of certain chemical substances and stockpiles
of chemical weapons purportedly discovered in the
south of the country are a concern not only to the
international community but also, first and foremost, to
us and to innocent civilians living in areas within
Libya where such substances are stockpiled.
There are numerous factors fuelling instability,
but I assert with certainty that one principal factor is
the ongoing freeze of Libyan monies and assets —
assets that belong to the Libyan people — pursuant to
United Nations resolutions. Although we highly
appreciate the work and measures undertaken recently
by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) to unfreeze
$16 billion and remove some Libyan companies from
the embargo list, the road ahead remains very long.
For the first six months of our blessed revolution,
the National Transitional Council existed to fight a
dictatorial regime. The current and future legitimacy of
the NTC will depend entirely not only on its fight
against a despotic regime, but also on its capacity to
meet the basic needs of citizens. The inability of the
NTC or the provisional Government to provide those
basic services because of a lack of funding could affect
its very foundations and legitimacy, which the Security
Council recognized in the historic resolution 2009
(2011), re-establishing its seat at the United Nations as
the sole legitimate representative of the Libyan people.
Continuing the assets freeze could be very risky
because it could inhibit the efforts of the National

11-51341

S/PV.6622

Transitional Council to perform its functions. I ask the
Security Council to totally lift the assets freeze as soon
as possible, because the circumstances that applied
when resolution 1970 (2011) was adopted no longer
exist. That resolution sought to deprive the Al-Qadhafi
regime of the funds, assets and authority that enabled it
to buy weapons, which it turned on innocent people.
Al-Qadhafi is no longer part of the regime. It is true
that he still has vast wealth. However, that said, the
ones who are being deprived of those assets and wealth
are the Libyan people, on whose behalf the resolution
was adopted in order to enable them to receive
protection and save lives.
Let me recall that the circumstances that
prevailed before the resolution was adopted no longer
exist. It is therefore imperative to adopt a resolution
that seeks to lift the freeze fully on those assets and
funds so that the Libyan people can begin their
reconstruction process. There are a number of injured
people who have to be treated. There are many
wounded people who are awaiting artificial limbs.
Many houses have been destroyed, with many people
displaced. Also, many schools have been destroyed and
need to be rebuilt. Many power plants are down. Much
infrastructure, including bridges and roads, has been
demolished. Social, economic, material and human
infrastructure have completely collapsed or been
incapacitated. All of this will require money to rebuild.
With regard to the formation of the provisional
Government, we cannot really talk about that unless it
has the necessary funds to fulfil its functions. We
cannot talk about Government structures if they turn
out to be ineffective and unable to provide citizens
with the basic necessities of life, to collect weapons
from the streets, to form a national army incorporating
all existing military forces and to put in place robust
security and police forces that are able to carry out
their duties and establish security in all cities and
towns. All that will be in vain if the financial resources
are not available, since the lack of such resources
would be a major obstacle to the effectiveness of any
Government, transitional or otherwise.
Moreover, today, a number of Governments
throughout the world — poor Governments that do not
have many resources available — are not able to do

11-51341

anything. Poverty, need and want therefore remain
destabilizing factors in those countries, even in they
are not experiencing conflict.
With regard to human rights violations and the
ill-treatment of migrant workers in my country, I am
obliged now to now give a clear picture of the
situation. From the very beginning, the National
Transitional Council expressed its commitment to the
relevant human rights instruments and principles. We
have reaffirmed our intention to avoid mistreatment of
any foreigners in my country. However, the incidents
that have occurred in no way translate into a systematic
policy of the NTC, which rejects such a policy.
However, we must be allowed to establish security
services, a strong national army and a robust police
force because those will help us to put an end to such
violations and wherever and whenever they occur.
Such vengeful acts do not reflect the policy of the
National Transitional Council. They are horrendous
acts that we vehemently condemn and reject, as we
have done in the past and intend to do in the future.
Investigations to resolve them will continue, but we
still need substantial means to carry out such
investigations. That brings me back to the need to
provide us with the appropriate financial and economic
resources so that we can act, and do so effectively.
In reiterating my thanks, I would also like to
recall that the assistance provided to the National
Transitional Council is one issue and that the means for
us to meet deadlines is another matter. We have
invested in many tasks, but, once again, we need the
necessary financial resources to accomplish all of
them. The Libyan people must have their resources and
other monies due them restored so that they can march
together towards the future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Jibreel for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on the
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

7
