S/2020/167

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 March 2020
Original: English

Youth and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to resolution 2419 (2018), in which the
Security Council requested me to submit a report on the implementation of resolutions
2419 (2018) and 2250 (2015).
2.
The present report is the first one on youth and peace and security since the
Security Council adopted resolution 2250 (2015), in which the essential role of young
people in preventing and resolving conflicts and in sustaining peace was recognized.
That recognition has gained further momentum in the years since and was reaffirmed
in Council resolution 2419 (2018) and in a statement by the President of the Council
made in December 2019 (S/PRST/2019/15).
3.
The publication of the present report coincides with significant milestones: the
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, the 20th anniversary of
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, the launch of a
decade of action for the Sustainable Development Goals, the 25th anniversary of the
Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the 75th
anniversary of the United Nations. The observance of those milestones offers a prime
opportunity to highlight the invaluable role of young people. Indeed, the United
Nations is marking its anniversary with a series of dialogues held worldwide, aimed
in particular at amplifying the voices and perspectives of young people in shaping the
future of the world.
4.
Young people provide a solid foundation on which to build. Their talents are
diverse, they yearn to engage and even those who live in difficult circumstances are
generally optimistic. In 2020, there are 1.85 billion young women and men 10 to
24 years of age in the world, 1 90 per cent of whom live in developing countries. One
in four young people is affected by violence or armed conflict (A/72/761-S/2018/86,
para. 8). Young people around the world are striving for peace, justice, inclusion,
gender equality and human rights. Their aspirations, views and demands need to be
heard. Their potential must be harnessed and their plight addressed.
5.
Young people face significant challenges stemming from glo balization,
violence, demographic shifts, inequalities, new technologies, forced displacement,
shrinking civic space, changing labour markets and climate change. The situation
__________________
1

20-03225 (E)

World Population Prospects 2019 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.20.XIII.8).

120320

*2003225*

S/2020/167

fuels declining confidence in political establishments and institutions and is f elt
especially keenly by young people in two ways: a participation gap, a result of which
young people find themselves left out of decision-making, and an opportunity gap,
manifested most clearly by steeply rising youth unemployment.
6.
The marginalization of young people foments political distrust and
hopelessness, challenges systems and structures and adds to national, regional and
global insecurity. When such a cycle takes hold, it is all too easy for extremist groups
to exploit the frustration and anger that stems from exclusion.
7.
At the same time, false and harmful characterizations of young people as threats
have to be avoided. As stressed in the study entitled “The missing peace: independent
progress study on youth and peace and security” (A/72/761-S/2018/86), published in
2018 under the coordination of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, most young people are resilient and peaceful. Young
people represent a vast source of innovation, ideas and solutions. Connected to one
other like never before, they are driving social progress, renewing environmental
activism and inspiring political change. It is critical that the international community
support young people in fulfilling their full potential as a positive force for building
peaceful and just societies.
8.
That objective is at the core of the youth and peace and security agenda (General
Assembly resolution 72/146, para. 21) and informs the vision of Youth 2030: The
United Nations Strategy on Youth, which was launched in 2018. To translate the
Strategy’s promise into tangible change, the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth,
working with senior management of the United Nations, advocates for youth
engagement throughout the pillars of the Organization – sustainable development,
human rights and peace and security – as well as humanitarian action.
9.
In the present report, the five pillars outlined in resolution 2250 (2015), are
addressed: participation, protection, prevention, disengagement and reintegration,
and partnerships. The report covers trends and progress in implementing the youth
and peace and security agenda from the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), in
December 2015, through December 2019. The report is informed by analysis and data
provided by the United Nations system, Member States and regional and civil society
organizations, including organizations that are led by and focused on young people.
10. Two clear findings emerge from the analysis. The first is the growing
recognition of young people’s essential role in peace and security. It is encouraging
to see many instances in which Governments, United Nations entities, civil society
actors and others are stepping up to meet the requirements of resolution 2250 (2015).
The second is that core challenges remain, including structural barriers limiting the
participation of young people and their capacity to influence decision -making;
violations of their human rights; and insufficient investment in facilitating their
inclusion, in particular through education.
11. The present report is therefore a call for accelerated implementation. To create
a peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world for all, young people need to be involved
and conditions that enable them to unleash their full potential must be created.
Institutions must be inclusive of young people and adequately represent, engage and
address their needs and expectations.
12. A new age of participation by young people requires mechanisms for continuous
and meaningful participation in making decisions, shaping policies, adopting
strategies and implementing actions.

2/16

20-03225

S/2020/167

II. Youth and peace and security: assessing progress since 2015
A.

Participation
13. In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, it is recognized that everyone has the right to participate
in the conduct of public affairs and thus experience and enjoy the wide range of rights
and freedoms that is guaranteed in the Universal Declaration. Partic ipation therein
should be active, free and meaningful. 2
14. While progress on including young people in public life has been made over the
reporting period, however, meaningful youth participation in the maintenance of
peace and security remains a challenge. Such participation encompasses a wide range
of actions, from formal participation in political, electoral or peace processes to
informal participation at the community level and in digital spaces. More needs to be
done to create an enabling environment for young people in which they are seen and
respected as citizens with equal rights, equal voices and equal influence. All young
women and men, regardless of their nationality, ethnicity, caste, class, religion,
gender, sexual orientation or political affiliation, possess the fundamental right to
participate in public life and make a contribution to the peace, development and
prosperity of their society. They can act as advocates for peace, including in the
prevention and resolution of conflict, whether by exerting influence through public
debate and dialogue with decision makers at the local, national and international
levels, by echoing messages of peace or addressing misinformation campaigns
through social media or when directly involved and engaged in processes.
15. Many young peacebuilders report that their participation is not welcomed by the
public or those in positions of power, pointing to an overall disregard for their work
and, in some instances, their human rights. This is especially true for young women,
who face multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and marginalization.
Young people across the globe describe experiences of exclusion that are deeply
rooted in their mistrust of Governments and the multilateral system, as well as those
institutions’ mistrust of them (A/72/761-S/2018/86, paras. 33 and 34).
Participation in peace processes
16. In the past two decades, hundreds of peace agreements 3 have been signed
throughout the world. Although broader inclusion has been shown to have a positive
impact on the sustainability of the agreements, young people continue to be excluded
from decisions that will have a direct impact on the present and future prospects for
peace. As highlighted in a key finding in the summary report of the first International
Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes, held in Helsinki on 5 and
6 March 2019, young people will inherit an agreement’s long-term benefits or its
long-term consequences.
17. The question of how effectively young people are engaged in peacebuilding
ultimately shapes their perception of the legitimacy of peace processes. 4 Young
people contribute to peace processes in multiple ways, from monitoring ceasefires to

__________________

Enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, art. 21; the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, art. 25; and the Convention on the Rights of the C hild, art. 12.
3
Online databases that store peace agreements have varied in their count of signed agreements
since around 2000. For example, United Nations Peacemaker provides 457 peace agreements, the
Political Settlements Research Programme comprises 1,518 peace agreements and the Language
of Peace contains some 1,000 peace agreements.
4
Siobhán McEvoy-Levy, ed., Troublemakers or Peacebuilders? Youth and Post-Accord Peace
Building (Notre Dame, Indiana, University of Notre Dame Press, 2006).
2

20-03225

3/16

S/2020/167

resolving local-level disputes, building relationships across social divisions and
shaping peace agreements. Research on the participation of young people in peace
processes has demonstrated that, while the inclusion of young people as signatories
inside the negotiation room is key, their presence alone does not always guarantee
that youth-specific needs will be addressed. Furthermore, young people’s influence
does not always correlate with proximity to the negotiation table. For example , youth
participation around the room or activism outside the room through peaceful
demonstrations or online campaigns can sometimes be more influential than
anticipated.5 Young people from the South Sudan Civil Society Forum, for example,
used the power of social media to assert their rights as observers of the South Sudan
High Level Revitalization Forum, making their views known to participating parties
through the online campaign #SouthSudanIsWatching. 6
18. When young people are meaningfully included in all phases of the peace
process, the benefits are clear. In Colombia, young leaders played a critical role
throughout the peace process. Their participation led to the recognition of the need
for a differentiated approach for youth in several provisions of the peace agreement
of 2016. In the Philippines, interreligious dialogues organized by the Young Women
for Peace and Leadership programme of the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders
in conflict-affected communities of the Bangsamoro autonomous region helped to
address the limited local understanding of the peace agreement and build local
ownership of the Bangsamoro Organic Law.
19. United Nations field missions are also engaging increasingly in the overall effort
to include young people in peace processes, including the Joint Galkayo Youth
Committee’s engagement in reconciliation initiatives in Somalia. The Special Envoy
for the Horn of Africa has supported youth engagement in peace efforts within the
region and with partners such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development.
20. There is scope for peace and security stakeholders to become more creative and
make the most of technology in reaching out to young people globally. Digital
technologies, and social media in particular, offer new opportunities for mediators to
engage with and include the perspectives of young people. It is important that
mediators create inclusive platforms and thus ensure that no new patterns of
exclusion, barriers to access or algorithmic biases are produced. Online consultation
mechanisms can also raise unmanageable expectations, often amplified by social
media interactions, and may limit the participation of young people to superficial
forms of inclusion. 7
Participation in humanitarian contexts
21. Since 2015, the humanitarian system has made progress in recognizing the
centrality of working for and with young people. The World Humanitarian Summit ,
held in Istanbul, Turkey, in May 2016, emphasized the urgency of safeguarding the
rights of young people, including in particular the right to obtain access to secondary
education and sexual and reproductive health services and information, as well as to
be engaged as an integral part of the humanitarian response effort. The summit
marked the launch of the Compact for Young People in Humanitarian Action, led by
UNFPA and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. In
the past five years, the humanitarian community has focused more intensely on the
__________________

Ali Altiok and Irena Grizelj, “We are here: an integrated approach to youth -inclusive peace
processes”, April 2019.
6
Ibid.
7
United Nations, Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Centre for Humanitarian
Dialogue, “Digital technologies and mediation in armed conflict”, March 2019.
5

4/16

20-03225

S/2020/167

particular needs of young people, including education, vocational training,
participation and the creation of safe spaces in which refugees can engage in sports,
music and social innovation challenges.
22. New tools are equipping humanitarian actors to engage with young people in all
phases of the humanitarian cycle and strengthen gender- and age-sensitive
humanitarian programming, such as the forthcoming inter-agency Guidelines for
Working with and for Young People in Humanitarian Settings, led by the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Norwegian Refugee Council, and the
revised Gender with Age Marker of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee. The
Committee has also launched its Guidelines on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities
in Humanitarian Action, in which essential actions to effectively identify and respond
to the needs and rights of persons with disabilities are set out. Owing to the
intersectionality of their disability and their age, as well as possibly their gender,
ethnicity, location, race and other factors, young persons with disabilities face greater
marginalization and discrimination.
23. It has been demonstrated that direct engagement can help to enhance
perspectives and strengthen outcomes. For instance, through the Global Youth
Advisory Council of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the direct engagement of refugee young people in global discussions, such
as the global compact on refugees and the Global Refugee Forum, has helped to shape
growing recognition of the importance of youth participation in humanitarian contexts
and secured pledges from Member States to enhance their support for refugee young
people. The 2019 Oslo international conference on ending sexual and gender-based
violence in humanitarian crises has helped to give greater prominence to the role of
women and girls as powerful agents of change in their communities.
24. The above-mentioned examples signal a growing recognition that young
people’s engagement in humanitarian preparedness, response and recovery is not only
important, but enhances the effectiveness and impact of humanitarian action.
Participation in governance and political processes
25. Young people’s meaningful participation and representation in political
processes contribute to successful peacebuilding, yet their formal participation
therein remains extremely low. Declining levels of turnout on the part of young voters
globally reflect systemic challenges and growing dissatisfaction and mistrust towards
democratic structures. In a survey published in 2016, it was shown that only 43 per
cent of persons 25 years of age and under had reported voting in national elections,
which is 20 percentage points lower than the figure for persons more than 26 years of
age. 8
26. Young people are rarely found in parliaments, public administration and
decision-making bodies. 9 In 2017, 2.2 per cent of the world’s parliamentarians were
under 30 years of age, and 0.9 per cent of parliamentarians are women under 30 years
of age. 10 Young women commonly experience misogyny, and their participation is
hindered by discriminatory social norms and laws. Patterns of intimidation,
harassment and violence against women who exercise their political rights deter
young women from entering political and public life (see A/73/301).

__________________

Abdurashid Solijonov, Voter Turnout Trends around the World (Stockholm, International Institute
for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, 2016).
9
See https://aceproject.org/ace-en/topics/yt/yt10/yt210/young-people-in-political-decision-making.
10
Inter-Parliamentary Union, Youth Participation in Parliaments: 2018 (Geneva, 2018).
8

20-03225

5/16

S/2020/167

27. Specific measures 11 taken to remove structural barriers to youth representation
and ensure meaningful participation in political processes and institutions include
adopting temporary measures, such age and gender quotas; aligning voting and
eligibility ages; ensuring greater access to financing mechanisms; and supporting
capacity-building for young politicians and inter-party youth groups. The
effectiveness of the measures depends on the country context and political will and
often requires multifaceted approaches.
28. The participation of young people requires unrestricted civic space and breaking
with practices of tokenism whereby, for example, political leaders instrumentalize
youth for political ends. Initiatives implemented by United Nations field missions in
Afghanistan, Cyprus, Iraq, Liberia and elsewhere have fostered intergenerational
dialogue between young people and political actors. In the Central African Republic,
Liberia, Libya, Mali and Somalia, United Nations missions established mechanisms
that enabled young people to contribute to the development of national security
strategies (A/72/761-S/2018/86).
29. However, it is insufficient to simply listen to young people and provide them
with a seat at the table. Young people have to be provided with the scope to both
design and implement holistic policies and programmes that address their specific
needs, uphold their rights and acknowledge their diversity and the challenges that
they face. In conflict-affected settings in particular, youth participation should be
mainstreamed into all institutions.
Informal participation
30. Young people also embrace informal spaces of participation, such as grass -roots
peacebuilding engagement, activism and peaceful protests, which can make critical
contributions to peace. 12
31. For example, in Madagascar, the youth-led movement Agir Solidairement
engages university students in peacebuilding initiatives to overcome the barriers that
affect the ability of young people to engage in the political and economic spheres. In
Myanmar, a Peacebuilding Fund project implemented by UNFPA and UNICEF
supports the capacity of youth leaders from various ethnic backgrounds, many of
whom have launched peacebuilding initiatives within their communities and have
participated in both formal and informal peace dialogues. In Mali, the Agency for
Cooperation and Research in Development has implemented a Peacebuilding Fund
project to strengthen the capacity of young people to contribute meaningfully to the
implementation of the peace agreement and increase the access and participation of
young women and men to the agreement’s various implementing bodies.
32. Ensuring that young people can fulfil their right to participate formally and
informally, offline and online, at all levels, is essential for achieving peace. In 2019,
there were significant protests, many of which were youth-led, through which new
ways of organizing political, economic and social systems were called for. While
change led by young people is a historical reality (ibid., para. 32), the scope,
geographic coverage, organizational mode and universality of the current wave of
social and political mobilization are significant. The demands of young people are
rooted in their sense of exclusion from decisions that affect their lives and their future,
such as with regard to climate change. By extension, research has shown that the
__________________

Ruth Beeckmans and others, Youth Participation in Electoral Processes: Handbook for Electoral
Management Bodies (United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and European
Commission, 2017).
12
Sub-Working Group on Youth Participation in Peacebuilding of the Uni ted Nations Inter-Agency
Network on Youth Development, “Guiding Principles on Young People’s Participation in
Peacebuilding”, 2014.
11

6/16

20-03225

S/2020/167

participation of women at the forefront of protest movements is highly correlated with
non-violence. 13
33. Digital spaces provide innovative participation opportunities for dialogue,
accountability and transparency in decision-making, including in conflict-affected
contexts. Millions of young people use the Internet to promote peace and security
through initiatives such as crisis mapping, crowdsourcing platforms, peace gaming,
technology-driven first responder programmes and geographic information system based security applications. 14 At the same time, inequalities with regard to access to
technology remain widespread. 15 The Internet and social media can also pose risks to
young people, including when personal and sensitive data are used to control
information and breach privacy, spread misinformation and violent extremist
ideologies and threaten and attack young activists.

B.

Protection
34. Young women and men who leave their homes owing to conflict and violence
usually lose everything from their basic livelihoods to access to education and health
services. In many instances, they also lose the protection of their families and
communities, which places them at greater risk. Protecting all young people, in
particular young refugees and internally displaced persons, has to be a priority for all
actors. The protection pillar of Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) is a central
tenet of the youth and peace and security agenda.
35. Young people face a multitude of special protection threats and challenges. In
particular, reports of continuing threats and human rights violations against young
peacebuilders and human rights defenders are of grave concern. For example, in the
report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on youth and
human rights, mandated by the Human Rights Council, the discrimination and
challenges that young people face in gaining access to civil, political, social,
economic and cultural rights is documented (A/HRC/39/33). Young activists face
harassment and attacks and limitations on their freedom of movement, assembly,
association and expression. 16 In some country situations, young activists who work
closely with the United Nations have reported that they or their family members
experienced retaliation and even detention for speaking out. The work of human rights
defenders is essential to all efforts towards peace and sustainable development. It is
critical to remain vigilant regarding the issue and to adopt a “do no harm” approach.
While the vast majority of cases remain undocumented or not investigated, given the
nature of contemporary armed conflict, it is the responsibility of Member States to
guarantee a safe and conducive environment for all those who defend human rights. 17
Threats, attacks, acts of intimidation and hate speech should be thoroughly and
impartially investigated and perpetrators brought to justice. 18

__________________

Erica Chenoweth, “Women’s participation and the fate of nonviolent campaigns: a report on the
women in resistance (WiRe) data set”, October 2019.
14
Raouf Farrah, John de Boer and Robert Muggah, “ Digitally-enabled peace and security:
reflections for the youth, peace and security agenda”, November 2017.
15
Human Development Report 2019: Beyond Income, Beyo nd Averages, Beyond Today –
Inequalities in Human Development in the 21st Century (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.20.III.B.1), p. 35.
16
A/HRC/42/30; António Guterres, Secretary -General, United Nations, “Youth standing up for
human rights”, statement made on Human Rights Day, 10 December 2019.
17
Human Rights Council resolution 42/28 and General Assembly resolution 74/146.
18
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. See General Assembly resolution 2200 A
(XXI), annex.
13

20-03225

7/16

S/2020/167

36. Ensuring a safe, enabling and gender-responsive environment is also essential
for the active participation and engagement of young people. For young wom en, age
and gender discrimination intersect, rendering them particularly vulnerable – and
even more so those from marginalized ethnic and religious groups. The exclusion of
young women from political decision-making and educational and economic
opportunities further increases their vulnerability to discrimination, sexual violence,
sexual exploitation, trafficking and child marriage. The prevention of sexual and
gender-based violence requires the advancement of gender equality before, during
and after conflict, as well as the full and effective participation of young women in
political, economic and social life, in addition to their access to health services,
responsive justice and security institutions. In many contexts throughout the world,
United Nations activities geared towards young refugees are focused on adopting
non-violent conflict resolution, increasing their self-esteem and strengthening their
integration into the local community.

C.

Prevention
37. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a cornerstone of long-term
prevention. As conflicts continue to cause widespread human suffering, prevention
strategies have to underpin all actions across the peace continuum. Long -term
prevention efforts must address the underlying drivers of conflict. Inequalities,
discrimination, exclusion and persistent human rights violations are factors driving
many of today’s conflicts and are directly connected to the lives of young people. 19
Inequalities accumulate through life and persist across generations. 20 While extreme
deprivations are declining, a new generation of inequalities is emerging, reflecting
deep power imbalances. Thus, long-term prevention efforts have to address the
underlying drivers of conflict. Investing in young people and transforming systems
of exclusion into those of inclusion represent a central component of the 2030 Agenda
commitment to ensuring that no one is left behind and a core responsibility of Member
States.
38. Education represents a key pathway to shaping the prospects and opportunities
of young people and serves as a powerful social engine for peace and resilience.
However, a global learning crisis threatens to undermine long-term prospects for both
development and social cohesion, in particular in conflict-affected settings.21 Efforts
to close the education gap and guarantee education worldwide, even during conflict,
have to be redoubled. Action is also necessary to promote a culture of peace as
societies become more interconnected through migration and the rise of new
technologies and conflicts thereby become more complex. Several initiatives are
under way to support young leaders to promote peace, conflict resolution, social
cohesion and interreligious dialogue. The global citizen education framework of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), for
example, supports learners of all ages to become active promoters of more peaceful,
tolerant, inclusive, secure and sustainable societies.
39. The economic inclusion of young people is another area that necessitates urgent
attention and action. 22 Unequal access to economic resources is linked to broader
structural inequalities with regard to access to power and resources, limiting young
people’s economic opportunities and dividing societies. 23 It remains imperative to

__________________

United Nations and World Bank Group, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., World Bank Group, 2018), p. 109.
20
Human Development Report 2019, p. 3.
21
Ibid., pp. iii, 1 and 85.
22
United Nations and World Bank Group, Pathways for Peace, p. 62.
23
Human Development Report 2019, p. 19.
19

8/16

20-03225

S/2020/167

support the access of young people to meaningful employment, including through
investment in the education-to-employment transition, vocational training and strong
youth employment policies, adapted to local contexts and responsive to the needs and
aspirations of young people. Such support requires far-reaching collaborative action,
such as the recently launched Generation Unlimited partnership, which is aimed at
the continuum of education, training and employment, and the Global Initiative on
Decent Jobs for Youth, which, under the leadership of the International Labour
Organization and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), places an
emphasis on empowering young people in conflict-affected settings.24 Above all, in
matters of peace and security, economic and livelihood opportunities must be
considered as part of a larger strategy for the economic, social and political inclusion
of young people (A/72/761-S/2018/86, para. 42).
40. Responding to the inequalities and exclusion that young people face requires
enabling a stronger youth voice in the development of national and local policies. The
policies should encompass all issues in which young people have a stake, such as
education, employment and health, including sexual and reproductive health and
rights. By way of example, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNDP
are engaging young people in defining youth policies with a strong focus on
sustaining peace in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and Togo.

D.

Partnerships
41. Building partnerships with a wide array of partners is central to prevention and
an important contribution to strengthening multilateralism. In resolution 2250 (2015),
the importance of partnerships between youth-led organizations and Member States,
United Nations entities, regional organizations and civil society was signalled. The
inclusive model of partnership used by the Global Coalition on Youth, Peace and
Security is one such example. Created in 2012 as the Working Group on Youth and
Peacebuilding, the renamed Global Coalition serves as a platform for defining guiding
principles for the engagement of young people in peacebuilding and for advocating
for the adoption and implementation of resolution 2250 (2015). The platform
facilitates multi-stakeholder partnerships between civil society organizations that are
led by and focused on young people and Member States and the United Nations
system.
42. Initiatives to connect young peacebuilders around the world remain key to
amplifying efforts and exchanging experiences. In 2018, the United Network of
Young Peacebuilders, a global group of 116 youth organizations in 55 countries,
reached nearly 10 million young people to support their participation in peace and
security initiatives. Regional youth organizations and networks, such as the
Pan-African Youth Network for a Culture of Peace, the European Youth Forum, the
Asian Youth Peace Network and the Commonwealth Youth Peace Ambassadors
Network, regularly engage with national and regional actors on peace and security
issues.
43. In crisis-affected situations, United Nations country teams are working with the
World Bank Group through joint data, analysis and programme design. Joint analysis
in Tajikistan and Tunisia has been focused on youth and peace and security, while the
United Nations and the World Bank Group are engaged in complementary youth
employment programmes in Mali to enhance the economic stake of young people in
society. Deeper United Nations-World Bank Group partnerships and synergies in
fragile contexts can ensure that programmes related to employment, community

__________________
24

20-03225

Efforts are aligned with International Labour Organization recommendation No. 205 on
employment and decent work for peace and resilience , 2017.
9/16

S/2020/167

violence reduction and local governance include the perspectives of young people,
support their aspirations and enhance their social, political and economic stake in
society.
44. The African Union has institutionalized its work on youth and peace and
security through annual open sessions of its Peace and Security Council since 2018.
The Peace and Security Council mandated the development of the Continental
Framework on Youth, Peace and Security, as well as a study on the roles and
contributions of youth to peace and security in Africa, developed through a
participatory process, including regional consultations in Abuja, Asmara, Gaborone,
Libreville and Tunis. The African Union Commission appointed its first Youth Envoy,
as well as five regional African Youth Ambassadors for Peace, to promote young
people’s participation in peace and security issues across the continent. The Youth for
Peace Africa programme was launched in 2018 to prioritize the role of young people
as contributors to the flagship African Union initiative Silencing the Guns by 2020,
providing strategic opportunities to further expand the critical partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations on the engagement of young people in
peace.
45. Increasingly, European Union institutions have focused on harnessing the
potential of young people in conflict prevention and sustaining peace. In May 2018,
the Council of the European Union adopted conclusions on the role of young people
in building a secure, cohesive and harmonious society in Europe. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has emphasized the role of young
people in peace and security efforts in its recent Ministerial Council declarations, as
well as by appointing Special Representatives of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office on
Youth and Security and by supporting youth-led networks and providing platforms
for intergenerational dialogue in Central Asia, Eastern Europe and the Western
Balkans.
46. Increasingly, the United Nations has supported efforts to provide space for the
participation of young people at the regional level. The Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the Government of Mongolia organized a regional dialogue
on youth and peace and security in north-east Asia, held in Ulaanbaatar in June 2019,
establishing a regional youth network on issues related to peace and security and
creating the conditions for more inclusive regional political discussions. The United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the Economic Community of West
African States organized the first annual youth forum for peace and security in West
Africa and the Sahel, held in Ouagadougou in December 2018.

E.

Disengagement and reintegration
47. In resolution 2250 (2015) those involved in planning for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration are encouraged to consider the needs of young
women and men affected by armed conflict. Far from being passive beneficiaries,
former youth combatants should contribute to the design, planning and
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes to ensure
that their interests and aspirations are represented (ibid., para. 43). In the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and the Sudan, as of
December 2019, more than 6,500 former combatants, mostly young people, have
benefited from such programmes supported by peacekeeping missions.
48. More holistic, bottom-up and youth-inclusive approaches to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration have been adopted by United Nations field missions
through community violence reduction programmes in communities where young
people account for more than 50 per cent of the population. In the Central African

10/16

20-03225

S/2020/167

Republic, the Mission has established committees to ensure that local authorities,
traditional leaders and the representatives of young people and women have a direct
say in the design of projects. Greater efforts are needed to support organizations
working on disengagement and reintegration outside the formal disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, in particular those led by young people.
In Cameroon, for example, the youth-led organization Local Youth Corner is focused
on the rehabilitation and reintegration of young violent offenders and supports local
communities and the Government in accepting former offenders.
49. Greater attention has also been paid to the inclusion of young women in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, such as through the use of
gender quotas and targeted needs assessments by the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. However, too often, the experiences and needs of young women continue to
not be addressed by disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, and
further work is needed to engage young women meaningfully in the design,
implementation and planning of such programmes.
50. Many United Nations field missions support national Governments in
strengthening services dedicated to juvenile justice and corrections. That support
includes efforts to increase the access of young people to justice by e nsuring that
investigations and judicial proceedings are youth-sensitive and that the detention of
juveniles meets international standards. In Afghanistan, Darfur, Haiti, Libya and
South Sudan, the justice and corrections components of United Nations missions have
supported rehabilitation and reintegration measures for young people and young
offenders. United Nations police have supported national police counterparts to
prevent and address various forms of serious and organized crime, such as illegal
trafficking and illicit natural resource extraction, that have a disproportionate impact
on young people.
51. Current efforts to address violent extremism often fail to acknowledge the
underlying factors that drive conflict and resonate directly with young people, such
as political exclusion, local conflicts over resources, corruption or discrimination
against certain ethnic or religious groups. 25
52. Protecting the human rights of young people requires also ensuring that
responses to violent extremism do not stigmatize or instrumentalize youth but, rather,
harness young women and men as agents of change in preventing terrorism and such
extremism. In a UNDP report, a broad range of successful youth-led initiatives that
address the root causes of violent extremism is identified. 26 Enabling young people’s
digital literacy and ability to identify fake news and resist divisive or exclusionary
rhetoric and hate speech is critical. The Youth Engagement and Empowerment
programme of the Office of Counter-Terrorism is aimed at reinforcing the positive
contributions of youth to the prevention of violent extremism and strengthening the
resilience of young people. Additional resources are required to increase the level of
investment in a whole-of-society approach to the prevention of violent extremism and
promote context-sensitive and gender-responsive policies and programmes that
respect, protect and promote the rights of young people, foster their resilience and
systematically integrate their meaningful participation.

__________________

Siobhan O’Neil and Kato Van Broeckhoven, eds., Cradled by Conflict: Child Involvement in
Armed Groups in Contemporary Conflicts (New York, United Nations University, 2018).
26
UNDP, Frontlines: Young People at the Forefront of Preventing and Responding to Violent
Extremism (New York, 2019).
25

20-03225

11/16

S/2020/167

F.

Institutionalization of the youth and peace and security agenda
53. Since 2015, the engagement of young women and men has been recognized
increasingly by Member States, the United Nations system and partners as central to
inclusive and sustainable development and peacebuilding efforts. However,
awareness still needs to be translated into concrete actions, including national-level
measures, institutional priorities and dedicated funding and accountability measures,
to ensure that all actors can deliver on the substantive pillars of resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018).
Youth and peace and security in the Security Council and other
intergovernmental forums
54. Through resolution 2250 (2015), a new path was opened to Security Council
engagement in the role and circumstances of young women and men in the
maintenance of peace and security. The Council has held several dedicated
discussions on youth and peace and security since 2015, including an open debate in
April 2018, on the occasion of the presentation of “The missing peace”. The debate
led to the adoption of the second resolution on youth and peace and security,
resolution 2419 (2018), in June 2018, and in July 2019, the Council assessed the
implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda.
55. The Security Council has had interactions with young people during nearly half
of its country visits. A number of active United Nations field missions are explicitly
requested by the Council to support the participation of young people, either by
engaging with them directly or supporting national authorities in facilitating youth
participation. Increasingly, since December 2015, reports of the Secretary -General
presented to the Council have addressed the situation of young people.
56. In October 2019, a debate on peace and security in Africa entitled “Mobilizing
the Youth towards Silencing the Guns by 2020” led to the adoption of a statement
made by the President of the Security Council (S/PRST/2019/15), in which it was
reaffirmed that a large youth population presented a unique demographic dividend
that could contribute to lasting peace and economic prosperity. The African Union
Special Envoy on Youth and young peacebuilders from civil society were among the
briefers. Increasingly, the Council has sought the views of young people in thematic
discussions on issues such as climate change and the women and peace and security
agenda, as well as in country-specific discussions on Afghanistan and the Syrian Arab
Republic.
57. Other intergovernmental forums have addressed the issue from various angles.
In December 2019, the General Assembly adopted resolution 74/64, in which young
people were encouraged to more actively engage in discussions on disarmament and
non-proliferation. The President of the seventy-third session of the Assembly declared
the youth and peace and security agenda to be one of her thematic priorities and on
several occasions during her tenure, including at the Economic and Social Council
Youth Forum held in April 2019, engaged in dialogue with young peacebuilders.
Similarly, since 2015, the Peacebuilding Commission has provided young
peacebuilders with a platform to present their work and policy recommendations
through country-specific meetings, visits and dedicated thematic discussions, most
recently in November 2019, at the initiative of El Salvador and under the
chairmanship of Colombia. Inspired by the work of young peacebuilders in the
Gambia and Kyrgyzstan, the Commission committed itself to exploring ways of
further supporting youth peacebuilding initiatives.

12/16

20-03225

S/2020/167

Youth and peace and security and Member States
58. The efforts of Member States to support the implementation of the youth and
peace and security agenda comprise all five pillars of resolution 2250 (2015), from
the promotion of the political participation of young people to human rights
mechanisms, educational reforms and employment policies, among others.
Nonetheless, translating youth and peace and security into broader policy frameworks
is key to ensuring strategic and coordinated action at the national level.
59. Increased recognition by national authorities of local and national peace efforts
undertaken by young women and men can help to ensure that policy decisions are
informed by the contributions of young people. National parliaments can play an
important role in ensuring the implementation of the youth and peace and security
agenda by adopting relevant legislation, commissioning national road maps for youth
and peace and security, allocating financial resources and supporting inclusive youth
participation.
60. Colombia, Finland, the Gambia, Nigeria and the Philippines are in the process
of developing national road maps for youth and peace and security. In Finland, an
action plan is being drafted in collaboration with a network of youth organizations
that could serve as a blueprint for the development of action plans by other Member
States. National action plans on women and peace and security, when developed
through a participatory process and adequately resourced, have proven to be essential
frameworks for country-level action.
61. Resolution 2250 (2015) prompted the creation of national coalitions on youth
and peace and security in several countries to facilitate the engagement of multiple
stakeholders. Cameroon, Finland, Jordan, Nigeria and Sri Lanka have active
coalitions, often at the initiative of youth-led and volunteer organizations and with
support from the national authorities. Similar efforts to build national coalitions are
ongoing in Afghanistan, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, India, Iraq, Lebanon, Myanmar, the Niger, Tunisia and Yemen.
62. A “group of champions” of youth, peace and security, formed in 2017 under the
leadership of Jordan and Norway, has helped to garner the political buy-in of Member
States for the agenda.
Youth and peace and security in the United Nations system
63. The United Nations Youth Strategy, launched in September 2018, provides an
internal road map for the Organization. While holistic in nature, given that it
comprises five thematic priorities, it includes a specific priority on peacebuilding and
resilience-building, directly aligned with resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
Under the Youth Strategy, the United Nations is committed to recognizing and
supporting the positive contributions of young people to development, peace and
security; social justice; the prevention of violence; disaster and risk reduction; and
humanitarian and climate action.
64. Under the Youth Strategy, the United Nations is also committed to strengthening
measures on the accountability of senior management regarding youth-related
commitments and goals. Senior managers are responsible for ensuring that objectives
related to young people and peace and security are fully integrated into all strategies,
policies, budget allocations and funding requests specific to their entities.
65. As of December 2019, there were 14 youth focal points in the 22 active special
political missions, including 1 full-time youth adviser in Somalia, and 3 such focal
points in the 13 peacekeeping operations. Peace and development advisers, deployed
in 49 countries and settings in 2019, can provide important guidance to United

20-03225

13/16

S/2020/167

Nations country teams on enhancing youth participation in conflict analysis, conflictsensitive programming and conflict prevention efforts. Youth focal points on United
Nations country teams are important human resources at the field level to spearhead
the implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda across pillars. At the
global level, a joint secretariat on youth and peace and security established by the
Peacebuilding Support Office and UNFPA has been critical in facilitating the
coordination of the youth and peace and security agenda throughout the humanitariandevelopment-peacebuilding nexus. Action must be taken to ensure that internal
expertise on youth and peace and security within the United Nations is adequately
positioned at the local, country, regional and global levels.
Resourcing
66. Inadequate resourcing remains a central challenge to the implementation of
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). The lack of resources is a profound
impediment to the realization of the peacebuilding and sustaining peace approach and
of the 2030 Agenda because youth and peace and security is an accelerator of those
global commitments. The few important initiatives that have been put in place by
individuals, funds and donors cannot address the important funding needs identified
in “The missing peace”, in which it was documented that 50 per cent of youth
peacebuilding organizations operate on less than $5,000 a year. In the report, a target
of $1.8 billion allocated to actions related to youth and peace and security was
proposed (A/72/761-S/2018/86, paras. 23 and 60 (a)).
67. Meeting the funding challenge requires the mobilization of additional and new
resources, as well as a shift in focus towards preventive interventions tackling both
the drivers of violence and the root causes of conflict. It would also require the
capacity to track bilateral aid in support of young people in conflict-affected contexts.
For the United Nations system, the Youth Strategy is a commitment to the
development of a youth marker to track progress and ensure that programming
contributes to the empowerment of young people and intergenerational equity. Efforts
to track funding allocations quantitatively must be associated with qualitative
assessments of programmes that identify investments in the positive contributions of
young people to peace.
68. The Peacebuilding Fund has taken proactive measures to support young people’s
critical contributions to peacebuilding at the local and national levels through the
annual Youth Promotion Initiative. Between 2016 and 2019, the Fund invested a total
of $57.2 million through the Initiative, increasing funding from $2.7 million in 2016
to $20.4 million in 2019. A total of 40 per cent of all Initiative funds have been
allocated directly to civil society partners. To date, the Initiative remains the largest
funding measure in support of the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018). Examples of the Fund’s investments in young people include Burundi,
where a Fund-financed project resulted in the creation, under the Ministry of Interior,
of a 36-member inter-party youth group that is elaborating a strategy to increase youth
participation. In Kyrgyzstan, the organization Search for Common Ground has
implemented a Peacebuilding Fund project using a youth-led approach to mitigate the
factors that lead to radicalization and to increase collaboration between young people
and older persons in local decision-making.
69. A number of initiatives support the peacebuilding work of youth-led
organizations. Donors and partners can explore innovative approaches to support the
capacity and leadership of young people, such as the Youth 360 initiative of Search
for Common Ground, which combines access to financial, human and technical
resources for formal and informal youth groups.

14/16

20-03225

S/2020/167

III. A call to invest in youth and peace and security
70. In the present report, it is demonstrated that progress has been made in
supporting young people in the context of peace and security since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2250 (2015). Young women and men have influenced
peace processes and humanitarian response efforts. They have engaged with decision
makers on peace and security issues in local- to national-level policy discussions.
They have demanded a multilateral system that engages them meaningfully, and they
have demonstrated their potential to forge alliances and be partners to count on in
sustaining peace and fostering development in a world faced with multiple challenges.
71. However, while there has been significant progress with regard to inclusivity, a
more systematic approach to implementing resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018)
is urgently needed.
72. With the launch of the Decade of Action for the sustainable development goals,
it is time for all actors to step up their efforts on youth and peace and security. The
comprehensive and strategic recommendations formulated in “The missing peace”
provide guidance thereon, including three mutually reinforcing strategies: investing
in the capacities, agency and leadership of young people; addressing the structural
barriers limiting meaningful youth inclusion and participation; and prioritizing
collaborative action by working with young people as equal and essential partners for
peace (ibid., para. 59).
73. In order to accelerate the implementation of those overarching recommendations,
and as the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015) draws near, I wish to highlight
a number of specific recommendations to Member States, regional organizations,
United Nations entities and other actors.
Actions to be taken by the Security Council
74. In acknowledging the progress made thus far, I invite the Security Council to
consider taking the following actions:
(a) Specifically encouraging the meaningful participation of young people in
peace and security efforts, including as relevant within mission mandates;
(b) Systematically engaging with diverse groups of young people and
representatives of youth organizations during the country visits that it undertakes;
(c) Expanding and systematizing the participation of young people as briefers
in its country-specific and thematic discussions.
Actions to be taken by Member States and regional organizations
75. Recognizing that the youth and peace and security agenda is the responsibility
of all Member States, I invite Member States and regional organizations to consider
taking the following actions:
(a) Developing dedicated local, national and regional road maps for youth and
peace and security;
(b) Enhancing the meaningful participation of young women and men in peace
processes and throughout negotiations of peace agreements;
(c) Increasing funding for the implementation of the youth and peace and
security agenda, including accessible resourcing for organizations led by and focused
on young people;

20-03225

15/16

S/2020/167

(d) In conformity with international law, taking specific measures to ensure
the protection of civilians, including young people, in particular young human rights
defenders and peacebuilders, during and after armed conflict.
Actions to be taken by the United Nations
76. To accelerate the efforts of Member States, the United Nations could take the
following actions:
(a) Ensuring the integration of the youth and peace and security agenda into
the Organization’s strategic and planning documents, conflict analyses, frameworks,
initiatives and guidance tools at the global, regional and national levels;
(b) Establishing a network of youth and peace and security focal points at the
country, regional and headquarters levels and building on existing human resources
to ensure dedicated capacities with regard to youth and peace and security;
(c) Allocating appropriate resources, as feasible, to the accelerated
implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda, including funding for
capacity-building efforts and programmatic interventions;
(d) Developing dedicated guidance on the protection of young people,
including those who engage with the Organization in the context of peace and
security, as part of a new common protection agenda for the United Nations system.

16/16

20-03225
