A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/208
6 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (d)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.4)]
49/208.

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/121 of 20 December 1993, in which it
endorsed the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 1/ adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights,
Reaffirming the view of the World Conference on Human Rights that the
promotion and protection of human rights is a matter of priority for the
international community,
Considering that the promotion of universal respect for and observance
of human rights and fundamental freedoms is one of the basic purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and one of the main priorities of the
Organization,
Welcoming Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/95 of 9 March 1994
on the World Conference on Human Rights, 2/ in which, inter alia, the
Commission called upon all special representatives, special rapporteurs,
independent experts and thematic working groups of the Commission to take
fully into account the recommendations contained in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action within their respective mandates,
Recognizing the urgency of eliminating denials and violations of human
rights, as expressed in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,

1/
Report of the World Conference on Human Rights, Vienna,
14-25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I)), chap. III.
2/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.

95-77137

/...

A/RES/49/208
Page 2

Convinced that the World Conference on Human Rights made an important
contribution to the cause of human rights and that the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action has to be translated into effective action by States, the
competent United Nations organs and organizations and other organizations
concerned, including non-governmental organizations,
Bearing in mind that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
provide the United Nations and the international community with a coherent
framework of principles, objectives and means for promoting and protecting
human rights,
Noting that the activities envisaged in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action add further to the workload and the responsibilities of
the United Nations human rights system and that the General Assembly at its
forty-eighth session took the initial steps towards bridging the gap between
resources and the mandated outputs,
Recalling the request of the World Conference on Human Rights to the
Secretary-General and the General Assembly to take immediate steps to increase
substantially the resources for the human rights programme from within the
existing and future regular budgets of the United Nations,
Taking note of the view of the Secretary-General, as expressed in his
report, 3/ that a prompt endorsement of a detailed plan of implementation of
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, together with the related
necessary financial decisions, could positively facilitate the achievement of
the broad range of objectives in human rights set forth by the World
Conference on Human Rights,
Noting that at the first regular session of 1994 of the Administrative
Committee on Coordination, in April 1994, the executive heads of all United
Nations agencies discussed the implications of the results of the Conference
for their respective programmes and committed themselves to supporting the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the coordination of
United Nations organs, bodies and the specialized agencies whose activities
deal with human rights, as set out in General Assembly resolution 48/141 of 20
December 1993,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up
to the World Conference on Human Rights 4/ and the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 5/
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up
to the World Conference on Human Rights 4/ and of the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; 5/
2.
Endorses the view of the Secretary-General 6/ that, if
adequately implemented, the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action will be
a milestone in history, and that this requires concerted efforts on the part
of Governments and national human rights institutions, international

3/

A/49/668, para. 139.

4/

A/49/668.

5/

A/49/36.

6/

A/49/668, para. 134.
/...

A/RES/49/208
Page 3

organizations, United Nations human rights bodies and non-governmental
organizations;
3.
Endorses the reaffirmation in the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action of the importance of the promotion of universal respect for, and
observance and protection of, all human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure as wide a distribution of
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action as possible;
5.
Urges all States to continue to give widespread publicity to the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action in order to promote increased
awareness of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
6.
Calls upon all States to take further action with a view to the
full realization of human rights in the light of the recommendations of the
Conference;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General, the General Assembly, the
Commission on Human Rights and other organs and bodies of the United Nations
system related to human rights to take further action with a view to the full
implementation of all the recommendations of the Conference;
8.
Reiterates the request of the Conference that immediate steps be
taken to increase substantially the resources for the human rights programme
from within the existing and future regular budgets of the United Nations;
9.
Requests the High Commissioner for Human Rights, as the United
Nations official with principal responsibility for United Nations human rights
activities, to submit, no later than 15 February 1995, for the preparation of
the programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997, a report with a detailed plan
on the human and financial resource requirements of the implementation of the
recommendations of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action that have
been endorsed by the competent United Nations organs or on which those organs
have taken decisions;
10.
Also requests the High Commissioner to include in his annual
report to the General Assembly a section on the measures taken and the
progress achieved in the comprehensive implementation of the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action;
11.
Decides to consider this question at its fiftieth session under
the sub-item entitled "Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action".
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
