United Nations

A/RES/67/209

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 20 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2012
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.3)]

67/209. International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/219 of 22 December 1999, 56/195 of 21 December
2001, 60/195 of 22 December 2005, 64/200 of 21 December 2009, 65/157 of
20 December 2010 and 66/199 of 22 December 2011, and taking into consideration
all other relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 1 in particular the decisions
related to disaster risk reduction,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 2 Agenda 21, 3
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 4 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 5 and the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation) 6 and the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, 7
Stressing the importance of stronger interlinkages among disaster risk
reduction, recovery and long-term development planning, calling for more
coordinated and comprehensive strategies that integrate disaster risk reduction and
climate change adaptation considerations into public and private investment,
decision-making and the planning of humanitarian and development actions in order
_______________
1

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.
4
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
5
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
7
Resolution 65/1.
2

12-49114

*1249114*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/209

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

to reduce risk, increase resilience and provide a smoother transition between relief,
recovery and development, and in this regard recognizing the need to integrate a
gender perspective into the design and implementation of all phases of disaster risk
management,
Recalling the results of the midterm review of the Hyogo Framework for
Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to
Disasters, 8
Recognizing that the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction was
confirmed, at its third session, held in Geneva from 8 to 13 May 2011, as being the
main forum at the global level for strategic advice coordination and partnership
development for disaster risk reduction,
Welcoming the special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change on managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate
change adaptation, issued in Geneva in March 2012,
Emphasizing the added value of Governments, at all levels, as well as relevant
subregional, regional and international organizations, in committing adequate,
timely and predictable resources for disaster risk reduction in order to enhance
resilience of cities and communities to disasters, according to their own
circumstances and capacities,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
1.
of General Assembly resolution 66/199; 9
2.
Stresses the importance of the continued substantive consideration of the
issue of disaster risk reduction, and encourages Member States and the relevant
United Nations bodies to take into consideration the important role of disaster risk
reduction activities for, inter alia, the achievement of sustainable development;
Reaffirms the commitment to the Hyogo Framework for Action
3.
2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters,8 and
calls upon States, the United Nations system, international financial institutions,
subregional, regional and international organizations and civil society to accelerate
implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action and the achievement of its
goals;
Encourages Member States, in accordance with their national priorities,
4.
to establish and develop national disaster loss databases, disaster risk mapping and
financial tracking systems in order to support decision-making across all levels of
Government and to make full use, as appropriate, of the Hyogo Framework for
Action Monitor system to support the assessment of progress made in disaster risk
reduction;
Stresses the need to foster better understanding and knowledge of the
5.
causes of disasters, as well as to build and strengthen coping capacities, in particular
in developing countries, through, inter alia, the exchange of best practices,
technology transfer, as mutually agreed, and technical knowledge, educational and
training programmes for disaster risk reduction, access to relevant data and
information, the strengthening of institutional arrangements and the promotion of

_______________
8
9

2/4

A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2.
A/67/335.

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

A/RES/67/209

community participation and ownership through community-based disaster risk
management approaches;
6.
Recognizes the importance of the developing of strategies at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels by Member States, in particular
developing countries, to achieve disaster risk reduction, and reiterates the need to
further develop regional initiatives and risk reduction capacities of regional
mechanisms where they exist, to strengthen them and to encourage the use and
sharing of all existing tools, and requests the regional commissions, within their
mandates, to support the efforts of Member States in this regard, in close
coordination with the implementing entities of the United Nations system;
Encourages States to establish disaster risk reduction as a priority for
7.
community-level action and to promote the involvement of relevant stakeholders,
including community representatives, national Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, other civil society actors and the private sector, and to allocate adequate
resources for disaster risk reduction activities at the community level;
Recognizes the importance of coordinating adaptation to climate change
8.
with relevant disaster risk reduction measures, invites Governments and relevant
international organizations to integrate those considerations in a comprehensive
manner into, inter alia, development plans and poverty eradication programmes and
into the preparation and implementation of national adaptation programmes of
action, and invites the international community to support the ongoing efforts of
developing countries in this regard;
Welcomes the upcoming fourth session of the Global Platform for
9.
Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Geneva from 19 to 23 May 2013, which will
focus on reviewing progress in the implementation of the commitments made at its
previous sessions in 2007, 2009 and 2011, and encourages all relevant stakeholders
to participate with senior-level representation from various sectors;
10. Decides to convene the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction, in Japan, in early 2015 to review the implementation of the Hyogo
Framework for Action and to adopt a post-2015 framework for disaster risk
reduction;
11. Also decides to consider, before the end of 2013, the scope, modalities,
participation, format and organization of the Conference in the most efficient and
effective manner possible;
12. Requests the secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction to serve as the secretariat of the Conference, to facilitate the development
of a post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction and to coordinate the
preparatory activities in consultation with all relevant stakeholders;
13. Encourages all relevant stakeholders to actively engage in the
consultation process for the development of a post-2015 framework for disaster risk
reduction, including by the sharing of lessons learned on managing disaster risks, for
example, through the convening of national multi-stakeholder consultations and
participation in regional platforms;
14. Strongly encourages giving appropriate consideration to disaster risk
reduction and the building of resilience to disasters within the post-2015
development agenda;

3/4

A/RES/67/209

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

15. Also strongly encourages promoting a complementary and coherent
approach to the relationship between the post-2015 framework for disaster risk
reduction and the post-2015 development agenda;
16. Encourages all Member States in a position to do so to ensure resources
and support for strengthening the secretariat of the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction so that it can meet the challenges of its coming work and
discharge its cross-cutting mandate with efficiency and effectiveness;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the institutional arrangements of
the secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction under review,
with a view to supporting it in effectively and efficiently carrying out its crosscutting mandate and its role as the focal point for disaster reduction within the
United Nations system;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-eighth session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled
“International Strategy for Disaster Reduction”;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
61st plenary meeting
21 December 2012

4/4
