i

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgendaj2255) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression‘ of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.l

Expression of welcome to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Niger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...........................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Date of elections to fill two vacancies in the International Court of Justice
(S/14246) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

: :
‘\

’ !,

SIPV.2255

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

!
i

2255th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 12 November 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

4. I am sure that I am expressing the sentiments of
all members of the Council in extending sincere condolences to the delegations of the United States and
the Syrian Arab Republic on this sad occasion.

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

5. Richard Reeve Baxter studied at Brown, Harvard,
Cambridge and Georgetown Universities and was at
member of the Massachusetts Bar. In the course of a
long academic career, he was the Manley Hudson
Professor of Law at Harvard University for many
years. He also taught at the Universities of Cambridge
and the Philippines as well as lecturing to The Hague
Academy of International Law. He acted as a counsellor on international law to the United States Department of State and, at different times, as a consultant
to the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research and to .the Secretariat of the United Nations.
Judge Baxter was a member of several United States
delegations to conferences on questions of intemational law, most recently the Diplomatic Conference
on the Reaffirmation and Development of International
Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts,
from 1974 to 1976, where he acted as chairman of one
of the working groups. Judge Baxter was the author of
many learned works on international law, in particular
his book on The Law of International
Waterways.
He was elected a member of the Court with effect
from 6 February 1979 and, in accordance with Article 13 of the Statute of the Court, his term of office
would have expired on 5 February 1988.He was a most
distinguished international lawyer and an eminent
judge. His contributions to international law were very
considerable and his early death constitutes a loss,
not only to the United States, but also to the intemational community as a whole.

agenda (S/Agenda/2255)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Date of elections to till two vacancies in the International Court of Justice (S/14246)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.00 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT: As this is the first formal
meeting of the Security Council for the month of
November, I should like to pay a tribute on behalf of
the Council to the President for the month of October,
Ambassador Oleg Troyanovsky, representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the great
diplomatic skill and expedition with which he conducted our business during the month of October.
Expression of welcome to the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of the Niger

2. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to welcome
Mr. Hamid Algabid, the Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs and Co-operation of the Niger, who is present
with us this afternoon.
Adoption

6. Judge Salah El Dine Tarazi graduated as doctor
of law in 1945and held an honorary doctorate from the
University of Hyderabad. After practising as a lawyer
in Syria between 1940 and 1947, he pursued an
academic career at the University of Damascus. During
the course of a long career in the service of his Govemment, he acted as Secretary-General of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and as the Ambassador of Syria
to the Soviet Union and to Turkey. He was also Ambassador of the United Arab Republic to Czechoslovakia and to China. From 1962 to 1964, he was
the Permanent Representative of Syria to the United
Nations. He represented Syria on several legal committees and at the United Nations Conference on the
Law of Treaties. Judge Tarazi was the author of
several publications and lectured to The Hague

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Date of elections to ffl two vacancies in the
International
Court of Justice (S/14246)

3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will
have had an opportunity to study document S/14246,
which explains the need for this item on our agenda.
The recent deaths of Judge Richard Reeve Baxter
on 25 September, and of Judge Salah El Dine Tarazi
on 4 October, have created two vacancies on the
International Court of Justice which have to be tilled.
1

Academy of International Law. Judge Tarazi was
elected to the Court on 17 November 1975 and, but
for his tragic death in a traffic accident, his term of
office would have expired on 5 February 1985. Judge
Tarazi was a very distinguished diplomat and lawyer
whose contributions to the work of the International
Court of Justice will long be remembered. His death
is mourned not only in Syria but throughout the entire
international community.

12. Professor Baxter devoted much of his life to the
progressive development of the’ law of war, in attempting to reduce the terrible suffering that hostilities
always cause. Thus he was instrumental in helping to
develop Additional Protocols I and II to the Red Cro.ss
Conventions for the protection of victims of war,
adopted in Geneva in 1977.
13. We feel keenly the tragedy of Judge Baxter’s
premature and painful death. His life in the law gave
every indication of the contribution to the work of the
International Court of Justice that he would have made
had he been spared. The best tribute that we can pay
to him is to recall the potential of the Court for resolving
disputes and to redouble our will to help the Court play
that greater role in the affairs of nations for which the
Charter of the United Nations has always hoped.

7. Under Article 14 of the Statute of the Court, the
Security Council is required to fix the date of the election to fill any vacancy in the Court. Members of the
Council have before them the text of a draft resolution in document S/14253. It is my understanding that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote now on
the draft resolution. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote.

14. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic in
which he requests to be invited to make a statement. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to extend an invitation to
that representative, in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolurion
(resolution 480 (1980)).

was adopted

unanimously

8. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The
United States joins with others in expressing deep
regret to the Government and people of Syria and to
the International Court of Justice at the death of Judge
Salah El Dine Tarazi. We regret that the participation
of Judge Tarazi in the work of the International Court
of Justice and his distinguished life of service to his
country were cut short by the accident that took his
life in The Hague.

At the invirarion of the President, Mr. Sage (Syrian
Arab Republic) rook a place at the Council table.

15. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
16. Mr. SIAGE(Syrian Arab Republic): At the outset
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. Your dipIomatic skill and ability have
lent you authority among your colleagues at the United
Nations.

9. Mr. President, I want to thank you for the tribute
you have today paid to Judge Richard Baxter, and wish
to say a few words in response.
10. Richard Baxter’s academic career was exceptionally distinguished. He went to Harvard at the end
of the Second World War, took up an academic post
at the Law School at Harvard in 1954 and remained
there until his election to the International Court of
Justice in 1978. For the long period 1970through 1978,
he served as Editor-in-Chief of the American Journal
of International
Law with its extraordinarily demanding scholarship and as President of the American
Society of International Law from 1974through 1976.
Among the outstanding qualities of his scholarship
were scrupulous care, objectivity, balance and judiciousness in the best sense of the term. He was an
exceedingly kind and gentle man.

17. I should like also to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, Ambassador Troyanovsky of the
Soviet Union, who, as the representative of a great
country with which the Syrian Arab Republic continues to maintain relations ofco-operation and friendship, so efficiently and ably presided over the Council
during the month of October.
18. We are meeting here today to pay tribute to two
eminent international jurists: the late Judge Richard
Baxter from the United States of America and the late
Judge Salah El Dine Tarazi from the Syrian Arab
Republic. I should like here to express the condolences of my Government to the Government of the
United States of America and the family of Judge
Baxter on his untimely demise.

11. Dick Baxter studied with enormous enthusiasm
with then Professor Hersch Lauterpacht at Cambridge
in 1950-1951 and lectured extensively abroad in later
years, especially in Egypt, the Netherlands and
Poland. He was in that rare company of members
of the Institut de droit international. He was counsel
to Governments on three continents and had a host
of friends in international law circles throughout the
world.
,

19. Judge Tarazi., as the President mentioned, served
his country for 30 years with honour, dedication and
loyalty as a professor at the Law School of the University of Damascus, as an ambassador to the Soviet
Union, China, Turkey and Czechoslovakia, as the
2

,

Permanent Rtpresentative to the United Nations and
as Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. F6r overfour years, and with the same honour,
dedication and loyalty, he also served the international
community as a Judge of the International Court of
Justice.

20. I address the sincere gratitide of the Syrian
Government to you, Mr. President, and through you to
the other members of the Council and all others who
have expressed their condolences and sympathy.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

HOW TO OBTAIN lJNl7ED NATIONS PURLlCATlONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstote or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PURLICATIONS

DES NAllONS

UNlES

Les publications des Nations Unia sont en vente dans Is librairies et la agences d@ositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aupr& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unia. Section
des ventes. New York ou Gentvc.
HAK
%iwtaHHn
3PRaX

namey

Hasun.

HOJIY’IHTh
OprSXiX3AUAH
(LrKiTCTBAX

HSAAHHII

OPFAHHSAI&HH

COMO CONSEGUlR PURLICAClONES

HauHR

OIi’bEAHHEHHhIX

HAUHH

Kynxrb
II XKHKWbnc
uArAI
BO Bcex paROHAX
MHpa.
CnpABKII
06 H3ZtaRRnX
B
xmxno~
uarmwie
ww nmnnfe
no anpecy : Oprammaum
Odaenxxewabrx
CeKUHR no nponamte A3naHHR. Hbm-FiopK
HJIH 3KeXeBA.
06W2AWIeHtibIX

YOXHO
HaBo~Hre

DE LAS NAClONES UNlDAS

Las publicaciones de hts Naciones Unidas estan en venta en libretfas y cams distriiuidotas en
todas panes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su iibrero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.
,
/

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

I

8341462-sqRcmbef

m6-2,oM

’
