S/PRST/2021/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 July 2021
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8820th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 July 2021, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Libya”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Second Berlin Conference convened
on 23 June 2021, the Conference Conclusions (S/2021/595) and the commitment
of the participants to the UN-facilitated, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
process and the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Libya. The Security Council welcomes the inclusion of Libya as a
member of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya.
“The Security Council expresses its support for the interim Presidency
Council and the interim Government of National Unity as the Government of
Libya charged with leading the country up to Presidential and Parliamentary
national elections on 24 December 2021, as set out in the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum (LPDF) roadmap in Tunis in November 2020 and resolution
2570 (2021).
“The Security Council stresses the importance of free and fair Pre sidential
and Parliamentary elections that are inclusive and credible and underlines the
importance of arrangements to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and the inclusion of youth. The Security Council
recognises the need to protect women, including those participating in public
spaces, from threats and reprisals.
“The Security Council recalls the importance of the unification of Libya’s
institutions; good governance and improved economic performance, including
through agreement on a unified budget; and the swift agreement on sovereign
positions, as set out in the LPDF roadmap. The Security Council welcomes the
completion of the independent audit of the Central Bank.
“The Security Council reaffirms its intention to ensure tha t assets frozen
pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 1970 (2011) shall at a later stage be made
available to and for the benefit of the Libyan people.
“The Security Council recalls the commitment of the participants at the
Second Berlin Conference to accept and support the outcome of the intra-Libyan
political process and their call for all Libyans and international actors to do the
same.

21-09846 (E)

190721

*2109846*

S/PRST/2021/12

“The Security Council underlines the importance of an inclusive,
comprehensive national reconciliation process. The Security Council welcomes
the support of the African Union in that regard and recognises the important role
of regional organisations including the League of Arab States and the European
Union.
“The Security Council strongly urges the relevant authorities and
institutions, including the House of Representatives, to take immediate action
to clarify the constitutional basis for elections and to enact legislation, as
necessary, to allow the High National Election Commission to have adequate
time and resources to prepare for National Presidential and Parliamentary
elections according to the timeline prescribed in the LPDF roadmap. The
Security Council reiterates its call on the LPDF to take steps to f acilitate the
elections if necessary and welcomes the UN Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL)’s efforts to encourage the LPDF to develop proposals for a free, fair
and inclusive electoral process.
“The Security Council recalls that the measures set out in resolution 1970
(2011), as modified by subsequent resolutions, shall also apply to individuals
and entities determined by the Committee to be engaging in or providing support
for other acts that threaten the peace, stability or security of Libya, or obstruct
or undermine the successful completion of its political transition and underlines
that such acts could include obstructing or undermining those elections planned
for in the LPDF roadmap.
“The Security Council strongly urges all Member States, all Libyan parties
and all relevant actors to respect and support the full implementation of the
23 October 2020 ceasefire agreement, including through the withdrawal of all
foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya without delay. The Security Council
recalls UNSMIL’s role supporting the implementation of the Libyan ceasefire
and that UNSMIL is requested to support the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
ceasefire monitoring mechanism (LCMM) including through the swif t, scalable
and incremental deployment of UNSMIL ceasefire monitors once conditions
allow.
“The Security Council recalls its decision that all Member States shall
comply with the arms embargo on Libya, imposed under resolution 1970 (2011),
as modified by subsequent resolutions.
“The Security Council recalls the commitment of the participants at the
Berlin Conference to refrain from interference in the armed conflict or in the
internal affairs of Libya and their call on all international actors to do the same.
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern over the impact of the
conflict on neighbouring countries, particularly in the Sahel, including with
regard to threats arising from the illicit transfer, destabilising accumulation and
misuse of weapons and the flow of armed groups and mercenaries. The Security
Council encourages further international support and regional cooperation and
coordination between Libya and the Sahel.
“The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at the smuggling of
migrants and refugees and human trafficking through Libya and at the dire
situation faced by migrants, refugees and internally displaced people, including
children, in Libya and recalls the need to support further efforts to strengthen
Libyan border management.
“The Security Council emphasises that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human
rights law must be held accountable.
2/3

21-09846

S/PRST/2021/12

“The Security Council recalls the need to plan for the disarmament,
demobilisation and reintegration of armed groups and all relevant non -state
armed actors, security sector reform and the establishment of a unified,
inclusive, accountable, civilian-led security architecture for Libya as a whole
and calls on the Libyan authorities to engage and achieve progress on this issue.”

21-09846

3/3
