A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/110
19 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 110
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/642)]
52/110. Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination and its resolutions on the status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,1 most recently resolution 51/80 of 12 December 1996,
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference
on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,2 in particular section II. B of the Declaration relating to equality,
dignity and tolerance,
Reiterating the importance of the Convention, which is one of the most widely accepted human rights
instruments adopted under the auspices of the United Nations, and mindful of the importance of the
contributions of the Committee to the efforts of the United Nations to combat racism and all other forms
of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin,
Calling upon States which have not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede
thereto,

1

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

2

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

98-76783

/...

A/RES/52/110
Page 2

Emphasizing the obligation of all States parties to the Convention to take legislative, judicial and
other measures in order to secure full implementation of the provisions of the Convention,
Recalling its resolution 47/111 of 16 December 1992, in which it welcomed the decision, taken on
15 January 1992 by the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,3 to amend paragraph 6 of article 8 of the Convention
and to add a new paragraph, as paragraph 7 of article 8, with a view to providing for the financing of the
Committee from the regular budget of the United Nations, and registering its concern that the amendment
to the Convention has not yet entered into force,
Reiterating the importance of enabling the Committee to function smoothly and to have all necessary
facilities for the effective performance of its functions under the Convention,
Recalling the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 10 of the Convention regarding the location of the
meetings of the Committee,
I
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination on its fiftieth and fifty-first sessions;4
2. Commends the Committee for its work with regard to the implementation of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,1 especially the examination of
reports under article 9 and action on communications under article 14 of the Convention;
3. Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligation, under paragraph 1 of article 9 of the
Convention, to submit their periodic reports on measures taken to implement the Convention in due time;
4. Commends the Committee on its efforts to contribute to the effective implementation of
international instruments on human rights, inter alia, by continuing to improve its working methods, which
include the process of reviewing the implementation of the Convention in States whose reports are
seriously overdue, and, in that regard, invites the Secretary-General to seek further ways to assist those
States in fulfilling their reporting obligations;
5. Commends the Committee for its continuing contribution to the prevention of racial
discrimination, including early warning measures and urgent procedures, and welcomes its relevant action
thereon;

3

See CERD/SP/45, annex.

4

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/52/18).
/...

A/RES/52/110
Page 3

6. Encourages the Committee to continue to contribute fully to the implementation of the Third
Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and its revised Programme of Action,5 including by
continuing to collaborate with the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights, as well as by cooperating with the Special Rapporteur
of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance;
7. Welcomes and encourages the cooperation and exchange of information between the Committee
and relevant structures and mechanisms of the United Nations, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as with the General Assembly and the States parties to
the Convention;
II
FINANCIAL SITUATION OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION
OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial status of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,6
9. Expresses its profound concern about the fact that a number of States parties to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination have still not fulfilled their financial
obligations, as shown in the report of the Secretary-General, and strongly appeals to all States parties that
are in arrears to fulfil their outstanding financial obligations under paragraph 6 of article 8 of the
Convention;
10. Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to accelerate their domestic ratification
procedures with regard to the amendment to the Convention concerning the financing of the Committee
and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment, as
decided upon at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on 15 January 1992,3 endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 47/111 of 16 December 1992 and further reiterated at the Sixteenth Meeting
of States Parties on 16 January 1996;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure adequate financial arrangements and
appropriate means and to provide necessary support to ensure the functioning of the Committee and to
enable it to cope with its increasing amount of work;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite those States parties to the Convention that are in
arrears to pay the amounts in arrears and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-third
session;

5

Resolution 49/146, annex.

6

A/52/463.
/...

A/RES/52/110
Page 4

13. Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the financial situation of the
Committee and the report of the Committee at its fifty-third session under the item entitled "Elimination
of racism and racial discrimination".
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
