United Nations

S/PV.4100 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4100th Meeting
Wednesday, 9 February 2000, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rodríguez Giavarini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Fowler
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Dejammet
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel'chenko
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Protection of United Nations personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in conflict zones

00-28703 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was resumed at 3.40 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Norway, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kolby
(Norway), took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next speaker
inscribed on my list is Mrs. Sylvie Junod, head of the
delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross
to the United Nations. I invite her to take a seat at the
Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Junod (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, as well as the members of
the Council, for having invited the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) to speak in this important debate.

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
of humanitarian personnel that are rooted in the principle
of protecting civilian populations against the effects of
hostilities. Civilians must be protected and respected in all
circumstances. To this general immunity are added
specific rules of protection covering individuals
participating in impartial humanitarian assistance actions.
Moreover, the red cross and red crescent emblems
confer special protection to medical facilities and
personnel, be they military or civilian. As the Council is
aware, these emblems, whose use is strictly governed by
international humanitarian law, also protect the activities
of the ICRC, as well as those of other components of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement —
in other words, national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies and their International Federation.
The Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, adopted by the General
Assembly in 1994, has bridged certain gaps. Fresh
thought is being given today to strengthening the
protection it provides. In that exercise it will be important
to take into account the relevant rules of international
humanitarian law, a good part of which fall under
customary law. The ICRC will be pleased to contribute its
expertise on this subject and will follow this work with
all the attention it deserves.
The law exists, however imperfect it may be. What
remains to be done is to implement it.

(spoke in French)
The provision of protection and assistance to the
victims of armed violence — which is the raison d'être of
the ICRC — depends upon the existence of a minimum of
security conditions for humanitarian personnel. That is why
this subject is particularly close to our hearts. The
deterioration of security conditions today raises a daily
challenge to humanitarian action in numerous contexts. Like
the protection of civilian populations, the protection of
humanitarian personnel is linked to a number of legal and
operational considerations that are to some extent the tools
to be used in trying to meet this challenge.
Allow me briefly to outline, not exhaustively, the
three major compartments of this toolbox: legal protection,
the implementation of and respect for law and, lastly, the
modalities for humanitarian action.
With regard to legal protection, it may be useful to
recall that the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols contain basic rules for the protection

2

The protection of humanitarian personnel requires
concrete measures that States must enact in order to
reduce the numerous violations of law and to put an end
to the impunity of the perpetrators. Ratifying treaties,
adopting national legislation to make possible the
prosecution of war criminals and more effective
dissemination of legal rules are all sine qua non
conditions, as was emphasized repeatedly in this
morning's debate. It is important and encouraging to recall
in this regard that the Statute of the International Criminal
Court specifically stipulates that it is a war crime to
attack persons involved in humanitarian assistance
operations.
The last aspect that I would like to touch upon is
no less important, for it has to do with the modalities of
humanitarian action, which can have a decisive effect on
the security of humanitarian personnel. Effective
humanitarian action must be conducted neutrally,
impartially and independently. Rigorous respect for these
principles in such a way as to foster relations of trust with

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
the parties to a conflict is a key factor for the security of
humanitarian personnel. In order to gain a minimum level
of trust, the ICRC attaches great importance to the
establishment of a regular dialogue with all actors in the
field so that its mandate, its role as neutral intermediary and
the limits of its action can be clearly understood.
That approach, based on the acceptance of its
presence by all the parties involved, has led the ICRC to be
extremely prudent in taking measures of armed protection
for its personnel; these are taken only in situations where
there is a significant risk of banditry and when it is
genuinely vital for the victims it seeks to reach.
The ICRC remains firmly convinced that
humanitarian action must be clearly distinguished from the
use of force. This position, which is well known, is also
supported by a recent experience in which the ICRC was
forced to withdraw from a region and to evacuate its
representatives, whose security had been gravely
jeopardized due to the use of armed escorts by another
humanitarian organization that had chosen that option to
protect its own personnel.
I would also like to point out that, as we understand
it, a dialogue with all actors is not confined to the political
or military authorities, be they legal or de facto; it is also
a question of working transparently with all the other
humanitarian organizations present.
Day-to-day cooperation between the members of the
humanitarian community is another factor in reducing risks
and in this connection I would stress the importance of the
conduct of humanitarian personnel in the field, which
requires not only professionalism, but also a thorough
knowledge of the cultural context and customs. One can
never overemphasize the value of advice from locally
recruited personnel or the number of lives that such wise
advice has saved.
In conclusion, I wish to note that the ICRC is
thinking more and more in terms of preventive strategy
through its network of regional delegations. In most cases,
these have already been in place for several years when a
crisis arises in a country, which allows us from the outset
to benefit from the trust of being known, particularly
through educational programmes on humanitarian law.
Hence, we are in a position to respond first and speedily to
the most urgent needs of the victims.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next speaker
on my list is the representative of South Africa. I invite him

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We of the South
Africa delegation wish to warmly congratulate Argentina
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
are also happy to see the continued practice of open
debates in the Security Council, which is an important
part of the ongoing efforts to democratize it.
South Africa salutes those United Nations staff
members and humanitarian personnel who have paid the
ultimate price while bringing relief in conflict situations.
It is deplorable and totally unacceptable that caregivers to
the most vulnerable in conflict situations — namely
women, children and the elderly — should have their
lives taken so frequently and with such impunity.
The role that humanitarian personnel play during
conflict situations is of immeasurable value. In many
cases, particularly in Africa, such assistance represents the
only means of survival for civilian populations affected
by conflicts. In 1999, more than 700,000 people benefited
from food aid in Somalia, while more than a million
people are currently receiving such aid in Angola.
Yet, millions more remain in dire need, as they will
not receive even this basic level of assistance due to the
unacceptable threats faced by United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. Frequent attacks on and the
killing of humanitarian personnel in Somalia are
preventing food assistance from reaching an estimated
65,000 people in dire need. The criminal actions of armed
groups in that country are also disrupting vaccination
campaigns against polio. In Angola, at least 700,000
internally displaced persons go without food and shelter.
We are convinced that no one benefits from such
criminal actions. Civilians may be the immediate victims,
but Government and non-state actors alike suffer in the
long run when humanitarian assistance is suspended. For
example, the brutal murder in October last year of two
United Nations officials in Burundi severely curtailed
humanitarian assistance in that country and the prevailing
insecurity continues to do so.
It is clear from these examples that the suffering of
civilian populations is exacerbated when United Nations
and humanitarian personnel are not protected. Killings,
attacks and harassment of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel are therefore tantamount to

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
waging war on unarmed civilians. For this reason, the
protection of such personnel requires urgent attention.
My delegation strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral's recommendation, contained in his report
S/1999/957 of last year, that civilian populations should
have unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance.
Realizing this goal should be the Council's first order of
business when addressing any new or existing conflict. It is
imperative to obtain firm guarantees from state and
non-state parties for the safety of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel, even if this requires the imposition
of targeted sanctions.
It is important to remind ourselves that the primary
responsibility for the protection of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel lies with the host Government.
Non-state parties should similarly protect such personnel, in
line with the provisions of international humanitarian law.
The Council should also promote the wider acceptance of
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. In this regard, my delegation further
supports the recommendation by the Secretary-General that
efforts be initiated to extend the scope of the Convention.
We welcome the classification of intentional attacks
against humanitarian personnel as war crimes under the
Statute of the International Criminal Court. South Africa is
actively participating in the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, which we believe will further
promote the protection of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel.
My delegation strongly believes that a distinct
division should be maintained between humanitarian actions
and efforts to secure political settlements. Only by
maintaining the impartial nature of humanitarian personnel
and the assistance they provide can continued relief be
ensured to those who need it most.
Millions of people affected by conflict rely on United
Nations and humanitarian personnel for their daily
existence. If we do not protect these personnel, we will be
failing them, the people who depend on them, as well as
our own humanity in which we pride ourselves.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next speaker
on my list is the representative of Uruguay. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Pérez-Otermin (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to congratulate the sister Argentine

4

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
Republic in the person of its Minister of Foreign Affairs,
International Trade and Worship, Mr. Adalberto
Rodríguez Giavarini, who has honoured us by presiding
over this open meeting. I wish him every success in
guiding it.
I also wish to express my appreciation for the
statements made by Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Fréchette; Ms. Bertini, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme; and Mrs. Junod, head of the delegation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the
United Nations. These statements were very enlightening
and will certainly be most useful to us as we pursue the
objectives of this meeting.
Uruguay has a long tradition of supporting
peacekeeping in the community of nations. We were
present at peacemaking efforts before the Organization
even existed. True to our heritage and vocation for peace,
our country has participated in various missions, offering
military observers, members of military staff, police
officers and contingents numbering approximately 10,000
men sent to the furthest corners of the planet.
We believe that in the century that has just begun,
as in the past one, it will be the human factor that
determines the success of future undertakings. Human
beings are the source and users of new technologies,
structures and processes; human beings — especially
those who throughout history have made a difference —
are responsible for blazing trails and opening horizons.
The protection of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel is the
subject that brings us together today and that concerns us.
This subject is becoming increasingly important, given the
increasing dangers encountered in areas where such
personnel are sent to do their work to maintain peace.
While it is a fact that more civilians have lost their
lives in recent conflicts, it is also true that military
observers and police on the ground have had to assume
risks for which the United Nations does not have
sufficient capacity to prepare for in advance. Very often
certain bureaucratic practices led to situations that have in
turn led to an inability to secure air- transport services
and that have resulted in unfortunate deaths. Uruguay has
suffered the loss of several compatriots who were serving
in peacekeeping operations, and thus we are inscribed on
the list of countries that have paid the highest cost in
situations in which security shortcomings have been the
principle cause of death.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
On 3 September 1999 my country ratified the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, which was adopted in 1994 by the General
Assembly and which entered into force one year ago. This
is a major step, but the international community must
provide even greater support to such initiatives. We urge
Member States that have not yet ratified the Convention to
do so as soon as possible.
Other practical measures should be taken to broaden
the United Nations capacity to deal with this issue of
crucial importance. The Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator must be assigned more staff to deal
with security issues in peacekeeping operations.
For reporting incidents involving the safety of
peacekeeping personnel, the Secretariat has established a
system for prompt consultation with the permanent missions
in New York of troop-contributing countries. We encourage
the Secretariat to continue this effort, because we believe
that this is the best possible mechanism and should be
continued and not be considered as an attempt at micromanagement of these situations.
The fact that the report prepared by the Situation
Centre, which until recently was distributed only to
members of the Security Council, is now available to the
countries who are involved in the peacekeeping operations
is a very important contribution to the management of
situations in which security and related problems endanger
personnel which the contributing countries have placed at
the service of the United Nations. The improved
dissemination of this report was a long-standing demand
that my delegation steadily reiterated, and we appreciate
that this approach has now been instituted.
We also regard the meetings of the presidency of the
Security Council with troop-contributing countries as very
useful. This is already an established and routine practice,
an essential contribution to the successful management of
peacekeeping operations.
Without a doubt, much remains to be done to
improve the security conditions in peacekeeping operations,
and in this regard prior training is essential. Uruguay,
through its training school for peacekeeping operations,
located in Montevideo, is making significant efforts in this
area, and we have already invited other States to attend the
courses being given there. This training is crucial — today
more than ever — given that the most recent kind of
peacekeeping operations involves multidisciplinary efforts,
in which the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
top priority, in view of the alarming number of deaths
that have been recorded.
We hope that this special meeting will help to once
again call attention to the need to ensure that during their
important missions United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and contracted humanitarian personnel are
provided with special protection — protection befitting
the importance of the mandates they are being given. This
protection will be even more difficult to achieve if the
necessary resources are not available. Therefore, more
than ever it is essential that States shoulder their
responsibilities vis-à-vis this Organization in accordance
with their role here in the concert of nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Uruguay for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Australia.
I invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to
make her statement.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): I would like to extend
the Australian delegation's appreciation to you and to
Argentina for bringing this issue before the Security
Council. It continues the important debate begun a year
ago under Canadian leadership on the related question of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
It is a deeply disturbing truth that United Nations
personnel and humanitarian workers have increasingly
become the targets of violence. It seems that the
principles of neutrality and impartiality, the provisions of
international humanitarian law and the emblems of the
United Nations and of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent are simply no longer sufficient to assure the
safety of international humanitarian workers and
organizations.
As we have heard so frequently today, this last year
has seen an alarming number of attacks on United
Nations and humanitarian personnel. Australians have
been among those who have suffered, and in two cases —
most notably in Angola — have lost their lives. In
Australia these casualties have created significant public
interest in the issue that the Council is discussing today,
as did another case, that of the three CARE Australia aid
workers who were imprisoned in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
What happened to those three raised many disturbing
questions and, we believe, merits very close examination
for the lessons that might be drawn for the future, so as to
help avoid the same thing happening to other humanitarian
workers. I have not got time to go into the details; the case
has been well documented. Steve Pratt, Peter Wallace and
Branko Jelen spent a combined total of 19 months in prison
on charges of espionage which the Australian Government
and which CARE maintains were manifestly false. This was
these men's reward for working under extraordinarily trying
conditions to attend to the suffering of ordinary people all
over Yugoslavia. They had left behind their families and
their friends; they had taken on the risks and the hardships
inherent in working in a conflict environment because they
were committed to the principles and the goals of
humanitarian assistance. They are representative of
hundreds of thousands of individuals around the world
committed to helping others.
Those three are now in Australia, back with their
families, and have begun new lives. But their release came
about only as a result of protracted diplomatic activity and
pressure. I would like to take this opportunity publicly to
record Australia's gratitude to the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and many of their colleagues in
the United Nations — particularly in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) — for their
unflagging support, practical and political, which was
central to the effort to get Pratt, Wallace and Jelen released.
While their capture and imprisonment must have disturbed
all humanitarian workers around the world — and must
indeed have deterred some from taking up this calling —
many others must at the same time have drawn reassurance
from the determination and the perseverance with which the
United Nations and the international community fought for
these men's release.
I have talked a little bit about this because I think it
is important to put a practical face on the rhetoric of our
discussions. It is just one of many cases that underline the
seriousness of the issue and, above all, the need for
concerted effort by the international community to
strengthen the protection of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. It is a challenge that we think
should be tackled through a combination of measures.
Responsibility for ensuring the safety of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel rests, first and
foremost, with Governments within whose jurisdiction
humanitarian activities are taking place. Governments
should recognize and respect the independence and the
impartiality of United Nations personnel and humanitarian

6

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
workers and allow them to operate without threat or
hindrance. States must guarantee immunity and protection,
according to the law, and provide whatever physical
protection and assistance possible. In this respect, States
perhaps need to be well informed about the realities of
contemporary aid workers. One of the reasons that Pratt,
Wallace and Jelen got into trouble was that they were
carrying sophisticated equipment that international
humanitarian agencies use today as a matter of course —
sophisticated maps, sophisticated wireless, sophisticated
systems — that made them objects of suspicion. I think
that is one of the lessons we should be drawing and
thinking about as we move forward in this debate.
Governments must also denounce — and denounce
strongly — attacks against United Nations personnel and
humanitarian workers and take all measures to bring
perpetrators of violence to justice. Impunity, as so many
of my colleagues have emphasized in this discussion,
cannot be allowed. Practical measures can be taken by
Governments to promote understanding and observance of
international humanitarian law within their own
communities, especially among military and security
forces, but also among civilian populations, including by
disseminating information about international
humanitarian law. It is a coincidence, but today there is
an important seminar taking place on this very subject
elsewhere in New York, emphasizing that United Nations
and humanitarian workers must also be properly trained
about their responsibilities. Building a spirit of partnership
between international personnel and local governments
and communities can also be a particularly crucial
ingredient in averting tensions and threats.
Of course, many measures that may seem simple to
implement in stable communities are far more difficult in
zones of conflict. Absence of effective central
Government control or military command has been a
feature of a number of recent, and current, conflicts in
which United Nations and humanitarian personnel have
been threatened or killed. The nature of international
peacekeeping, much of which now has a large
humanitarian component, blurs the distinction between
enforcement action and humanitarian work.
To minimize these risks, the Security Council
should ensure that appropriate plans are in place as part
of peacekeeping operations to ensure the proper protection
of humanitarian personnel. It is for this reason that
Australia supports the use of Chapter VII authority to
ensure the protection of United Nations personnel where
this is warranted, as we did, for example, in the case of

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
recent Security Council resolutions for the International
Force in East Timor and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor. The authority of the United
Nations and the Security Council must be brought fully to
bear when violence is committed or threatened against
United Nations staff or personnel of legitimate humanitarian
organizations.
The importance of international humanitarian law in
protecting United Nations and humanitarian workers has
been referred to by almost everyone in this debate and
cannot be overstated. The international community must
make efforts to strengthen those protections already
provided for, in particular the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel, to
which the Deputy Secretary-General referred in her
statement at the beginning of the debate this morning. My
own Government signed this Convention in December 1995
and is currently in the process in our federal system — and
it is quite laborious — of enabling its ratification. Subject
to our parliamentary and federal system processes, the
necessary legislation is expected to be passed later this
year, with the aim of full ratification by the end of 2000.
We strongly urge Member States that have not already done
so to take the necessary steps to ratify this basic and very
important Convention.
The enforcement of international humanitarian law
must also be strengthened in order to bring those
responsible to justice and to send a clear message of the
international community's intolerance of this violence.
Intentionally attacking humanitarian personnel who are
legitimately going about their business is a war crime, and
has been specifically codified as such in the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We support the ICC as
a powerful instrument for bringing to justice perpetrators of
crimes against humanitarian personnel, as well, obviously,
as perpetrators of other war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The ICC will do this not only by providing a
mechanism for the investigation and prosecution of such
crimes where no State is able to do so, but also through the
imperative that it will place on States, through the
complementarity regime, to investigate and prosecute such
crimes themselves. Even more important, we believe, will
be the deterrent effect of this interlocking of national and
international jurisdictions. We therefore consider, as an
important part of these several measures that the
international community could take on this subject, that
States should be urged to begin their domestic processes for
ratification of the ICC Statute to ensure its early entry into
force.

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
Much more still can and must be done to improve
protection for United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
Argentina's initiative in convening this debate, in our
view, will greatly assist the Council and Member States
to consider further how to deal with this issue. We
appreciate the earlier report that was provided by the
Secretary-General on the related issue, and we very much
look forward to the follow-up report of the SecretaryGeneral, which, we are very confident, will give us more
valuable ideas.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Australia for the kind words she
addressed to the presidency.
The next speaker is the representative of Slovenia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Žbogar (Slovenia): I first want to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of February. I also want to
commend you for taking the initiative on this issue of the
protection of United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian workers in conflict zones. Since we had the
privilege of serving with your delegation in this body last
year, and since we know Argentina's principled and
consistent position regarding human rights and
humanitarian issues, your initiative came to us as no
surprise.
My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement by the European Union presented earlier by the
Ambassador of Portugal.
We listened with interest to the comments of the
Deputy Secretary-General this morning on the steps that
the United Nations Secretariat is undertaking to improve
security procedures. We also took note of her comments
referring to action that is needed and the support that the
Secretariat expects from the Member States. We also
appreciate the contributions to today's debate made by the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme and by
the head of the delegation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
At the outset, my delegation wants to pay tribute to
the courage and dedication of all United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian workers, and
particularly to all those who have lost their lives or
suffered otherwise while serving the United Nations and
the noble ideal of humanitarianism.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The issue of protecting the protectors deserves a
prominent place on the agenda of the Security Council. The
nature of armed conflicts has changed, and civilians are
often deliberate targets of attacks. Consequently,
humanitarian workers are perceived as an impediment to
achieving political or military objectives of the parties to a
conflict. Arrests, criminality, hostage-taking, attacks,
injuries, killings and prosecution on espionage charges are
no coincidence but are rather the reaction of belligerent
parties to the presence of undesirable witnesses to grave
violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law. As the Secretary-General stated in his report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict,
“The protective emblem of the International Red
Cross as well as the Red Crescent, and the United
Nations flag, which represent the impartiality of
relief workers, appear to offer less protection than
ever.” (S/1999/957, para. 21)
Or as Ms. Bertini of the World Food Programme said this
morning, the United Nations flag is a target rather than a
shield.
The responsibility of the Security Council remains a
key element in the response of the international community
to humanitarian crises. A lesson re-learned in the past few
years is that prevention is better than cure. The Council
should as a rule engage itself at an early stage of an
emerging conflict. We are encouraged by the presidential
statement adopted on 30 November 1999 showing the
Council's resolve to give more attention to preventive
action, and we are looking forward to the first periodic
report of the Secretary-General on prevention.
Preventive action, while preferable, is not always
possible, and the challenges of protecting humanitarian
action in conditions of active armed conflict need to be
dealt with. In such cases, timeliness and adequacy of
response to emerging conflicts are crucial criteria for
judging the effectiveness of the Council. In this context, we
are encouraged by the draft presidential statement to be
read out later, which will reflect the Council's reiterated
preparedness to take further measures at its disposal.
The mandates and objectives of peacekeeping
missions have to be clearly defined and supported in order
for them to be successful. Lessons on the need to define a
clear line between peacekeeping and peace enforcement
have been learned by the United Nations the hard way. As
we heard today, mandates should also include special
provisions regarding the security and safety of United

8

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
workers.
While it is necessary that humanitarian activities,
especially those carried out by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and non-governmental
organizations, remain independent and that the
“humanitarian space” be respected, it remains equally
important that the humanitarian aspects of a United
Nations operation be properly placed within a
comprehensive approach which includes political, military
and humanitarian aspects. Humanitarian action is meant
to save lives and alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population. It cannot be a substitute for necessary political
action aimed at tackling the roots of the crisis.
States have the primary responsibility to ensure the
safety and security of all personnel. The Security Council
for its part should insist on the responsibility of all parties
to a conflict to respect international humanitarian law, and
should take appropriate action in that regard. Attacks
against such personnel clearly represent breaches of
norms of international law. Every incident must be fully
investigated, and the perpetrators must be brought to
justice. And yet the Deputy Secretary-General presented
the Council this morning with the astounding fact that
since 1992 only two persons have been brought to justice
and convicted. Such a culture of impunity must not be
allowed to prevail.
We welcome the inclusion of attacks against
humanitarian personnel among the crimes falling within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. We
also welcome the entry into force of the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
At the same time, we recognize the need to explore ways
to address the scope of the Convention and its extension
to cover all situations in which United Nations and
associated personnel, including national staff, are
deployed, and of ensuring its implementation by non-State
actors.
We are pleased to see that today's open debate has
focused exclusively on the question of the protection of
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel. The Security Council has itself
on many occasions addressed this problem when dealing
with country-specific situations, as well as with generic
topics. In addition, we would recommend that the Council
engage in a direct dialogue with humanitarian agencies
and organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, on the issue of protection of their

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
personnel. We would also particularly like to point to the
close link between the subject under discussion today and
the Council's consideration of the comprehensive issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well as the
concept of human security. We look forward to future
consideration of all these issues in the Council and in other
United Nations bodies.
Let me conclude by expressing Slovenia's full
support for all efforts aimed at creating safer conditions for
the work of United Nations personnel, associated personnel
and humanitarian personnel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Slovenia for the kind words he addressed
to the presidency.
The next speaker is the representative of New
Zealand. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): May I begin, Sir, by
congratulating you on your decision to hold this open
debate on a subject which remains one of most important
facing Member States. Let me say also that it is a particular
pleasure to appear under your presidency, given the close
collaboration, going back many years, between our two
delegations on Security-Council-related matters.
Like others, we welcomed very much the thoughtful
contributions of the Deputy Secretary-General and of Ms.
Bertini at the outset of the debate this morning.
Three weeks ago in this Chamber many of us
watched with astonishment videotaped testimony from a
former UNITA guerrilla to the effect that the shooting
down of two United Nations aircraft in Angola in
December 1998 and in January 1999 had been deliberately
ordered. That video recording was, of course, part of the
report made by Ambassador Fowler to the Council on his
visit to Angola in his capacity as Chairman of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
864 (1993).
The two C-130 aircraft were carrying a total of 23
staff of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola.
The premeditated destruction of those aircraft would be one
of the most flagrant crimes against this Organization and its
personnel ever recorded. According to the evidence
presented on the videotape, the soldier who fired the missile
on each occasion was promoted as a result. We hope that
the evidence brought back by Ambassador Fowler is

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
thoroughly studied. It is essential that the perpetrators be
brought to justice, however long it takes. There can be no
impunity for crimes of such a nature.
In recent months Member States have also endured
the murders of staff members of the United Nations
Children's Fund and the World Food Programme in
Burundi and the savage death of a United Nations official
in a public place in Pristina, Kosovo.
The Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, which my own country and
Ukraine had a lead role in developing in 1994 and which,
of course, New Zealand ratified some time ago, offers a
framework for dealing with some of these crimes. But the
protections offered by that instrument will remain
fragmented in their application until many more States
have become party to it. Furthermore, perhaps its scope
does not go far enough. The categories of United Nations
operation that the Convention covers are somewhat
narrow. Recent examples of brutal violence in East Timor
against personnel of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor illustrate the scope for possible broadening of the
United Nations operations covered. Additionally, the
Convention, crucially important as it is, does not
accommodate humanitarian workers not specifically tied
into a United Nations operation. This currently poorly
protected group is in need of strengthened protection
under international law. We are sympathetic to the
elaboration of a protocol to extend the range of protection
afforded by the Convention.
In this context, the inclusion of deliberate attacks
on personnel involved in a humanitarian situation or
peacekeeping mission in the Rome Statute as a war crime
over which the International Criminal Court will have
jurisdiction is a welcome step forward and an
acknowledgement of the seriousness of the plight faced
by personnel in these situations. We hope that the Court
will provide an effective forum for enforcing those
protections which currently exist under international
humanitarian law, and that it will contribute towards
ending the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of such
attacks in the past.
There is a particular category of United Nations
staff to whose needs I wish to draw attention today. They
are those staff who are often locally recruited for a United
Nations mission in a wide range of disciplines, depending
on the needs of the particular mission, and include
interpreters, drivers, clerks, cleaners and others. Recent
experience in East Timor, in particular, showed that such

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
people can become principal targets for violence because of
their association with the United Nations. We believe that
more must be done to ensure their protection, including
their better integration into security planning for missions.
In conclusion, we are glad the Council is seized once
again of this important issue, and we look forward to solid
outcomes from this debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of New Zealand for the kind words he
addressed to the presidency.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): There is an acute need for
enhanced protection of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel. There has been an
increasing number of violations of the security of
humanitarian personnel in recent conflicts, including in the
Sudan, Kosovo, Chechnya, Burundi and elsewhere. Norway
therefore welcomes the initiative of Argentina, and the
presence here today of the Argentine Foreign Minister.
In our view, it is essential that the United Nations
and the international community remain seized of the
challenging task of increasing respect for international
humanitarian law and contributing to ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. This requires
compliance with the essential principles and rules of
conduct of armed conflicts, including, inter alia, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols
of 1977. Concrete measures must be taken. The Norwegian
Government welcomes resolution 1265 (1999), adopted by
the Security on 17 September last year, addressing the
importance of safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
personnel to civilians in armed conflicts and the
establishment of a process to consider further appropriate
steps as a follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General.
Within this context, the safety of United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel is a critical
issue. The Norwegian Government worked actively for the
adoption of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, and we are a party to the
Convention. That Convention represents a major
contribution to the safety of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel. Its entry into force
on 29 January last year was an important step forward.
However, in order to make it an effective tool for

10

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
enhancing the protection of United Nations and associated
personnel, more States need to commit themselves to the
Convention. Norway is encouraging other States to ratify
and implement this important instrument, and supports the
decision by the General Assembly last year to request the
Secretary-General to submit by May this year a report
containing analysis and recommendations addressing the
scope of legal protection under the Convention. Norway
has also contributed to the Trust Fund for Security of
United Nations personnel in order to support training and
enhanced security management.
It should be recalled that under international law,
the primary responsibility for the security and protection
of United Nations and associated personnel lies with the
Government hosting a United Nations operation,
conducted under the United Nations Charter or in
accordance with agreements with the relevant
organization. States need to hold States as well as nonState actors accountable for their attacks on humanitarian
workers operating in territory under their control. The
Secretary-General referred to this aspect in the statement
he made in May last year in The Hague, referring to
accountability for “every militia guilty of crimes against
our common humanity.”
The Norwegian Government actively took part in
the process leading towards the adoption of the Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Two weeks ago, on 27
January, the Norwegian Parliament gave its approval to
Norwegian ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We urge all Governments to
make an extra effort with a view to ensuring, through
their early ratification of the Rome Statute, the
establishment of the International Criminal Court without
further delay.
The Norwegian Government is pleased that attacks
against United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel are included in the list of war
crimes under article 8 of the Statute. When established,
the Court will play an important role in bringing to justice
those responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. At this stage, our main priority must be
to ensure the final establishment of the Court, which
presupposes 60 ratifications.
We would also like to mention the question of the
applicability of international humanitarian law in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Norway supports the
general idea of guidelines for peacekeepers. However,
Norway is of the view that the guidelines published by

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
the Secretariat in the Secretary-General's Bulletin need
further study and consultation before they are ripe for
implementation in peacekeeping operations.
Finally, Norway pays tribute to those who have given
their lives in the service of peace, and my country remains
committed to working towards a safer environment for
United Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The statement
made at the beginning of the meeting today by the Deputy
Secretary-General certainly set the tone for our very
interesting and useful debate. As we near the end of the
meeting, I should like to ask the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Louise Fréchette, to make a few comments.
The Deputy Secretary-General: First of all, let me
reiterate our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for placing this
item on the agenda of the Council. It is clear from all the
statements that have been made today that we all share the
same deep sense of concern over the multiplication of grave
incidents — deliberate attacks against United Nations and
humanitarian workers.
Many delegations — most delegations, I think —
have reaffirmed a number of very important principles: that
the primary responsibility for the safety of United Nations
and other humanitarian workers rests with the Governments
of the countries in which we are operating; that the
perpetrators of attacks against United Nations and
humanitarian personnel must be brought to justice; and that
the impartiality and neutrality of humanitarian agencies and
humanitarian workers must be protected.
I very much welcome the commitment of the
Security Council increasingly to factor into its decisions the
security dimensions of its mandates, as exemplified by the
draft presidential statement that the Council will be
adopting shortly. I noted with great satisfaction that many
speakers again supported the notion of the need to
strengthen the international legal framework for the
protection of United Nations and humanitarian workers. I
also noted with great pleasure that a number of countries
have initiated the process of ratification, and that we can
hope to see a good number of new ratifications coming
about in the near future.
As well, I have noted that many countries have
indicated interest in seeing whether the scope of application
of this Convention could be enlarged. Also, there were
many positive references to the important role that the

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
International Criminal Court would play in this matter
once it enters into operation.
I welcome very much the support expressed by
most speakers for the number of concrete measures that
Catherine Bertini and I mentioned in our presentations,
particularly training, and the recognition by many
speakers that to implement some of these measures,
resources will have to be provided.
Let me say in passing, Mr. President, that we
appreciate very much the contribution that you have
announced today to the trust fund that was set up a
couple of years ago for the purpose of providing for
security of United Nations staff.
I believe the next step in the consideration of these
very important issues will be the comprehensive report
that the Secretary-General will issue on the protection of
United Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel. Many of you have invited us to come forward
with concrete proposals, and I can assure you that we will
do that.
Let me finally say, in the name of Catherine Bertini
and all our colleagues in the United Nations system, that
we appreciate very much the moving tributes that you
have all paid to our colleagues who have fallen victim in
the course of their duty as United Nations and
humanitarian workers. I think you will all agree that we
must move beyond words to concrete actions so that, in
the words of one of the speakers today, today's heros do
not become tomorrow's victims.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General very much for her
remarks and for her contribution.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council is gravely concerned
at continued attacks against United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel,
which are in violation of international law
including international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution
1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999 and reaffirms
the statements of its President of 31 March 1993,
on the safety of United Nations forces and

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
personnel deployed in conditions of strife (S/25493);
of 12 March 1997, on condemnation of attacks on
United Nations personnel (S/PRST/1997/13); of
19 June 1997, on the use of force against refugees
and other civilians in conflict situations
(S/PRST/1997/34); and of 29 September 1998, on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations (S/PRST/1998/30).
The Council also recalls General Assembly
resolution 54/192, on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel.
“The Security Council also recalls the report
of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations, and its addendum on the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel (A/54/154
and Add.1), and looks forward to the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 54/192 of
17 December 1999, to be submitted to the General
Assembly in May 2000, which should contain a
detailed analysis and recommendations addressing
the scope of legal protection under the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel of 1994.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction
the entry into force of the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
recognizes its importance for addressing the security
of such personnel and recalls the relevant principles
contained therein. The Council encourages all States
to become party to, and respect fully their obligations
under, the relevant instruments, including the 1994
Convention referred to above.
“The Security Council recalls that, on a
number of occasions, it has condemned attacks and
the use of force against United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel. It
strongly deplores the fact that incidents of violence
have continued, leading to a rising toll of casualties
among United Nations, associated and humanitarian
personnel. The Council strongly condemns the acts
of murder and various forms of physical and
psychological violence, including abduction, hostagetaking, kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and
detention to which such personnel have been
subjected, as well as acts of destruction and looting
of their property, all of which are unacceptable.

12

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
“The Security Council also recalls that the
primary responsibility for the security and
protection of United Nations and associated
personnel, and humanitarian personnel, lies with
the host State. The Council urges States and nonState parties to respect fully the status of United
Nations and associated personnel, and to take all
appropriate steps, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the rules of international law, to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel,
and underlines the importance of unhindered access
to populations in need.
“The Security Council urges States to fulfil
their responsibility to act promptly and effectively
in their domestic legal systems to bring to justice
all those responsible for attacks and other acts of
violence against such personnel, and to enact
effective national legislation as required for that
purpose.
“The Security Council will continue to stress
in its resolutions the imperative for humanitarian
assistance missions and personnel to have safe and
unimpeded access to civilian populations and, in
this context, is prepared to consider taking all
appropriate measures at its disposal to ensure the
safety and security of such personnel.
“The Security Council welcomes the
inclusion as a war crime in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, of attacks
intentionally directed against personnel involved in
a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission
as long as they are entitled to the protection given
to civilians under the international law of armed
conflict, and notes the role that the Court could
play in bringing to justice those responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council expresses the view
that improving the security of United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel,
may require, inter alia, the development and
strengthening of all aspects of the current safety
and security regime in place, as well as the
adoption of effective action to address the impunity
of those who commit crimes against such
personnel.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of issuing clear, appropriate and feasible
mandates for peacekeeping operations, to ensure that
they are applied in a timely, efficient and objective
manner, and of ensuring that all new and ongoing
United Nations field operations include appropriate
modalities for the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel, and humanitarian
personnel. The Council underscores that United
Nations personnel have the right to act in selfdefence.
“The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to complete the process of
conducting a general and comprehensive review of
security in peacekeeping operations, with a view to
elaborating and undertaking further specific and
practical measures to increase the safety and security
of United Nations and associated personnel, and
humanitarian personnel.
“The Security Council considers it important
that a comprehensive security plan be developed for
every peacekeeping and humanitarian operation and
that, during early elaboration and implementation of
that plan, Member States and the Secretariat
cooperate fully in order to ensure, inter alia, an open
and immediate exchange of information on security
issues.

4100th meeting (Resumption 1)
9 February 2000
“The Security Council, bearing in mind the
need to reinforce the responsibility of the host State
for the physical security of United Nations and
associated personnel, also underlines the
importance of including in each status-of-forces
agreement and status-of-missions agreement
specific and practical measures based on the
provisions of the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel of 1994.
“The Security Council recalls the obligations
of all United Nations personnel and associated
personnel, and humanitarian personnel, to observe
and respect the national laws of the host State in
accordance with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
“The Security Council believes it is essential
to continue to strengthen security arrangements, to
improve their management, and to allocate
adequate resources to the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel, and
humanitarian personnel.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/4.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

13
