A/61/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

64

th plenary meeting
Monday, 4 December 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Mladineo
(Croatia), Vice-President, took the Chair.

people, especially during this time of the festive
season.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

Diamonds are one of Africa’s major natural
resources. About 65 per cent of the world’s diamonds,
worth about $8 billion per annum, are sourced from
Africa. In southern Africa, more than 28,000 people are
employed by the diamond industry. At the global level,
about 10 million people are either directly or indirectly
supported by the diamond industry.

Agenda item 10
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Letter from Botswana transmitting the report
on the progress made towards the
implementation of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme (A/61/589)
Draft resolution (A/61/L.27)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by Mr. Festus G. Mogae, President of
the Republic of Botswana.
Mr. Festus G. Mogae, President of the Republic of
Botswana, was escorted into the General
Assembly Hall.
The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the United
Nations His Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae, President of
the Republic of Botswana, and to invite him to address
the Assembly.
President Mogae: In view of the wording of this
agenda item, let me begin by stating that diamonds are
a valuable resource. Clean diamonds have made and
continue to make an enormous contribution to
economic development and bring happiness to many

Botswana owes its advances in development to
the exploitation of minerals, especially diamonds,
which account for about 33 per cent of gross domestic
product, about 75 per cent of export earnings, and
about 50 per cent of Government revenues. All mineral
rights are vested in the State. Revenues earned through
taxes, royalties and dividends from Government
shareholding in the company that mines the diamonds
accrue to the national coffers. Those are revenues that
we have used to develop schools, health facilities and
physical infrastructure.
It is against that background that Botswana,
alongside the international community, is fully
committed to working in partnership and cooperation
with States members of the Kimberley Process to
maintain and enhance the credibility of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme and the legitimate
diamond trade.
I am pleased to present to the General Assembly
the annual report of the Kimberley Process. The
Kimberley Process held its annual plenary in

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-63974 (E)

*0663974*

A/61/PV.64

Gabarone, Botswana, from 6 to 9 November 2006. The
report gives an overview of the activities of the
Kimberley Process during 2006, the challenges that the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme faces, and
strategies agreed by the Gabarone plenary to address
those challenges.
The Kimberley Process is a unique tripartite
arrangement between Governments, non-governmental
organizations and the diamond industry, whose main
objective is to exclude conflict diamonds from the
legitimate trade in rough stones.
Since its inception, the Kimberley Process has
enabled closer interaction between participants,
observers, applicants and various organizations,
providing a valuable platform to consolidate the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, as well as to
explore ways and means of curbing the flow of illicit
diamonds. In that way, the Kimberley Process has been
instrumental in contributing to the prevention of
conflict and the maintenance of peace and security.
The Kimberley Process remains open on a global,
non-discriminatory basis to all countries and regional
economic integration organizations willing and able to
fulfil its requirements. In that regard, countries
continue to apply to and join the Kimberley Process.
During the current year, New Zealand and Bangladesh
joined the Scheme, bringing the total number of
participants to 47, representing 71 countries. That is so
because the 25 European Union member States are
represented by the European Commission as a single
participant. With its current membership, the
Kimberley Process now covers the vast majority of all
States involved in trade in rough diamonds. A number
of countries, such as Cape Verde, the Republic of the
Congo, Gabon, Kazakhstan, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Liberia, Mali, Mexico, Swaziland,
Tunisia and Turkey have expressed interest in joining.
It is the desire of the Kimberley Process to see the
widest possible participation. To that end, it continues
to engage and encourage countries to do so.
The peer review mechanism, the quarterly
statistical submissions and annual reporting by
participants are major tools for monitoring the
implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme by participants. As of the end of November
2006, 34 participants had received review visits. That
compares with 19 for the same period last year. In all, a
total of 43 of the 47 participants have received or

2

invited review visits, thus ensuring the largest number
of participants it has monitored under the peer review
mechanism. Review visits are now increasingly seen
not only as part of a long-term sustained process of
implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, but also as tools for technical assistance, thus
serving the dual purpose of monitoring and support.
Plans are under way to begin a second round of review
visits to build on the lessons learned and successes of
the first round of visits and thus to further strengthen
the monitoring process.
Statistics that the Kimberley Process collects and
analyses form an integral part of monitoring to ensure
that conflict diamonds do not enter the legitimate trade
in rough diamonds. Participants are required to submit
statistics on a quarterly basis, and I am particularly
pleased to report that all participants submitted
statistics for 2005. That is an important improvement
over 2004.
The annual analysis exercise enables specific
concerns for individual participants to be brought out.
Analyses of the 2005 statistics identified data
discrepancies as the most common problem. The bulk
of data discrepancies was, however, resolved through
bilateral reconciliations by participants. In order to
improve statistical reporting and to advance
transparency, the Gabarone plenary agreed that, in
future, summary data on trade and production by value
and volume, as well as counts of certificates issued
under the Certification Scheme, should be released.
During 2006, our major preoccupation has been
the review of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme itself. When the Certification Scheme was
established in 2003, it was agreed that it would be
subjected to periodic reviews to allow participants to
conduct a detailed analysis of all its elements. The
review was to include, among other things,
consideration of the continuing need for the
Certification Scheme, taking into account the
perceptions of the participants and of the continued
threat posed by conflict diamonds at the time of the
review. It was further agreed that the first review
would be conducted within three years of its
implementation. As the Certification Scheme was
implemented in July 2003, the review had to be
undertaken and concluded in time for presentation to
the Gabarone plenary. Indeed, preparations for the
review started at the Gatineau, Canada, plenary, where
an ad hoc working group chaired by Canada was

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

established. The mechanics of the review were agreed
during the Moscow plenary.
The review was completed and presented to the
Gabarone plenary for consideration and adoption. In
broad terms, the review focused on the following three
main areas: first, the impact of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme on the international trade in
rough diamonds and the extent to which the Scheme
has been effective in preventing the flow of conflict
diamonds into the legitimate trade in rough diamonds;
secondly, the technical provisions of the Scheme and
whether they are functioning as well as planned or
require improvement; and thirdly, the operations of the
Scheme, their effectiveness and efficiency.
The findings of the review are that all available
data suggest that the majority of the international trade
in rough diamonds is now carried out within the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. Since the
implementation of the Certification Scheme in 2003, it
has contributed to substantial increases in the volume
and value of rough diamonds exported through official
channels in countries previously affected by conflict
diamonds. The technical provisions of the Certification
Scheme were found to be working well overall. They
were being enforced through a number of seizures of
irregular shipments and prosecutions for infringement
of the Certification Scheme regulations by various
participants.
However, as can be expected with an
international system of such complexity, technical
problems continue to be encountered. The Kimberley
Process continues to address those emerging
challenges. During the review, suggestions were made
regarding possible solutions for dealing with technical
problems. Many of those suggestions were captured in
the report and presented in the form of
recommendations.
Effective implementation of internal controls is
one of the issues that were identified in the review as
an important challenge. A number of recommendations
were put forward to address it. Given that internal
controls form the very foundation of the Certification
Scheme, recommendations in this area require
immediate implementation, as internal controls and
their effectiveness remain the major priority of the
Process.
On the operations of the system, the findings of
the review are that the collection and analysis of

06-63974

statistics, as well as the peer review monitoring
systems, are not only working well but remain essential
tools. Evidently, given the achievements of the
Certification Scheme to date, there can be no doubt
that it must be continued and improved, as appropriate.
Participants, observers and other stakeholders made
many suggestions in the areas of statistical
requirements and the peer review monitoring system.
The majority of those suggestions have been captured
in the recommendations.
The report of the review contained more than 40
recommendations. The Gaborone Plenary endorsed
them following full and constructive deliberations. In
terms of the rules of procedure of the Kimberley
Process, the report will be translated into all the
working languages of the Kimberley Process, which
are English, French, Portuguese, Spanish and
Russian — unfortunately, no African language. That is
similar to the United Nations talking about Africa, with
no African language.
There is overwhelming evidence that the
introduction of the Certification Scheme has had a
positive impact on reducing the trade in conflict
diamonds. However, the mining of diamonds in
northern Côte d’Ivoire, which is under rebel control,
presents a very difficult and challenging situation. The
Kimberley Process is seriously disturbed by the
leakage of Ivorian diamonds into the legitimate trade in
rough diamonds. The problem of diamonds from Côte
d’Ivoire is not new, but it is one that continues to
plague the Kimberley Process. Its solution will require
the collective resolve of the international community.
Côte d’Ivoire prohibited the export of diamonds
from its territory as far back as 2002. That prohibition
is still in force. Consequently, since the beginning of
the implementation of the Certification Scheme,
exports of diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire have been
banned by the authorities in that country. The
introduction of rough diamonds into the legitimate
diamond trade not only threatens the integrity and
credibility of the Kimberley Process but also represents
an area of grave concern to the international
community.
In addition to the nine-point resolution that the
Kimberley Process adopted at the Moscow Plenary to
stop Ivorian diamonds from entering the legitimate
trade in rough diamonds, the Security Council imposed
sanctions on exports of Ivorian diamonds in December

3

A/61/PV.64

2005. That decision effectively prohibited all States —
whether Kimberley Process participants or not — from
dealing in Ivorian diamonds.

Development
Programme;
and
private-sector
organizations such as De Beers and the Dubai Diamond
Exchange.

In implementing the nine-point resolution, the
Kimberley Process conducted a survey of participants
in 2006 to find out if any diamonds suspected of
originating from Côte d’Ivoire had entered the territory
of any of the participants. To date, only one participant
has reported confiscation of a shipment of rough
diamonds suspected of being of Côte d’Ivoire origin.

I am therefore pleased to state that Liberia has
made a great deal of progress in implementing the
recommendations of the May 2006 mission. I am sure
that I speak for everyone when I say that we will
continue to encourage others to support Liberia in its
endeavours to prepare itself to meet the requirements
of and join the Certification Scheme once sanctions are
lifted, which I hope will happen soon.

The situation concerning Côte d’Ivoire’s
diamonds was discussed at length during the Gaborone
Plenary, and a number of measures were agreed to help
contain the leakage of Ivorian diamonds into the
legitimate trade. Those measures will remain a priority
of the Kimberley Process until the problem is resolved.
Of course, other efforts aimed at resolving the Côte
d’Ivoire conflict must be intensified, especially as
diamonds are not the cause of the conflict.
I wish to commend the Government of Liberia for
its strong determination to meet the requirements of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. We welcome
the readiness of the Government of Liberia
constructively to engage the Kimberley Process on the
relevant issues and its preparedness to cooperate in the
search for solutions.
At the invitation of the Liberia Minister of Lands,
Mines and Energy, a Kimberley Process mission was
sent to Liberia in May 2006. That expert mission was
undertaken against the backdrop of an earlier visit, in
February 2005. The 2006 mission was mandated to,
among other things, assess the measures taken by the
Liberian Government to establishment a transparent,
effective and verifiable system to implement the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, with
particular focus on the establishment of a system of
internal controls.
The expert mission reported that, in spite of the
post-conflict difficulties that Liberia faces, the country
has made considerable progress in implementing the
recommendations of the February 2005 mission. It
found that the biggest challenge facing the country was
the establishment of internal controls. On that front,
Liberia is receiving technical assistance from the
United Nations Mission in Liberia; the United States
Government, which, through the Futures Group, has a
consultant working with the Liberian Ministry of
Lands, Mines and Energy; the United Nations

4

The Kimberley Process has, through its peer
review mechanism, recognized that some participants
may require technical assistance to improve or enhance
their capacity fully to implement the Certification
Scheme. In its role as informal coordinator for
technical assistance, the United States has identified
several major assistance programmes, which are now
being implemented. In addition, the United States has
had a long-standing assistance programme in Sierra
Leone. The United Nations Development Programme is
also helping to foster cooperation among the diamondproducing countries of the Mano River Union and
sponsored a conference in June 2006 to promote
regional harmonization of policies. The World
Diamond Council has also provided technical
assistance and training to many participants over the
years.
Let me conclude by taking this opportunity to
express our deep gratitude for the assistance and
cooperation of the United Nations, which has been, and
continues to be, extended to us to the Kimberley
Process and in particular to Botswana as its Chair.
Without the support and cooperation of the United
Nations, the Kimberley Process would not have been
able to visit northern Côte d’Ivoire to assess at first
hand diamond mining activity in that part of the
country, and to understand the challenges that the
situation presents to us all. I am sure that the
Kimberley Process will continue to rely on this support
in its endeavour to eliminate conflicts diamonds. I
reiterate the fact that the Kimberley Process is
committed to working tirelessly to make the diamond
industry one of which the international community can
be truly proud and, above all, an industry that
continues to make a positive difference in the lives of
many people around the world.

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

I wish to end by congratulating the European
Community on its imminent assumption of the Chair of
the Kimberley Process in January 2007. I welcome the
leadership of the European Community, which
represents 25 members of the European Union. The
European Community can count on the strong and
assured support of India as Vice-Chair and, indeed, that
of Botswana as immediate former Chair. The combined
leadership of the European Community and India
should enable us to effectively address the challenges
that the Kimberley Process has identified.
The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic
of Botswana for the statement he has just made.
Mr. Festus G. Mogae, President of the Republic of
Botswana, was escorted from the General
Assembly Hall.
Mr. McNee (Canada): It is my honour to address
the General Assembly today on behalf of Canada,
Australia and New Zealand.
Let me to begin by congratulating His Excellency
the President of Botswana on his very cogent statement
today and congratulate Botswana on a successful term
as Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2006. His report
and the draft resolution that we are adopting today are
testament to the strong leadership provided by
Botswana in the face of serious and challenging issues
that have confronted the Kimberley Process over the
past year.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome the
European Community as the incoming Kimberley
Process Chair for 2007, as well as India as the ViceChair. We look forward to working with your
delegations as we continue to advance the
implementation and the strengthening of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme.

scope of the scheme. The Certification Scheme not
only deprives criminals and non-State armed groups
from easy access to capital, but has also improved the
revenue-generating capacity of Governments formerly
affected by conflict diamonds, such as Angola, Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
impact of this shift in resource flows on the
international community’s conflict prevention and
conflict resolution efforts has been significant.
We are pleased to note the constructive spirit in
which Kimberley Process Governments, industry and
civil society partners continue to effectively implement
and enforce key Kimberley commitments. Canada,
Australia and New Zealand are particularly pleased by
the mobilization of the Kimberley Process community
in response to allegations by the United Nations Group
of Experts regarding Côte d’Ivoire that Ivorian conflict
diamonds have been passing through third countries,
including Kimberley Process members.
To address the situation of one Kimberly Process
member country, a Special Envoy of the Chair of the
Process visited senior officials in Ghana between
30 October and 1 November, and, at the November
plenary, the Kimberley Process subsequently endorsed
an action plan intended to remedy the weaknesses
identified in Ghana’s system of internal controls.
We note with satisfaction that numerous offers of
technical assistance for the implementation of these
measures have been made by Kimberley Process
participants and observers, and we are pleased by the
proactive role the Kimberley Process has played in
addressing this situation. The Kimberley Process will
continue to work with Ghana towards prompt
implementation of this action plan.

Canada, Australia and New Zealand remain fully
supportive of the Kimberley Process, which advances
human security and the prevention of conflict by
preventing conflict diamonds from penetrating the
legitimate diamond market. Recognizing these
objectives, New Zealand recently joined Canada and
Australia as participant members of the Kimberley
Process.

Canada, Australia and New Zealand are also
pleased that the Kimberley Process has adopted the
report of the third year review, which provides an
overview of the progress made by the Kimberley
Process since its implementation in 2003 and outlines a
blueprint for the ongoing improvement of the Process,
articulating a number of concrete measures that may be
taken to this effect. We encourage all Member States
and relevant United Nations institutions and bodies to
cooperate with the Kimberley Process in the
implementation of these measures.

The Certification Scheme is working, and has
already had a major impact on the global diamond
trade, thanks in large measure to the comprehensive

Canada, Australia and New Zealand welcome the
elevation of the group on alluvial production —
formerly a sub-group under the aegis of the working

06-63974

5

A/61/PV.64

group on monitoring — to the status of a full working
group. As a sub-group, this group has already proved
its usefulness, and we are confident that Angola, as the
2007 Chair of the group, will provide the leadership
required to ensure that the group continues to enhance
the Kimberly Process’ ability to respond to the
challenges facing artisanal-alluvial producers.
(spoke in French)
The Kimberley Process is making a major
contribution in breaking the link between natural
resources and armed conflict, and stands as a living
testament to what can be achieved through the honest
partnership of Governments, the United Nations, the
private sector and civil society. It is — and will
remain — an essential tool for our ongoing efforts to
prevent conflict, and we look forward to strengthening
and deepening its implementation and enforcement in
the months ahead.
Mr. Mbuende (Namibia): It gives me pleasure to
participate in the debate on agenda item 10 on the role
of diamonds in fuelling conflicts, in general, and on the
Chair’s report on breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to the prevention and settlement of
conflicts, in particular.
Namibia supports the draft resolution on the item,
which we have co-sponsored for two reasons primarily.
First, it is an expression of our commitment to
international peace and security and particularly to
conflict prevention and resolution. Secondly, it is an
expression of Namibia’s commitment to protect the
integrity of our diamond industry.
We are conscious of the relationship between
conflicts and natural resources. Natural resources such
as diamonds, oil, timber, gold, copper, water and land
have had the potential to generate conflict. Some
conflicts have been engendered by a struggle over the
control of natural resources. In such cases, the conflict
was an expression of competition over the control and
utilization of resources. The party that had control over
the resources used the revenues derived therefrom to
finance its war efforts. There are also other instances
where resources are not necessarily the cause of
conflict but in which the parties to the conflict use
revenues from natural resources to sustain it.
Diamonds have been used in that regard, hence the
expression “blood diamonds”.

6

Namibia has committed itself to protecting the
integrity of its diamond industry by ensuring that its
diamonds are not contaminated by blood diamonds. We
also want to ensure that our industry does not
whitewash blood diamonds. We cannot allow one of
our most important industries to undermine our
commitment to international peace and security. It is
not only our standing and credibility that is at stake but
also the very existence of the industry. The diamond
industry is too important for the development of our
country, and its integrity and long-term sustainability
must be ensured. Transparency in the marketing of our
diamonds is of utmost importance in that regard. It was
against that background that Namibia joined the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.
It is our considered opinion that the Kimberley
Process guarantees transparency in the marketing of
our diamonds. It also provides a unique opportunity for
cooperation among diamond-producing countries. The
Kimberly Process may, in fact, be regarded as a moral
marketing cartel of the diamond-producing countries.
We are very pleased to note that this cartel has been
growing and that most of the rough diamonds traded
internationally today are of conflict-free origin.
It is important to note that there have been
positive developments in a number of diamondproducing countries that were at war, such as Angola,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and
Sierra Leone. Those countries are engaged in
peacebuilding processes and have either taken
measures to ensure, or are in the process of ensuring,
that diamonds are used for the promotion of
development rather than for fuelling conflicts. That
does not mean that those countries are fully compliant
with the Kimberley Process; what is important is to
acknowledge that an environment that can lead to full
compliance has been created.
Allow me to pay special tribute to the sister
Republic of Botswana that has led the Kimberley
Process in 2006 and during whose tenure a number of
positive developments took place. Namibia would also
like to congratulate the European Community and
India, which are to assume the chairmanship and vicechairmanship, respectively, of the Kimberley Process
for 2007. Namibia would like to assure them of its full
cooperation in ensuring that their mandates are
crowned with success.

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

Ms. Barrett (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to sponsor draft resolution
A/61/L.27, on the role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
We have made great strides in controlling the flow of
conflict diamonds since the late 1990s witnessed brutal
atrocities in Africa. Governments have joined forces
with the diamond industry and civil society to control
and monitor international trade in rough diamonds
through the Kimberley Process. We join those in the
international community who commend the Kimberley
Process for dramatically reducing the flow of conflict
diamonds and thus contributing to regional security,
peace and stability.
Through the multilateral efforts of the Kimberley
Process, we have made remarkable progress in a
relatively short period of time to control conflict
diamonds. Under the bold leadership this year of the
Botswana Government, Kimberley Process participants
took further steps to increase controls on the
international diamond trade including calls for
increased Government oversight of the industry.
Kimberley Process participants have been
generous with technical assistance to help diamondproducing countries implement controls, but we
encourage other donors to step forward to help
diamond producers build capacity to monitor the
diamond trade from mine to export. The cooperation of
the diamond industry and its commitment to a zerotolerance policy towards conflict diamonds has been
essential to Kimberley Process efforts. The Kimberley
Process has been made stronger by the efforts of civil
society to identify emerging problems and promote
constructive solutions.
The Kimberley Process should not rest on its
laurels. Much has been accomplished, but the trade in
conflict diamonds remains a threat to some of the most
fragile States around the globe. The Kimberley Process
will need to remain vigilant and respond quickly when
evidence emerges that diamonds may be financing
conflict or threatening regional stability. We appreciate
the European Community’s willingness to take over the
role of chair of the Kimberley Process in 2007, and
look forward to a year of continued close cooperation
in the efforts to control conflict diamonds.
Mr. Chulkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, allow me, on behalf of the Russian
Federation, to congratulate our colleagues from
Botswana for their successful performance of their

06-63974

function, this year, as Chair of the Kimberley Process,
in particular, the effective work on the preparation and
agreement on the draft resolution for this session of the
General Assembly, entitled, “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”
(A/61/L.27).
In our view the Kimberley Process has, to date,
made substantial progress towards achieving its main
goals and has significantly strengthened its authority. It
is essential to further increase the efforts of the
international
community,
including
through
strengthening the potential of the United Nations and
the decisions taken to resolve the issue of monitoring
the mining and trade of conflict diamonds, taking into
account the continuing armed conflicts in several
African countries.
It is clear that the growth in the effectiveness of
the Kimberley Process depend directly on ensuring the
universality of its membership and harmonization of
the actions of all of its working groups. Those were the
main issues focused on by Russia during its
chairmanship of 2005. Botswana — whose
chairmanship we greatly appreciate — did the same
this year.
In this context, I would like to note that, given
the importance of the diamond business and its specific
nature, it is important to expand the number of
participants, as well as observers, of the Kimberley
Process by including the organizations that form the
infrastructure of the world market, namely banks and
insurance and diamond-shipping companies.
The draft resolution that we are about to adopt
today reflects the substantial progress and activity
achieved under the aegis of the Kimberley Process
during 2006. However, we are convinced that much
still remains to be done to increase the effectiveness of
the implementation of the mandate of this process. In
future, we will need to strengthen one of its main
bases, which is the use of the international Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, which is designed to
ensure real monitoring and control of the international
movement of diamonds, guaranteeing feedback
between exporters and importers.
For its part, the Russian Federation, including
State entities, the diamond industry and civil society, is
ready to continue to make every possible effort within

7

A/61/PV.64

the United Nations, the Kimberley Process and other
international organizations and forums, and also on a
bilateral basis, in order to prevent the use of diamonds
to fuel international conflicts. We call on other United
Nations members to do this as well, particularly those
who have still not joined the Kimberley Process.
In conclusion, I would like to wish the European
Community as Chair and India as Vice-Chair of the
Kimberley Process next year every success in their
important posts and ensure them that the Russian
Federation will continue to participate most actively
and cooperate actively in the Kimberley Process.
Mr. Barnes (Liberia): The Liberian delegation
cherishes the opportunity to participate in the current
General Assembly consideration of agenda item 10,
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
Since its establishment, the United Nations has so
far succeeded in averting the recurrence of a third
global war. However, it is noteworthy that we have not
been successful in eliminating inter-State and civil
conflicts or removed their causes.
In this context, Liberia, as a country that is
emerging from a devastating civil conflict, knows only
too well the role a precious commodity such as
diamonds can play in prolonging conflicts and its
destabilizing consequences, as witnessed in the Mano
River subregion. Through it all, Liberians have learned
the hard way, thus enabling us to finally renounce war
and embrace peace with a commitment to build a
democratic society in which the interests of all are
served and basic rights are protected. To this end, I
wish to echo the gratitude of the Government and
people of Liberia to Member States, specialized
agencies and the United Nations system, particularly
the African Union (AU) and the United States of
America and the European Union, for their continued
overwhelming support during and after our civil
conflict.
In just three years, the recognition of the
Kimberley Process by the United Nations Security
Council and this great body as an effective mechanism
for eliminating conflict diamonds from the legal trade
of rough diamonds has paid considerable dividends in
the resolution of conflicts around the globe. I,
therefore, heartily congratulate Botswana for the very
professional and effective manner in which the affairs
of the Kimberley Process have been conducted, and for
the comprehensive report contained in document

8

A/61/589, which highlights the progress achieved thus
far and the challenges ahead. Similarly, my
felicitations go to the European Community and India
as incoming Chair and Vice-Chair, respectively, with
the expression of deep satisfaction that the Kimberley
Process will continue to excel under their illustrious
leadership.
Liberia’s sponsorship of draft resolution
A/61/L.27 speaks to its determination and commitment
to address the ills that necessitated the imposition of
sanctions by the United Nations Security Council. The
draft text underscores the recognition of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme as the best alternative
solution against trafficking in conflict diamonds and
reaffirms the commitment of the international
community to resolve the dangers posed by the illicit
trading of rough diamonds. I, therefore, recommend its
unanimous adoption by the Assembly.
The Government of Liberia is very pleased with
the exceptional cooperation it has continued to receive
from the Kimberley Process through technical support
and training programmes that are aimed at capacitybuilding, in compliance with the requirements for
lifting the sanctions on the exportation of rough
diamonds. The Government is also deeply encouraged
by the positive results of the assessment mission of the
Kimberley Process to Liberia in May 2006. We were
also pleased to participate in the recent Gaborone
plenary meeting in November 2006, which afforded
our Government an excellent opportunity to outline the
progress achieved regarding the possibility of lifting
the sanctions.
In this connection, I am pleased to reiterate some
of the concrete measures that have been undertaken by
the Government of Liberia relative to compliance with
the Kimberley Process. These include the revision of
mineral and mining regulations; the training of mineral
inspectors and mining agents, in addition to those who
are currently receiving diamond valuation training in
Kimberley, South Africa; the construction of
Government diamond offices with the assistance of
De Beers and the Dubai Diamond Exchange and
providing gemmology equipment and furnishings;
conducting seminars for miners, brokers, dealers and
exporters so as to ensure better awareness of the new
regulations; the enhancement of cooperation and
partnership with the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
which assisted in the construction of our regional
offices; developing a strict mechanism of control and

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

establishing a chain of custody, allowing the
Government to track diamonds from mining site to
exportation; and technical cooperation and the
exchange of useful information between Government
diamond officials from Liberia and Sierra Leone,
which further strengthened the renewed cordial
relations between these two Mano River Basin
countries. In addition, the Government of Liberia
conducted a workshop on diamonds for development in
Monrovia, the purpose of which was to ensure that the
proper mechanisms are implemented so as to make
certain that the proceeds accrued from the sale of
diamonds are not used to fuel conflicts, but rather to
promote social and economic development for the
Liberian people.
In addition to the aforementioned measures, the
Government has identified four priority areas in the
peacebuilding and recovery process, involving security,
the rule of law and good governance, economic
revitalization and basic services and infrastructure
development.
As Liberians, we have learned from the painful
experience of war. Whether rightly or wrongly, we all
share a collective guilt in the systematic destruction of
our beloved country, Hence, the overall task of
reconstruction remains the inescapable responsibility
of Liberians. Ultimately, this will require difficult
choices, involving, among other things, fiscal
prudence, the wise use of limited resources and the
adoption of policies that are sensitive to the needs of
citizens.
In essence, the efforts of the Administration are
aimed at providing for the basic needs of our citizenry
through the effective use of our existing resources
before appealing to the goodwill of the international
community. Our people are eager to reap the dividends
of peace, which the Government must deliver quickly,
without fail. It is in this context that, on behalf of my
fellow compatriots, I call for the urgent lifting of the
United Nations sanctions imposed on the exportation
of rough diamonds from Liberia, which has fully
complied with the requirements thereof.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania joins in thanking
Mr. Festus Gontebanye Mogae, President of the
Republic of Botswana, for introducing the 2006 report
of the Kimberley Process to this body.

06-63974

Tanzania is acutely conscious of the fact that the
Kimberley Process was born as a response to public
revulsion and a grass-roots movement against blood
diamonds — diamonds extracted from conflict zones
and traded legally and illegally to finance wars in
countries of origin and beyond at enormous and
unconscionable sacrifice of the lives of innocent
civilians, mostly women and children.
The Kimberley Process was the right thing to do.
It remains the right framework to combat the trade in
diamonds from conflict zones. The Kimberley Process
Certification
Scheme,
which
established
an
internationally recognized certification system for
rough diamonds as well as national export and import
standards, is a beginning step that deserves support
from all of us.
We welcome the third-year review of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, as requested
under resolution 60/182. We commend the report for its
balance and objectivity. The collaboration between
Governments, industry and civil society must be
sustained and strengthened.
We also welcome the technical assistance
rendered
to
enhance
capacity-building
for
implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme. This is an area of significant importance if
loopholes attributable to capacity issues are to be
plugged.
We also commend initiatives meant to promote
public-private partnership in the diamond sector, such
as the De Beers community development programme,
in partnership with our Government, to benefit local
populations in diamond-producing areas. This is a true
illustration of the positive benefits of the legitimate
diamond trade with and in producing countries. Such
partnership needs to be broadened and reinforced as a
way of attracting greater public confidence in the fair
and equitable exploitation of resources in the interests
of all stakeholders, including local communities.
We note that the 2006 report on the Kimberley
Process did not seek to gloss over the deficiencies
facing the mechanism. Despite a United Nations
embargo, conflict diamonds continue to be traded.
What needs to be done is to strengthen the Certification
Scheme by promoting a rigorous monitoring and
standards programme. Illegal trafficking in diamonds
by rebel groups and non-State entities and their
associated networks need special, coordinated

9

A/61/PV.64

strategies by enforcement agencies involved in the
process.
In Africa, the people of Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Angola have suffered immensely as a result
of diamond-financed conflict. We can never do enough
to alleviate their pain. However, we must never be
found to have failed in establishing credible
mechanisms to combat the phenomenon of blood
diamonds.
The Kimberley Process is a voluntary scheme. It
is not a perfect arrangement. It is something that we
are able to agree on under current conditions. It is a
framework we continue to strengthen and improve. We
must also continue to be sensitive to our collective
commitment to ensuring that natural resources are an
endowment that promotes the welfare and development
of countries and their peoples. A strengthened
regulatory and monitoring regime will serve that
objective better.
In our view, the spirit and the commitments
underwriting the Kimberley Process represent a step in
the right direction.
Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): As a participating
State in the Process Certification Scheme, Sierra Leone
has the honour to join in welcoming the President of
Botswana, Mr. Festus G. Mogae, to the General
Assembly, and to thank him for his presentation of the
latest report of the Process to the Assembly. My
delegation associates itself with his statement and is
pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution contained in
document A/61/L.27.
The United Nations and the international
community are aware of the painful and devastating
impact that conflict or so-called blood diamonds have
had on the peace, security and well-being of Sierra
Leone. Indeed, it is no surprise that Sierra Leone has
been used — and in many cases overused — as a
typical example of the link between the illicit trade in
rough diamonds, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, the prolongation of armed conflicts and
the systematic violations of human rights associated
with such conflicts.
As a diamond-producing country, Sierra Leone
has therefore faithfully participated in the Certification
Scheme since its inception. We have also made our
own modest contribution to the success that the

10

Scheme continues to enjoy as a transparent, inclusive,
non-discriminatory, credible and pragmatic global
partnership aimed at curbing and eliminating the trade
in conflict diamonds. Based on our own experience, we
believe that the Scheme has become a viable
mechanism for the promotion of international peace,
security and economic cooperation. In its capacity as a
member of the sub-group on Alluvial Mining, and its
coordinator for West Africa, Sierra Leone is actively
involved in the exchange of views on best practices in
the area of alluvial production.
Three years before the Process was established,
and conscious of the negative role that diamonds were
playing in fuelling the rebel war in Sierra Leone, the
Government suspended the export of rough diamonds
for approximately three months, in order to expedite
the establishment and operation of a certification
regime for rough diamonds exported from Sierra
Leone. With the support of the Security Council and
the assistance of the international community,
including the diamond industry and non-governmental
experts, the Certification of Origin regime for trade in
diamonds paved the way for the adoption of a historic
Security Council resolution — resolution 1306 (2000).
Adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter, the
resolution called on all States to take the necessary
measures to prohibit the direct or indirect import of all
rough diamonds from Sierra Leone to their territory,
except those rough diamonds controlled by the
Government of Sierra Leone through the Certificate of
Origin regime.
The Sierra Leone certification regime was a
model for national and international efforts to curb the
flow of conflict diamonds. Within a period of two
years — and notwithstanding problems associated with
controlling alluvial mining and with the activities of
unscrupulous individuals who were determined to beat
the system — the Security Council determined that
certification was indeed helping to curb the illicit trade
in diamonds from Sierra Leone. By 2003, the Council
had found it necessary to terminate the prohibition.
That was an acknowledgement of the significant
progress that Sierra Leone had made in ending the
conflict and extending Government authority
throughout the country, including in the diamondproducing areas.
When blood diamonds are eradicated, as we hope
they will be — especially from our West African
subregion — there will still be a need for effective

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

machinery at the national, regional and international
levels to ensure that the people in diamond-producing
developing countries such as Sierra Leone derive more
benefit from that precious mineral. With the end of the
rebel war, we are making every effort to ensure that our
diamonds make a positive contribution to our postconflict reconstruction and poverty alleviation
programme.
We continue to implement our diamond reform
policies, including more effective internal control
mechanisms. We are also taking proactive initiatives,
such as the creation of the Diamond Area Community
Development Fund. Although the export duty on Sierra
Leone’s rough and uncut diamonds is only 3 per cent of
their export value, a quarter of the money we derive
from the export duty is deposited in the Community
Development Fund, to be used for community projects
such as the rebuilding or building of schools and
clinics. The Fund, which has disbursed more than
$2.5 million during the past five years, also serves as a
means of discouraging illicit mining and smuggling.
At the subregional level, Sierra Leone is trying to
address the problem of the cross-border illicit trade in
diamonds through, for example, harmonization of some
of the provisions of the legal codes of the Mano River
Union countries, which include Liberia, Guinea and
Sierra Leone. We consider the Subregional Conference
on Diamonds for Development, held in Monrovia last
June, as an important step forward in addressing some
of the challenges facing the diamond industry in those
three countries. High-level delegations from Guinea
and Liberia have been visiting Sierra Leone to obtain,
among other things, relevant information on the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme in Sierra
Leone.
In that connection, Sierra Leone is pleased that
Liberia has expressed interest in participating in the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. We also
welcome the progress reported by Liberia in
establishing a national diamond certification regime
that should meet the requirements of the Kimberley
Process. Sierra Leone looks forward to having Liberia
as a member of the West Africa subgroup on alluvial
mining.
As emphasized in the latest report of the
Kimberley Process (A/61/589, annex), every annual
assessment since the introduction of the Process has
seen significant increases in the percentage of

06-63974

legitimate diamond production and sales. According to
the report, the Kimberley Process has had a significant
impact in curbing the illicit production of and trade in
diamonds in countries affected by conflict diamonds.
Sierra Leone can attest to that. Our national
Certificate of Origin regime, which became operational
in 2000, and the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme have made invaluable contributions to the
development of our diamond production. The value of
rough diamonds exported from Sierra Leone rose from
$10 million in 2000 to approximately $142 million in
2005.
Other factors contributing to that positive
development include the end of the rebel war and the
establishment of peace; the restoration of effective
Government control over the mining areas; the creation
of incentives to help curb illicit mining; and
international cooperation, thanks to the contributions
of the United Nations, the diamond industry and civil
society worldwide.
Diamonds
are
a
precious
international
commodity. The legitimate trade in diamonds is
international in character, and so are the illicit
transactions involving rough diamonds, or so-called
conflict diamonds. The first preambular paragraph of
the draft resolution before the Assembly (A/61/L.27)
recognizes that the trade in conflict diamonds
continues to be a matter of serious international
concern. Therefore, the need for continued
international cooperation and action to curb the trade in
conflict diamonds cannot be overemphasized.
The efficacy and the future success of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme will continue
to depend on the highest level of international
cooperation among producing, exporting and importing
States, as well as on the contributions of regional
organizations and civil society. In that regard, let me
paraphrase the words of the Minister of Mineral
Resources of Sierra Leone, speaking at a diamond
consumer confidence workshop in Windhoek last
month. He said that international cooperation is the
way forward to enhance consensus and world peace.
Despite the gap between developing and developed
countries in terms of technological and financial status,
they must all cooperate in finding solutions not only to
the problems besetting the diamond industry, but also
to other world problems. The Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme is a good example of how

11

A/61/PV.64

problems of
addressed.

an

international

nature

should

be

Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I have the honour
to speak on this important issue, on which there has
been a great deal of progress in recent years. We
congratulate Botswana and the European Commission
on their election as Chair and Vice-Chair, respectively,
of the Kimberley Process for 2006. Our congratulations
go also to Canada on the excellent work undertaken
during its chairmanship.
We associate ourselves with the statement made
by His Excellency President Festus Mogae of
Botswana in his capacity as Chairman of the
Kimberley Process, and we express our sincere
gratitude for the very clear and comprehensive report
presented to us this morning. We are indeed very
honoured with his presence at this important
discussion.
Angola remains fully committed to working
jointly with relevant governmental organizations of
diamond-producing and importing countries, as well as
legitimate private diamond companies and nongovernmental organizations in fighting this serious
scourge.
Efforts to address the problem of conflict
diamonds started some time ago. In 2000, the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) mining
ministers, meeting in Cape Town, agreed that
international action was imperative, as the problem
negatively affects the trade in legitimate diamonds,
which makes a critical contribution to the economies of
those countries.
In this connection, when we last debated the role
of diamonds in fuelling conflict, the overwhelming
sense of the General Assembly was already one of
satisfaction at the progress achieved by the
international community through the Kimberley
Process. The Assembly then welcomed in particular the
introduction of a peer review system to provide
assurances that all participants in the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme are in fact implementing
its provisions.
Today, there is no doubt at all that the Kimberley
Process is indeed a tremendous success. The excellent
and comprehensive report presented by Botswana
(A/61/589, annex), as Chair of the Kimberly Process
itself, makes clear the extent to which the Certification

12

Scheme has modified the diamond trade at the global
level. We believe that only the widest possible
participation in the Certification Scheme will achieve
the results we all seek: a reduction of conflict and
human suffering caused by the illegal trade in
diamonds and other natural resources. The Kimberley
Process has, therefore, given Governments a greater
degree of control over their diamond resources. It has
also clamped down on smuggling, with numerous cases
of illicit diamonds being seized which would otherwise
have ended up illegally in world markets.
Through resolutions 55/56 and 56/263, the
General Assembly has a crucial role in breaking the
link between the illicit transaction in rough diamonds
and armed conflict. This represents an important
contribution to the prevention and settlement of armed
conflicts.
The progress achieved in the implementation of
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme clearly
demonstrates what can be attained by the international
community in addressing such issues of serious
international concern as the illicit trade in diamonds. It
is hoped that the United Nations will continue to
support the implementation of the Kimberly Process,
since it helps to ensure the effective implementation of
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions concerning the trade in conflict diamonds.
Since the very beginning, Angola has played an
important role in international efforts to address the
global trade in conflict diamonds, which have had a
devastating impact on peace and human security in
several African countries, particularly in Angola. In the
case of Angola, it was important to ensure that
decisions of the Security Council regarding sanctions
were in fact translated into effective action. A key
lesson drawn from this process concerns the measures
to strengthen the role of the United Nations in the
implementation of targeted sanctions, the necessary
coordination among United Nations actors and the
importance of sanctions committees that have the
leading role in monitoring the implementation of
Security Council targeted sanctions.
With the lessons learned from the implementation
of international coordinated action in dealing with
illicit diamond trading, particularly in Africa, at the
initiative of Angola — specifically by the President of
the Republic of Angola, His Excellency José Eduardo
dos Santos — the African Countries Diamond

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

Producers Association was recently established. This
organization is designed to coordinate action by
African producers on the world diamond market, as
well as to harmonize legislation and encourage foreign
investment in the industry. This confirms the concerns
of the Government of Angola in relation to the issue of
the continued illegal trade of blood diamonds,
particularly from Africa, as the continent accounts for
nearly 60 per cent of world diamond production.
The newly established Diamond Producers
Association could play a pivotal role as an institution
that can bring together the producer countries and
provide a forum for permanent cooperation in order to
achieve sustainable growth in the industry, not only in
Africa, but also in the world. In this connection, both
producer and consumer countries should adopt
measures to allow more active and concerted
intervention with a view to transforming the gains
achieved through diamonds into development.
The positive results achieved so far in the fight
against conflict diamonds and the illicit trade in
diamonds are evidence that the more united countries
are, the better. The international community should
continue to promote progress in the Kimberley Process
in order to put an end to the role that diamonds play in
financing wars and international terrorism.
Allow me to make a final observation. The wars
that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme was
designed to tackle have now ended. But Angola
believes that as a conflict prevention instrument, the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme remains vital.
The draft resolution now before the General Assembly
(A/61/L.27) will send a strong and clear message that
the international community is not complacent
regarding the continuing potential of diamonds in
fuelling conflict.
We will continue to do whatever it takes to see
that the issue of conflict diamonds continues to be
addressed in a comprehensive manner through the
implementation of the international certification
scheme. We therefore look forward to the unanimous
adoption of the draft resolution before us today, which
we also sponsor.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3208 (XXIX) of
11 October 1974, I now call on the observer for the
European Community to speak on behalf of the
European Union.

06-63974

Mr. Carro Castrillo (European Community): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and
Serbia, and the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European economic
area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
align themselves with this statement.
Let me first welcome the excellent report of the
Chair of the Kimberley Process (A/61/589, annex), His
Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae, President of the
Republic of Botswana.
The annual debate on the role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict is an important opportunity for us to
take stock of the progress made by the international
community
through
the
Kimberley
Process
Certification Scheme in combating the scourge of
conflict diamonds.
This year we can, of course, draw on the findings
of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme’s own
internal review, based on the submissions of its
participating countries, civil society, industry and,
importantly, some of the United Nations missions on
the ground in those countries that have suffered the
curse of conflict diamonds.
The core finding of this review is that the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme remains
necessary. The peace in some of the countries affected
by conflict diamonds, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone, remains all
too fragile, and the United Nations diamond embargoes
against Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire would be far less
effective if there were no Certification Scheme.
The review also found that the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme is effective. It is not watertight,
not perfect, but it is, nonetheless, effective in fulfilling
its mandate. As mentioned by the Ambassador of
Angola, we should also not neglect the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme’s deterrent effect,
although it is, of course, harder to measure.
The review also concluded that the flexible
structure of the Certification Scheme has served it
well, allowing it to focus on the issues, rather than on
institutional questions. We think this makes it a real

13

A/61/PV.64

model for the international community, a mechanism
that was established relatively swiftly and focused on
practical and pragmatic solutions, drawing strength
from its legitimacy, inclusiveness and peer pressure, as
well as from the access it offers to the international
rough diamond trade. The Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme may prove inspirational for
dealing with other conflict resources, while
recognizing the specificities of each context.
The review did recommend a number of
improvements that could be made to the Kimberley
Process
Certification
Scheme.
Progress
on
implementing these recommendations will be a key
challenge for next year.
Another challenge will be that of dealing with the
situation of diamond production in the northern, rebelheld part of Côte d’Ivoire. The Kimberley Process has
cooperated closely with the United Nations on this
issue. The situation continues to present a very
significant challenge to the Process, and indeed to
peace and security in West Africa.
In the case of Ghana, the Kimberley Process has
come up with an innovative way to respond to the
finding by the United Nations group of experts that
Ivorian diamonds may be being exported out of Ghana
with a Kimberley Process Certificate. This solution
protects the credibility of the Kimberley Process by
providing a temporary mechanism to ensure that only
stones of Ghanaian origin are exported with Ghanaian
Kimberley certificates, while protecting Ghana’s
legitimate miners. Ghana will have a fair chance to
improve its implementation, and its procedures will be
evaluated after three months by a peer review mission.
Cooperation with the United Nations in this
matter is crucial, as shown by these examples. We hope
that the close working relationship between the
Kimberley Process and the relevant bodies of the
United Nations on this issue will continue over the
course of the coming year. There could be no better
indication of the importance of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme and its inclusiveness than the
continuing number of countries interested in joining. In
the past year, New Zealand and Bangladesh have
joined, and there are a number of others in line.
We are delighted to see the continuing progress in
innovative the Kimberley Process peer review system,
which has seen virtually every participant, and some
applicants, invite on-the-ground monitoring and

14

assessment of its implementation. As the Kimberley
Process matures, it is starting to develop greater
confidence, as demonstrated by the decision at the
recent Gaborone plenary meeting to start publishing its
own statistics on the international diamond trade. We
hope that people will look at this data and analyse
them, and come to us if they think the data indicate
potential and possible implementation issues.
As for technical cooperation, the Process, under
the effective coordination of the United States, has
made good progress in ensuring that appropriate
technical assistance, including training and geological
production assessment, is made available to meet
identified needs.
The European Union (EU) would like to express
its gratitude to Botswana for the leadership it has
displayed as Chair during the past year. Its authority
has derived from its own unquestioned integrity and
strong domestic controls. It has successfully steered the
Kimberley Process through some turbulent times to
sensible ways forward on West Africa and the review
recommendations. The EU wishes to add its voice to
those of other Governments, the international diamond
industry and non-governmental organizations in
congratulating Botswana on its achievements.
Botswana, like its predecessors, South Africa, Canada
and the Russian Federation, has set high standards
indeed for the European Community to live up to as it
succeeds those countries in the Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2007. We look forward to working closely
with India, which has been appointed Vice-Chair for
2007, with all the participants and observers in the
Kimberley family, and with the international
community, as we build on past achievements to
further strengthen implementation of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme and to confront the
challenges that continue to face us, in particular with
respect to Côte d’Ivoire, and any others that may arise.
Let me conclude by urging the General Assembly
to reiterate its strong support for the Kimberley Process
by endorsing the draft resolution. The prospect of
conflict diamonds remains a potential threat in a
number of cases, and an actual one in the case of Côte
d’Ivoire. The support of the United Nations is
necessary for the Kimberley Process to successfully
confront these challenges.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/61/L.27, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors of A/61/L.27:
Australia, Austria, Belarus, Central African Republic,
Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Guinea, Guyana, Indonesia, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mauritius, Moldova,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Ukraine and United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
May I take it that the Assembly decided to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.27?
Draft resolution
(resolution 61/28).

A/61/L.27

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 10?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider today the reports of the Sixth Committee
on agenda items 33, 75 to 80, 100, 110, 118, 128, 148
and 153.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Mamadou Moustapha Loum of Senegal, to
introduce in one intervention the reports of the Sixth
Committee before the General Assembly.
Mr. Loum (Senegal), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee (spoke in French): It is my honour today to
introduce to the General Assembly the reports of the
Sixth Committee on the 13 agenda items referred to it,
namely items 33, 75 to 80, 100, 110, 118, 128, 148 and
153. First, I will introduce the reports on items 75, 77,
80, 100, 110, 118 and 128, followed by those on items
33, 76, 78, 79, 148 and 153.
I wish first to address agenda item 75, entitled
“Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts”. The relevant report of the

06-63974

Sixth Committee is contained in document A/61/451,
and the draft resolution that the Sixth Committee is
recommending to the General Assembly for adoption
appears in paragraph 8 of that document. By that draft
resolution, the General Assembly would welcome the
universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of
1949, would call upon all States parties to the Geneva
Conventions that have not yet done so to consider
becoming parties to the Additional Protocols at the
earliest possible date, and would call upon States
parties to the Additional Protocols to ensure their wide
dissemination and full implementation.
It would also request the Secretary-General to
submit to the Assembly at its sixty-third session a
report, based on information received from Member
States and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, on the status of the Additional Protocols relating
to the protection of victims of armed conflicts, as well
as on measures taken to strengthen the existing body of
international humanitarian law. Moreover, the
Assembly would decide to include in the provisional
agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts”.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and hopes that the General Assembly
will be in a position to do the same.
I now wish to introduce the report of the Sixth
Committee on agenda item 77, entitled “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-ninth session”. The
relevant report of the Sixth Committee is contained in
document A/61/453. The two draft resolutions that the
Sixth Committee recommends be adopted by the
General Assembly appear in paragraph 9 of that
document.
By draft resolution I, entitled “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-ninth session”, the
General Assembly, among other things, would approve
the efforts made and the initiatives taken by the
Commission as the core legal body of the United
Nations system in the field of international trade law. It
would also reaffirm the importance, in particular for
developing countries, of the work of the Commission
concerned with technical assistance and cooperation in
the field of international trade law reform and

15

A/61/PV.64

development. In that connection, it would appeal to
Governments, the relevant bodies of the United
Nations system, organizations, institutions and
interested persons to make voluntary contributions to
the special Trust Fund. Moreover, the Assembly would
decide to continue in the competent Main Committees,
its consideration of granting travel assistance to the
least developed countries that are members of the
Commission.
The General Assembly would encourage the
Commission to further explore different approaches to
the use of partnerships with non-State actors in the
implementation of its mandate, in particular in the area
of technical assistance. The Assembly would also
welcome the preparation of digests of case law relating
to texts before the Commission as well as the decision
of the Commission to hold, in the context of its fortieth
session, in 2007, a congress on international trade law
in Vienna.
Draft resolution II under this agenda item relates
to the revised articles of the Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law, and
the recommendation regarding the interpretation of
article II, paragraph 2, and article VII, paragraph 1, of
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York on 10 June
1958. By this draft resolution, the General Assembly
would express its appreciation to the Commission for
formulating and adopting the revised articles and the
recommendation, and would request the SecretaryGeneral to make all efforts to ensure that the
documents become generally known and available.
The Sixth Committee adopted the two draft
resolutions without a vote and hopes the General
Assembly will be in a position to do the same.
Allow me now to turn to agenda item 80, entitled
“The rule of law at the national and international
levels”. The relevant report of the Sixth Committee is
contained in document A/61/456, and the draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee to the
General Assembly for adoption is contained in
paragraph 9 of the report.
By that draft resolution, the General Assembly
would request the Secretary-General to seek the views
of Member States on matters pertaining to the issues
addressed in the draft resolution and to submit a report
thereon at its sixty-second session.

16

It would also request the Secretary-General to
prepare an inventory of the current activities of the
various organs, bodies, offices, departments, funds and
programmes within the United Nations system devoted
to the promotion of the rule of law at the national and
international levels for submission at its sixty-third
session, and to submit an interim report thereon at its
sixty-second session.
It further requests the Secretary-General, after
having sought the views of Member States, to prepare
and submit at its sixty-third session, a report
identifying ways and means for strengthening and
coordinating the activities in question, with special
regard to the effectiveness of assistance that may be
requested by States in building capacity for the
promotion of the rule of law at the national and
international levels.
By this draft resolution the General Assembly
would also urge the Secretary-General, as a matter of
priority, to submit the report on the establishment of a
rule of law assistance unit within the Secretariat, in
conformity with paragraph 134 (e) of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and hopes that the General Assembly
will be in a position to do the same.
I turn now to agenda item 100, entitled
“Measures to eliminate international terrorism”. The
relevant report of the Sixth Committee is contained in
document A/61/457, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is
contained in paragraph 11 of that document.
By the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would call on all Member States, the United
Nations and other appropriate international, regional
and subregional organizations to implement the United
Nations Global Anti-Terrorism Strategy in all its
aspects without delay, and would recall its pivotal role
in the implementation and updating of the Strategy. It
would also recall its invitation to the Secretary-General
to contribute to the future deliberations and request
him when doing so to provide information on relevant
activities within the Secretariat to ensure overall
coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism
efforts of the United Nations system. Furthermore, the
Assembly would decide that the Ad Hoc Committee
established by resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996
shall meet on 5, 6 and 15 February 2007 to continue on

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

an expedited basis to elaborate the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism and to discuss the
question of convening a high-level conference under
the auspices of the United Nations.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and hopes that the General Assembly
will be in a position to do the same.
I now draw attention to agenda item 110, entitled
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”.
The relevant report of the Sixth Committee is
contained in document A/61/458, and the draft decision
that the Sixth Committee is recommending to the
General Assembly for adoption appears in paragraph 7
of that document, by which the General Assembly
would note that the Sixth Committee has decided to
adopt its provisional programme of work for the sixtysecond session of the General Assembly, as proposed
by the Bureau. According to the provisional
programme of work, the Committee would begin work
on 8 October 2007 and would complete its next session
on 16 November 2007.
The Sixth Committee adopted its provisional
programme of work for the sixty-second session
without a vote, and I hope that the General Assembly
will be in a position to do the same, by adopting the
draft decision contained in paragraph 7 of the report.
Concerning
agenda
item
118,
entitled
“Programme planning”, the relevant report of the Sixth
Committee is contained in document A/61/459. The
Sixth Committee considered the item and concluded
that the subject did not call for any decision to be taken
by the Committee. Accordingly, there is no draft
resolution on the item.
Concerning
agenda
item
128,
entitled
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”, the
relevant report of the Sixth Committee is contained in
document A/61/460. The draft decision adopted by the
Sixth Committee appears in paragraph 10 of the report.
By that decision, the Sixth Committee would hold
a resumed session of 10 meetings in March 2007, to
consider the legal aspects of the report of the Redesign
Panel on the United Nations system of administration
of justice (A/61/205), taking into account, as
appropriate, the comments that will be made by the
Secretary-General on that subject, as well as those that
may be made by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.

06-63974

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote and hopes that the General Assembly
will be in a position to do the same.
(spoke in English)
I invite the Assembly to consider agenda item 33,
entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”. The
relevant report of the Sixth Committee is contained in
document A/61/450, and the draft resolution that the
Sixth Committee is recommending to the General
Assembly for adoption appears in paragraph 7 of that
document. Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, decide to establish
an Ad Hoc Committee open to all State Members of the
United Nations or members of the specialized agencies
or of the International Atomic Energy Agency, for the
purpose of considering the report of the Group of Legal
Experts established by the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution 59/300 to provide advice on the best way
to succeed so as to ensure that the original intent of the
Charter of United Nations can be achieved, namely that
United Nations staff and experts on mission would
never be effectively exempt from the consequences of
criminal acts committed at their duty station, or
unjustly penalized, in accordance with due process.
The Ad Hoc Committee would meet from 9 to 13 April
2007 and would report on its work to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session, under the item
entitled “Criminal accountability of United Nations
officials and experts on mission”. The Sixth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote, and I hope
that the Assembly will be in a position to do the same.
I turn now to agenda item 76, entitled
“Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives”. The relevant
report of the Sixth Committee is contained in document
A/61/452, and the draft resolution that the Sixth
Committee recommends to the Assembly for adoption
is set out in paragraph 7 of that document.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, strongly condemn acts of
violence against diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives, as well as against missions and
representatives of international intergovernmental
organizations and officials of such organizations, and
would urge States to take all appropriate measures at
the national and international levels to prevent any

17

A/61/PV.64

such acts of violence and to ensure, with the
participation of the United Nations where appropriate,
that such acts are fully investigated with a view to
bringing offenders to justice.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
I now invite the Assembly’s attention to agenda
item 78, entitled “Report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifty-eighth session”.
The relevant report of the Sixth Committee is
contained in document A/61/454 and the three draft
resolutions recommended to the Assembly for adoption
are reproduced in paragraph 13 of that document.
By the terms of draft resolution I, entitled
“Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-eighth session”, the General Assembly
would, inter alia, take note of the report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its fiftyeighth session and recommend that the Commission
continue its work on the topics in its current
programme, taking into account the observations of
Governments, whether submitted in writing or
expressed orally in debates in the General Assembly.
The Assembly would also express its appreciation for
the work accomplished by the Commission at its fiftyeighth session, noting in particular its various
accomplishments. The Assembly would also draw the
attention of Governments to the importance for the
Commission of having their views on various topics on
its agenda, as requested in chapter III of the 2006
report of the Commission, including in particular the
draft articles and commentaries on the law of
transboundary aquifers as well as information on
legislation and practice on the topic of “The obligation
to extradite or prosecute”. Moreover, the Assembly
would take note of the inclusion of five new topics in
the Commission’s long-term programme of work.
The Assembly would also address organizational
matters concerning the working methods of the
Commission, the structure of the Commission’s report
and conference servicing issues, in the light of
previous decisions made by the Assembly concerning
the documentation and summary records of the
Commission. The Commission would meet at the
United Nations Office at Geneva from 7 May to 8 June
and from 9 July to 10 August 2007.

18

Moreover, the draft resolution refers to the
improvements in the relationship between the Sixth
Committee and the Commission, welcomes and
encourages the improved dialogue, including informal
consultations, and encourages delegations to adhere to
the structured work programme in the debate on the
Commission’s report. It recommends that the debate on
the report of the Commission at its fifty-ninth session
commence on 29 October 2007.
By the terms of draft resolution II, entitled
“Diplomatic protection”, the General Assembly would
express its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for its continuing contribution to the
codification
and progressive development
of
international law, take note of the draft articles on
diplomatic protection presented by the Commission
and invite Governments to submit reports concerning
the recommendation by the Commission to elaborate a
convention on the basis of its draft articles. The
Assembly would also decide to include in the
provisional agenda of its sixty-second session an item
entitled “Diplomatic protection”.
Draft resolution III is entitled “Allocation of loss
in the case of transboundary harm arising out of
hazardous activities”. By its terms, the Assembly
would again express its appreciation to the
Commission for its continuing contribution to the
codification
and progressive development
of
international law, take note of the principles on the
allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm
arising out of hazardous activities, which appear in the
annex, and commend them to the attention of
Governments. It would also decide to include an item
entitled “Consideration of prevention of transboundary
harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss in
the case of such harm” in the provisional agenda of its
sixty-second session.
The Sixth Committee adopted the three draft
resolutions without a vote and it is hoped that the
Assembly will do likewise.
I now draw the attention of the Assembly to
agenda item 79, entitled “Report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”. The
report of the Sixth Committee on this item is contained
in document A/61/455. The Sixth Committee
recommends for adoption by the General Assembly

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

two draft resolutions, contained in paragraph 13 of the
report.
Under the terms of the preamble of the draft
resolution I, entitled “Commemoration of the sixtieth
anniversary of the International Court of Justice”, the
Assembly would, inter alia, note that 2006 marks the
sixtieth anniversary of the Court’s inaugural sitting.
By operative paragraphs of the draft resolution,
the Assembly would, inter alia, solemnly commend the
International Court of Justice for the important role
that it has played as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations over the past 60 years in adjudicating
disputes among States, and express its appreciation to
the Court for the measures adopted to operate an
increased workload with maximum efficiency.
Furthermore, the Assembly would encourage
States to continue considering recourse to the Court by
means available under its Statute, and call upon States
that have not yet done so to consider accepting the
jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute.
It would also call upon States to consider means of
strengthening the Court’s work, including by
supporting the Secretary-General’s Trust Fund to Assist
States in the Settlement of Disputes through the
International Court of Justice.
Under terms of draft resolution II, entitled
“Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization”, the General Assembly, among other
things, would note with appreciation the adoption of
the working methods of the Special Committee,
contained in paragraph 72 of its 2006 report.
In addition, the Assembly would request the
Special Committee, at its next session in 2007, to
continue its consideration of all proposals concerning
the question of the maintenance of international peace
and security in all its aspects in order to strengthen the
role of the United Nations. The Special Committee
would also be requested to continue to consider, on a
priority basis and in appropriate substantive manner
and framework, the question of the implementation of
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
related to assistance to third States affected by the
application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter, and to consider, also on a priority basis, ways
and means of improving its working methods and
enhancing its efficiency with a view to identifying
widely acceptable measures for future implementation.

06-63974

It would also be requested to keep on its agenda the
question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between
States.
Furthermore, the Special Committee would be
requested to consider, as appropriate, any proposal
referred to it by the General Assembly in the
implementation of the decisions of the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session, in September 2005, that concern the Charter of
the United Nations and any amendments thereto.
Additionally, the Assembly would commend the
Secretary-General for the progress made in the
preparation of studies of the Repertory of Practice of
United Nations Organs, including the increased use of
the internship programme of the United Nations and
the wider cooperation with academic institutions for
this purpose, as well as the progress made towards
updating the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security
Council. It would also call upon the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts towards updating the two
publications.
Let me now turn to agenda item 148, “Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
The report of the Sixth Committee on this item is
contained in document A/61/461. The draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is set out
in paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly
would,
inter
alia,
endorse
the
recommendations and conclusions of the Host Country
Committee; consider that the maintenance of
appropriate conditions for the normal work of the
delegations and the missions accredited to the United
Nations and the observance of their privileges and
immunities are in the interest of the Organization and
all Member States; and request the host country to
continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that
might arise, and to take all measures necessary to
prevent any interference with the functioning of
missions.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. It is hoped that the Assembly will be in
a position to do likewise.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
agenda item 153, “Requests for observer status in the
General Assembly”. The relevant Committee report is
contained in document A/61/462, and the three draft

19

A/61/PV.64

resolutions recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption are reproduced in paragraph 11 thereof.

made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.

By draft resolutions I, II and III entitled,
respectively, “Observer status for the OPEC Fund for
International Development in the General Assembly”,
“Observer status for the Indian Ocean Commission in
the General Assembly” and “Observer status for the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations in the General
Assembly”, the General Assembly would decide to
invite, respectively, the OPEC Fund for International
Development, the Indian Ocean Commission and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to participate
in the sessions and the work of the Assembly in the
capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to
implement the present resolutions.

May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

These three draft resolutions were adopted by the
Sixth Committee without a vote, and I hope that the
Assembly will be in a position to do the same.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without a
vote in the Sixth Committee.

(spoke in French)
This concludes my introduction to the reports of
the Sixth Committee. Allow me at this stage, to express
my great gratitude to the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, His Excellency Ambassador Juan Manuel
Gómez Robledo of Mexico, for his tireless efforts and
the efficiency and energy, which he brought to his
guidance of the Sixth Committee at this session. I
should also like to thank the other members of the
Bureau — particularly Mr. Ganeson Sivagurunathan of
Malaysia, Mr. Theodor Cosmin Onisii of Romania and
Mr. Stefan Barriga of Liechtenstein — for their very
valuable cooperation and support. Finally, I wish to
thank all delegations and all of my colleagues whose
essential contributions ensured the success of the
Commission at its present session. And I cannot forget
to pay special tribute to the Secretariat, whose
dedication and professionalism have been of invaluable
assistance.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Sixth Committee that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position. The
positions
of
delegations
regarding
the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been

20

“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in the plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.

Agenda item 33
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/450)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Criminal accountability of United
Nations officials and experts on mission”. The Sixth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/29).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
33.

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

Agenda item 75

Agenda item 77

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts

Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its
thirty-ninth session

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/451)

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/453)

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take decisions on draft resolutions I and II.

We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/30).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 75?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 76
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/452)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/31).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 76?
It was so decided.

Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-ninth session”. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 61/32).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Revised articles of the Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law, and
the recommendation regarding the interpretation of
article II, paragraph 2, and article VII, paragraph 1, of
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, 10 June
1958”. The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/33).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 78
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-eighth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/454)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I, II and III.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the International Law Commission on the work of
its fifty-eighth session”. The Sixth Committee adopted

06-63974

21

A/61/PV.64

it without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/38).

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 61/34).

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 79?

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Diplomatic protection”. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/35).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Allocation of loss in the case of
transboundary harm arising out of hazardous
activities”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/36).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 78?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/455)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the
International Court of Justice”. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 61/37).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Report of the Special Committee on the
Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization”. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

22

It was so decided.
Agenda item 80
The rule of law at the national and international
levels
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/456)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/39).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 80?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 100
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/457)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/40).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
draft resolution just adopted.

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

Mr. Gómez González (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joined the consensus
on the draft resolution in paragraph 11 of the report of
the Sixth Committee contained in document A/61/457,
on measures to eliminate international terrorism.
However, we would like to point out that in the twentyfirst preambular paragraph, which refers to recent
developments and initiatives at the regional and
subregional level to prevent and suppress international
terrorism, the reference to a military organization —
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization — does not
imply that the perspectives of such an organization
should be accepted. Nor, in my delegation’s opinion,
should it set a precedent for future consideration of this
very important issue. My delegation will continue to
provide support in the quest for a global consensus that
allows for concrete and concerted actions to combat
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 100.
Agenda item 110
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/458)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft decision,
entitled “Provisional programme of work of the Sixth
Committee for the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 110.

Agenda item 118
Programme planning
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/459)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
118.
Agenda item 128
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/460)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision.
The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 128.
Agenda item 148
Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/461)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/41).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 148?
It was so decided.

06-63974

23

A/61/PV.64

Agenda item 153
Requests for observer status in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/462)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I, II and III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Observer status for
the OPEC Fund for International Development in the
General Assembly”. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 61/42).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Observer status for the Indian Ocean
Commission in the General Assembly”. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/43).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Observer status for the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations in the General Assembly”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/44).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of agenda item 153.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee
before it.
Agenda item 44 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/61/L.16)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 44 at its
47th and 48th plenary meetings, held on 3 November
2006.

24

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/61/L.16. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolution A/61/L.16, entitled “International Decade
for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the
Children of the World, 2001-2010”.
I wish to announce that since the introduction of
the draft resolution, the following countries have
become sponsors: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, the
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, the Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, the Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Suriname, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, the
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.16?
Draft resolution
(resolution 61/45).

A/61/L.16

was

adopted

The Acting President: I wish to inform Member
States that action on draft resolution A/61/L.11 will be
taken at a later date, to be announced.
The General Assembly has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of agenda item 44.

06-63974

A/61/PV.64

Agenda item 108 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution (A/61/L.13)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 108 and
its sub-items (a) to (t) at its 38th and 39th plenary
meetings, held on 20 October 2006.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.13.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution contained in document
A/61/L.13, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations”, sponsored by the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam, and sponsored also by 72 other countries
from the Asia-Pacific region, Africa, Latin America,
the Caribbean and Europe, which are listed in
documents A/61/L.13 and A/61/L.13/Add.1.
ASEAN is a dynamic, outward-looking
organization with a long history of close relations with
various countries and regional and international
organizations, in particular the United Nations. Home
to more than 500 million people representing 8 per cent
of the world population, with a combined gross
domestic product of almost $900 billion and total trade
of over $1 trillion, ASEAN has a significant impact on
world affairs, both politically and economically.
ASEAN was founded on the same principles as
those guiding the United Nations. In their relations
with one another, ASEAN member countries exhibit
mutual respect for the independence, sovereignty,
equality, territorial integrity and national identity of all
nations; recognize the right of every State to a national
existence free from external interference, subversion
and coercion; adopt a policy of non-interference in one
another’s internal affairs; settle differences and
disputes by peaceful means; renounce the threat or use
of force; and undertake effective cooperation among
themselves.

06-63974

ASEAN and the United Nations have had a long
history together, having begun their relationship,
through the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), when ASEAN was first established in 1967.
In the four decades that have since elapsed, that
relationship has been nurtured and developed. The first
ASEAN-United Nations Summit, held at Bangkok on
12 February 2000, and the adoption of two General
Assembly resolutions on ASEAN–United Nations
cooperation, in 2002 and 2004, have also served to
elevate and strengthen the relationship.
The second ASEAN-United Nations Summit,
held on 13 September 2005 at United Nations
Headquarters in New York, further enhanced that
relationship and provided future direction for
cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations.
During the Summit, ASEAN leaders and the United
Nations Secretary-General agreed to further broaden
ASEAN-United Nations cooperation with the
involvement of various United Nations specialized
agencies on key issues related to development, such as
poverty eradication, the Millennium Development
Goals, energy security, the prevention and control of
infectious diseases, disaster management, transnational issues, and peace and security. We would like
to highlight the progress that has been made so far in
the context of cooperation in those areas.
In the area of development, UNDP, in
conjunction with ASEAN, continues to conduct
training programmes and workshops to strengthen the
capacities of Member States in designing and
formulating project proposals as well as manage the
regional integration process in accordance with various
ASEAN plans of action.
On energy security, United Nations agencies have
been working with ASEAN to find appropriate ways
and means to strengthen international efforts to
promote the more efficient use of energy. The ASEAN
Centre for Energy is currently closely cooperating with
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific (ESCAP), the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and UNDP on various projects
such as energy-integrated urban planning and the
promotion of local manufacturing of renewable energy
equipment in ASEAN.
In the area of health, ASEAN's closer
collaboration with the relevant United Nations
agencies has resulted in greater assistance in

25

A/61/PV.64

preventing
diseases.

and

controlling

resurging

infectious

As concerns disaster management, ASEAN and
the United Nations, through the support and assistance
of UNDP, are discussing the implementation of
humanitarian emergency response coordination in
disaster-relief operations and in public awareness and
capacity-building, as agreed at the Special ASEAN
Leaders’ Meeting on the Aftermath of the Earthquake
and Tsunami.
On peace and security, ASEAN continues to
support the United Nations in its role of maintaining
international peace and security, developing friendly
relations among nations and achieving international
cooperation in the resolution of international problems.
ASEAN initiatives such as the Zone of Peace, Freedom
and Neutrality Declaration, the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in South-East Asia, the Declaration of
ASEAN Concord, the Treaty on the South-East Asia
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, the establishment of the
ASEAN Regional Forum, the ASEAN Plus Three

26

process, the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in
the South China Sea, and regional actions undertaken
in cooperation with the United Nations with regard to
Cambodia and East Timor, have significantly
contributed to peace, security and stability in the
region.
This year, ASEAN has been granted observer
status in the General Assembly, which will further
deepen cooperation between ASEAN and the United
Nations. ASEAN’s status as an observer in the United
Nations will also broaden and deepen ASEAN's
interaction with other United Nations Member States
and regional and international organizations in their
common pursuit of peace, justice and the rule of law.
We are extremely grateful to all those countries which
have sponsored the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and ASEAN. We hope that
the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus, as
was the previous one during the fifty-ninth session.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

06-63974
