22

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

ship of the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation and support for the efforts
and constructive steps taken by the Secretary-General,
especially the diplomatic process initiated by him, in the
search for a solution to the problem;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue those
efforts with a view to promoting a political solution, in
accordance with the provisions of the present resolution,
and the exploration of securing appropriate guarantees for
the non-use of force, or threat of force, against the political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict non-interference in each other's internal
affairs and with full regard for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to submit to Member States a report on the situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security".
74th plenary meeting
13 November 1985

40/13. International relief to Colombia
The General Assembly,
Deeply distressed by the loss of lives, the number of
afflicted persons and the enormous destruction wrought by
the volcanic activity ofNevado de! Ruiz, affecting areas of
the departments of Caldas, Tolima and Valle de! Cauca in
Colombia,
Noting the efforts of the Government and people of
Colombia to save lives and alleviate the sufferings of the
victims of this natural disaster,
Considering the enormous effort that will be required to
alleviate the grave situation caused by this natural disaster,
Recognizing that the magnitude of the catastrophe and
its effects will require, as a complement to the effort being
made by the people and Government of Colombia, a demonstration of international solidarity to ensure the necessary multilateral co-operation in order to meet the immediate emergency in the affected areas, as well as to
undertake the task of reconstruction,
1. Expresses its solidarity and support to the Government and people of Colombia in this tragedy;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States, international and regional agencies, non-governmental organizations and individuals providing emergency relief to
Colombia;
3. Calls upon the Governments of the Member States
to contribute generously to the relief and reconstruction
efforts in the affected areas and, to the extent possible, to
channel their assistance through the United Nations system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize
resources in order to assist in the relief and reconstruction
task of the Government of Colombia;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to co-ordinate
the multilateral assistance and, in consultation with the
24 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session. vol. I, Reso/utwns, p.
135.

Government of Colombia, to determine the emergency
and reconstruction needs of the affected areas.
79th plenary meeting
15 November 1985

40/19.

Return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of 19
November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/18 of
11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of
29 November 1979, 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December
1980, 36/64 of 27 November 1981 and 38/34 of 25
November 1983,
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, 24 adopted on 14
November 1970 by the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in co-operation with the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 25
Noting with satisfaction that following its appeal other
Member States have become parties to the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,
Aware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that they
may constitute collections representative of their cultural
heritage,
Noting with satisfaction that some countries have taken
positive steps towards the return or restitution of museum
pieces, archives and objets d'art to their countries of origin,
Reaffirming the importance of inventories as an essential tool for the understanding and protection of cultural
property and for the identification of dispersed heritage
and as a contribution to the advancement of scientific and
artistic knowledge and intercultural communication,
Deeply concerned at the clandestine excavations and the
illicit traffic in cultural property that continue to impoverish the cultural heritage of all peoples,
Supporting the solemn appeal made on 7 June 1978 by
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the return of irreplaceable cultural heritage to those who created it,
I. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of
Illicit Appropriation on the work they have accomplished,
in particular through the promotion of bilateral negotiations, for the return or restitution of cultural property, the
preparation of inventories of movable cultural property,
the reduction of illicit traffic in cultural property and the
dissemination of information to the public;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic
treasures contributes to the strengthening of international
co-operation and to the preservation and flowering of uni2.I A/40/344.

II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

versal cultural values through fruitful co-operation
between developed and developing countries;
3. Recommends that Member States adopt or
strengthen the necessary protective legislation with regard
to their own heritage and that of other peoples;
4. Invites Member States to continue drawing up, in
co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, systematic inventories of
cultural property existing in their territory and of their cultural property abroad;
5. Also invites Member States engaged in seeking the
recovery of cultural and artistic treasures from the sea-bed,
in accordance with international law, to facilitate by
mutually acceptable conditions the participation of States
having a historical and cultural link with those treasures;
6. Appeals to Member States to co-operate closely with
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or
its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and to conclude bilateral agreements for this purpose;
7. Also appeals to Member States to encourage the
mass information media and educational and cultural
institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general
awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural property to its country of origin;
8. Endorses the opinion expressed at the World Conference on Cultural Policies, held at Mexico City from 26
July to 6 August 1982, that the return of cultural property
to its country of origin should be accompanied by the
training of key personnel and technicians and the provision of the necessary facilities for the satisfactory conservation and presentation of the property restored; 26
9. Welcomes the steady increase in the number of
States parties to the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property;
IO. Invites once again those Member States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Return or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin".
87th plenary meeting
21 November 1985

40/20. Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity, 27
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of
CO•!)peration ~tween_ the United Nations and the Organizatlon of African Umty and the practical measures taken
for their implementation, in particular resolution 39/8 of 8
November 1984, and its resolution 39/29 of 3 December
1984 on the critical economic situation in Africa and the
Declaration annexed thereto,
265ee N38/456, p. 12. para. 17.
27 N40/S36.
28 See N40/666.
29 Jbid., annex I, declaration AHG/Ded. I IXXI).

23

Taking note of the relevant resolutions, decisions and
declarations adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its forty-second ordinary
session and by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of that organization at its twenty-first ordinary
session, which were held at Addis Ababa from IO to 17
July and from 18 to 20 July 1985, respectively, 28
Taking note also of the resolutions, decisions and declarations adopted by the Organization of African Unity on
the promotion of co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Noting, in particular, the Declaration on the Economic
Situation in Africa and Africa's Priority Programme for
Economic Recovery 1986-1990, annexed thereto, adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first session, 29
which was devoted mainly to the critical economic situation in Africa,
Considering the important statement by the current
Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity of 21 October
1985, 30 particularly with regard to the critical economic
situation in Africa as well as other matters of concern to
the two organizations,
Gravely concerned about the serious and deteriorating
economic situation in Africa, in particular the effects of the
prolonged drought, desertification and the adverse effects
of the international economic environment on the African
States,
Recalling, in this connection, the Lagos Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held
at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980, 31
Recognizing the need for closer co-operation between
the Organization of African Unity and all specialized agencies, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in realizing the goals and objectives set forth in the
Lagos Plan of Action,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southern Africa arising from the continued domination of
the peoples of the area by the minority racist regime of
South Africa and conscious of the need to provide
increased assistance to the peoples of the region and to
their liberation movements in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Conscious of its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa to help them cope with the situation caused by the acts of aggression committed against
their territories by the apartheid regime of South Africa,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the situation of the
refugees in Africa and the urgent need for increased internation~I assistance to help African countries of asylum
cope with the heavy social, economic and administrative
burden imposed on their fragile economies,
Recognizing the important role which the various information units and departments of the United Nations system can play in disseminating information to bring about
a greater awareness of the grave situation prevailing in
southern Africa as well as the social and economic problems and the needs of African States and their regional and
subregional institutions,
30 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session. l'/enary
Meetings, 42nd meeting.
31 A/S-11/14, annex I.
