United Nations

S/PV.4098

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4098th Meeting
Monday, 7 February 2000, 12.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Listre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Fowler
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Dejammet
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Letter dated 23 December 1999 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1999/1285)
Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1270 (1999) on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (S/2000/13 and Add.1)

00-28157 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth Year
The meeting was called to order at 12.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Letter dated 23 December 1999 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1999/1285)
Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1270 (1999) on the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (S/2000/13
and Add.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Security Council have before them the
letter dated 23 December 1999 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1999/1285, and the second report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution
1270 (1999) on the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, documents S/2000/13 and Add.1.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, regarding the situation in
Sierra Leone.
I give the floor to the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Annabi: Since we last briefed the Security
Council on 12 January, the situation in Sierra Leone has

2

4098th meeting
7 February 2000
remained relatively stable, although there have been a
number of serious incidents, to which I will refer in this
briefing.
As members of the Council are aware, in the letter
of 23 December addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the Secretary-General, as well as in his
subsequent report to the Council of 11 January, the
Secretary-General informed the Council that the
Government of Nigeria had decided to repatriate its troops
participating in the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in Sierra Leone.
On 13 January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria wrote to the Secretary-General indicating that his
Government was
“prepared to suspend for 90 days the withdrawal of
those forces deemed necessary to maintain security
in Sierra Leone if they can be re-flagged as United
Nations peacekeeping troops”.
In anticipation of the adoption of the draft resolution that
would expand the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), we have initiated negotiations with a highlevel Nigerian delegation headed by the Chief of Staff of
the Nigerian Armed Forces, Major-General Malu, which
in fact started in Freetown today. The purpose of these
talks is to discuss the modalities for the incorporation of
additional Nigerian troops and equipment into UNAMSIL.
As of today, there are reportedly 5,500 ECOMOG troops
remaining in Sierra Leone, mostly concentrated in and
around Freetown peninsula.
Turning now to UNAMSIL’s deployment, Council
members will remember that, in view of the withdrawal
of Nigerian troops from several key locations in Sierra
Leone at the end of December last year, UNAMSIL had
to accelerate its own deployment, despite the substantial
risks in doing so, to Makeni, Magburaka, Kenema and
Daru. At present, United Nations troops are also
deployed in the Freetown peninsula, at Lungi airport and
its vicinity, Papel and Tasso Islands, Port Loko, Lunsar,
Masiaka, Rogberi and Mano Junction. A quick-reaction
company from India, as well as a guard and
administrative company and an engineer company, are
also deployed in and around Freetown. In addition, a
reconnaissance is underway in the area of Kailahun in
preparation for the deployment of the Indian battalion to
that area.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth Year
The total strength of the military component of
UNAMSIL currently stands at 4,830 personnel, including
232 military observers. It should be noted, however, that
some battalions that have joined UNAMSIL lack essential
equipment, which of course affects their operational
capabilities. It should also be noted that during the course
of last month there were several incidents in which
UNAMSIL peacekeepers were confronted by rebel
elements, but did not respond, in our view, in a satisfactory
manner. This is of course a matter of particular concern to
us here at Headquarters, but also to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, and
to the Force Commander, Major-General Jetley. The matter
was extensively addressed and discussed at the troop
contributors’ meeting, which was held on Friday of last
week, and on Friday the Military Adviser also held a
separate meeting to discuss these issues with the
representatives of the major troop contributors. At the
same time, the Special Representative and the Force
Commander have been consulting on the ground with all
the contingent commanders to impress on them the need to
apply UNAMSIL’s rules of engagement resolutely, and the
need to apply them strictly, in accordance with the
mandates entrusted to UNAMSIL by the Security Council.
Simultaneously, the Special Representative is working with
Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma in order to put an
end to the recent attempts by rebel elements to restrict
UNAMSIL’s freedom of movement, and in order to secure
the return of the weapons and equipment that have been
seized from United Nations troops by these rebel elements.
The security situation in the country, I have to say,
remains difficult, with a continued high level of ambushes,
lawlessness and banditry in a number of areas. Continued
attempts to restrict the freedom of movement of United
Nations personnel in rebel-held areas are also, as I just
mentioned, a source of major concern. While Freetown and
Lungi remained relatively calm, there was in recent weeks
a discernible increase in rebel-related activity, in particular
along the Port Loko-Lungi road. In Port Loko itself,
following a grenade explosion in a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) camp, the security
situation has remained tense. Ceasefire violations have also
been reported in the areas of Occra Hills, Pepel Island and
Masiaka. In addition, UNAMSIL has reported tension at
Daru and Segbwema as a result of movements by armed
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) elements.
On the other hand, since we last briefed the Council,
more than 60 child soldiers have been released by ex-Sierra
Leone Army (SLA) rebel commanders at Occra Hills.

4098th meeting
7 February 2000
As regards the disarmament process, it has continued
to be slow, except for in the Port Loko area, where a
large number of additional combatants were disarmed
recently. As of 3 February — the end of last week —
7,616 ex-combatants had been disarmed. There continue
to be incidents in which ex-combatants arrive at DDR
sites with no weapons or with only hand grenades. It
should be noted that at a recent Joint Monitoring
Commission meeting, held in Freetown, rebel
representatives claimed that the RUF leadership had not
allowed their commanders to surrender their weapons.
Such ambivalence on the part of the rebel leaders of
course raises questions regarding their readiness to
cooperate in good faith with the DDR process and to
implement their commitments under the Lomé
Agreement.
In the meantime, there have been indications that
President Kabbah, Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul
Koroma may issue a press release proposing 29 February
as the deadline for the end of the disarmament process.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
believes — and we agree of course — that any deadline
for disarmament should be realistic. He is currently
discussing this issue with the President and the other
parties concerned.
Regarding the human rights situation, on 20 and 21
January two United Nations human rights assessment
missions were conducted in Port Loko and Kabala. In
Port Loko, most human rights abuses appear to be
perpetrated by ex-SLA elements from the Occra Hills
area. There are almost daily reports from this area of
looting, burning of houses, harassment and abductions of
civilians, as well as of sexual abuse and individual
abductions.
In the meantime, in Kabala, incidents of harassment,
abduction and rape somewhat subsided last month.
However, the civilian population continues to be harassed
by ex-SLA combatants roaming the area in search of food
and shelter. In RUF-dominated areas around Alikalia, the
continued imposition of so-called taxation is having an
effect on local food availability.
There has been some progress with regard to the
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. The Attorney-General and the Minister of
Justice of Sierra Leone on 2 February informed the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that the
draft statute to establish the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission had been finalized. It is expected that the

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth Year
draft statute will be circulated to the Cabinet shortly, with
a view to its adoption by Parliament, hopefully later this
month. At the same time, UNAMSIL and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
continue to assist the Government in its preparations for the
establishment of the Human Rights Commission.
As regards the humanitarian situation, plans for the
rapid expansion of humanitarian operations inside the
country, starting with Makeni, continue to be delayed by
insecurity. A comprehensive inter-agency humanitarian
assessment mission to those areas was postponed until this
week due to rebel activity. In Kabala, humanitarian
workers also continue to be harassed by disarmed
combatants. As a result, despite the efforts of United
Nations agencies, humanitarian activities in the northern
and eastern parts of the country remain limited.
The World Bank, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme have just completed a high-level
mission to Sierra Leone to explore operational responses
aimed at strengthening the linkage between humanitarian
assistance and early reconstruction and development.
Preliminary consultations to this effect with members of the
humanitarian community are scheduled to take place shortly
in Geneva.
Finally, a word about recent political developments.
On 24 January, the second meeting of the Joint
Implementation Committee was held in Freetown. This
meeting confirmed the commitment of ECOWAS to remain
fully involved in the peace process. The current Chairman
of ECOWAS, President Konaré of Mali, has announced his
intention to undertake — together with President Kabbah,
Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma — visits to the
provinces of Sierra Leone, in order to try to give a fresh
impetus to the DDR process. President Konaré also
appointed a Special Envoy for Sierra Leone to ensure
effective coordination between ECOWAS and other partners
in the peace process.
The implementation of the Lomé Agreement, however,
remains difficult. On 20 January, while addressing RUF
commanders in Makeni, Foday Sankoh instructed them not
to allow the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers.
The Special Representative, Mr. Adeniji, reacted to this
with a strongly worded public statement, which in turn led
Foday Sankoh to state that his comments had been
misunderstood.

4

4098th meeting
7 February 2000
On 23 January, Foday Sankoh, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Commission of the Management of
Strategic Resources, National
Reconstruction and
Development (CMRRD), announced a moratorium on all
mining activities, as well as the cancellation of existing
mining licenses issued before 24 January.
This
announcement was publicly supported by the Government.
Some parliamentarians, however, have voiced their
uneasiness with this decision. In this connection, it
should be noted that neither the CMRRD nor the
Commission for the Consolidation of Peace are yet
operational, and the Government is currently consulting
with Mr. Sankoh and Mr. Koroma on how to expedite the
work of these institutions. In the meantime, Mr. Koroma
officially resigned from the Sierra Leone Army on 28
January, apparently to be able to pursue his goals through
political means, while Mr. Sankoh publicly alluded to the
possibility of running for the presidency in the elections
to be conducted next year.
In conclusion, we feel that it would be important for
regional leaders and Security Council members, whether
individually or collectively, to continue to engage all
parties in this process to impress upon them the need to
fulfil their commitments under the Lomé Agreement and
to cooperate fully with UNAMSIL in the implementation
of its mandate. In this connection, President Konare’s
proactive approach towards the peace settlement in Sierra
Leone is a very encouraging development. The proposed
joint visit of President Konare, President Kabbah,
Mr. Sankoh and Mr. Koroma to the provinces also
highlights the urgent need to extend State administration
throughout the country.
It is hoped that the establishment of a credible
UNAMSIL presence in strategic locations throughout
Sierra Leone, including in and around Kailahun, will
facilitate that process. We and the Special Representative
are actively working towards that end. At the same time,
it would also be important to pursue and strengthen the
ongoing bilateral and multilateral efforts regarding the
training of the Sierra Leonean military and civilian police
in order to advance the implementation of the Lomé
Agreement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Annabi for his comprehensive briefing.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We are
very grateful to Mr. Annabi for his briefing and for all
the hard work that the Department of Peacekeeping

Security Council
Fifty-fifth Year
Operations is doing to get the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) in on the ground.
At this point, I only want to ask a couple of questions
about UNAMSIL’s ability to deploy. First, as regards the
logistical effort that needs to be upgraded, I wanted to ask
whether there were still shortfalls or whether the gap has
been filled with civilian contractors. And is it logistics that
is affecting the ability to deploy UNAMSIL outside
Freetown at an early date, or are we going deeper into the
business of the capacity of UNAMSIL’s contingents at this
moment to go beyond a very restricted area of operations?
Thirdly, could Mr. Annabi let us know which countries so
far have agreed to contribute troops to the enlarged
UNAMSIL and whether he can give us a clearer idea of the
time frames that he is envisaging for full deployment?
I will stop here. I will make other comments when
we come to our second meeting.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We are grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his realistic and
hardly reassuring briefing.
The draft resolution we are about to adopt is a very
sobering one. It plainly lists the major shortcomings in the
implementation of the Lomé Peace Agreement before
focusing on the immediate problem of the withdrawal of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). This is the
correct order.
The Security Council is called upon to enable the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to
take over essential tasks under Chapter VII of the Charter
that were previously carried out courageously and in the
spirit of sacrifice by ECOMOG troops from Nigeria,
Guinea and Ghana. By filling this gap, the Council will
enable the United Nations to continue to assist the parties
in implementing what they agreed upon in Lomé on 7 July
1999, but the draft resolution rightly underlines that the
responsibility for the success of the peace process
ultimately lies with the parties themselves.
In the draft resolution, the Council reiterates its call
upon the parties to fulfil all their commitments under the
Lomé Peace Agreement, but some important elements of
the peace process have encountered dangerous delays. The
momentum and promise of Lomé must be upheld. In
particular, the following is now required. The parties,
especially the Revolutionary United Front Party (RUFP),
must make every effort to speed up the disarmament,

4098th meeting
7 February 2000
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process and to
encourage more ex-combatants to lay down their arms.
The recent meeting of the Joint Monitoring Committee
characterized the success of the DDR as minimal.
Parties, especially the RUFP, must refrain from hostile
acts against the United Nations and humanitarian workers.
They must also put an end to defamatory public
statements directed against the United Nations and
UNAMSIL that endanger the peace process.
Those who continue to terrorize the civilian
population of Sierra Leone must realize that the amnesty
of the Peace Agreement does not extend to atrocities
committed after the signing of the Lomé Agreement. The
mechanism called for in that Agreement must be set up
and made fully operational. This applies in particular to
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, but also to the
Commission of the Management of Strategic Resources,
National Reconstruction and Development (CMRRD).
The reorganization of the diamond mining sector
recently announced by the Chairman of CMRRD must be
in full compliance with article VII, paragraph 6, of the
Lomé Agreement. The Commission must ensure that the
proceeds are used for the development of Sierra Leone,
particularly public education, public health, infrastructure
development and compensation for incapacitated war
victims, as well as post-war reconstruction and
development.
With regard to this last point, my delegation would
like to make the following observation: the impressive
activities of Ambassador Fowler as Chairman of the
Angola sanctions Committee have opened our eyes to the
alarming extent to which natural resources can fuel a
conflict. One is almost inclined to conclude that some
African countries are blessed with the absence of mineral
resources. That, of course, is not a very practical and
operational conclusion, but it points at the existence of a
real problem.
My delegation would welcome an
exchange of views on this subject in general. It is clearly
also relevant in the West African context.
Given the request for international involvement
contained in the Lomé Peace Agreement, we feel that the
Council has the responsibility to see to it that, on this
matter too, the letter and the spirit of the accord are
respected so that Sierra Leone’s rich resources can at last
fuel peace and prosperity instead of civil war.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Greenstock and his delegation, as well as the

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth Year
experts who were involved, for their hard and excellent
work, which made possible the formulation of a very
realistic draft resolution on the situation in Sierra Leone.
My thanks go also to Mr. Hedi Annabi, who has, as usual,
given us a very comprehensive and clear briefing following
the submission of the report of the Secretary-General.
I wish to reiterate the very strong commitment of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and in particular of its current Chairman, President Alpha
Oumar Konaré, to speedily bringing peace to Sierra Leone.
I wish also to stress the importance of the support of the
Security Council and of the international community, which
in our view is essential if we are successfully to implement
the Lomé Peace Agreement.
I shall not address Mr. Annabi’s comments at this
stage, but will just ardently express our hope that the draft
resolution on which the Council will take action later will
be speedily implemented. My delegation supports that draft
resolution.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We recognize that
events in Sierra Leone have been moving in the right
direction since the Lomé Peace Agreement. However,
since the situation in Sierra Leone is still precarious, the
continued involvement of the United Nations in bringing
peace to that country is of critical significance. With the
impending departure of troops of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), it is absolutely necessary that the United
Nations assume a greater responsibility there. Bangladesh
supported the expansion of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), to prevent any security gap in
Sierra Leone that might derail the peace process, and we
welcome the recommendations of the Secretary-General in
that regard.
In that connection, we welcome the briefing we just
received from the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi. We would like
him to brief us, perhaps later, about the conditions on the
ground in the area where additional UNAMSIL personnel
will be subsequently deployed. We are also interested to
know about the situation regarding the civilian police who
will need to train the Sierra Leone police force, which is at
the moment almost non-existent. We would like to find out
whether the number of civilian police, that is 60 at the
moment, will be adequate to undertake that training
responsibility. We would also like to know about the 29
February deadline for disarmament; we might take this

6

4098th meeting
7 February 2000
opportunity to request the Secretary-General to keep us
apprised of developments in that regard.
We are happy that the draft resolution that we will
consider later today reaffirms the strong commitment of
the Council to continue to support the efforts for peace
and reconstruction in Sierra Leone. It will provide
UNAMSIL with an adequate mandate and sufficient
strength on the ground to facilitate the full
implementation of the Lomé Peace Agreement.
Here, we would like to support the comment made
by Ambassador van Walsum regarding the resource
situation and its links to the implementation of the
sanctions and other elements of the Lomé Agreement.
We would strongly join him in supporting future
discussions in that regard.
The full implementation of the Agreement, however,
ultimately rests with the leaders and the people of Sierra
Leone. It is they who have to strive hard for the
regeneration of a culture of peace in Sierra Leone. Only
then will there be lasting peace and true reconciliation.
We are convinced that the draft resolution upholds that
final objective and will contribute to achieving it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on
Mr. Annabi to respond to the comments and questions
that have been addressed to him.
Mr. Annabi: As regards the capacity of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to deploy
and to operate: as I mentioned in my briefing, troops
made available to the United Nations under the new
contingent-owned equipment regulations are expected to
come fully equipped according to the agreed standards,
and to be self-sustaining for a period of at least 60 days.
Now, some contributors sometimes have difficulties in
meeting these requirements, and I have alluded to them.
These shortfalls in equipment affect the operational
capabilities of the troops. We have had to deploy some
of the troops before they were fully ready, at a time last
December when we did not expect to have to deploy
them, because of the withdrawal of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) from certain locations.
We are in the process of working with the contributors to
see how best we can make up, or encourage them to
make up, for these equipment shortfalls. We are also
looking at the possibility of civilian contracts for those
shortfalls that cannot otherwise be met.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth Year
I will not pretend that we have all the logistic
equipment that we need; there is always a certain delay in
all of our operations. But the main difficulties we are
encountering at this time regarding operational capability
come from shortfalls in the equipment of certain
contingents: equipment which was supposed to be available
to them and which is not.
As regards the expansion of UNAMSIL, we have, of
course, been negotiating actively with a number of
countries which have expressed interest in participating and
which have made offers to participate in the expanded
UNAMSIL. We already have two Nigerian battalions in
UNAMISIL, and we expect another two Nigerian battalions
as well as a motorized company; in addition to those, we
have offers by four other countries, which I understand are
waiting for the adoption of the draft resolution before they
are in a position to confirm their offers formally.
On the requirements for civilian police, the proposal
contained in the Secretary-General’s report for 60 civilian
police — as opposed to the six that were there previously,
a significant increase — was worked out in consultation
with the local police authorities as well as with some of the
other international partners engaged in providing assistance

4098th meeting
7 February 2000
to the local police on a bilateral basis. It was felt that
these numbers should be enough to meet the tasks
foreseen for them, which are limited to advice and
assistance to the Government on the restructuring and
training of the local police forces. In other words, they
are not going to assume direct law and order functions,
but only provide advice on the training and restructuring.
We would also establish a presence at the DDR sites and
at some key population centres, again for the purpose of
providing advice on the maintenance of law and order
rather than for the purpose of assuming direct policing
functions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Hédi
Annabi for his clarifications and responses.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

7
