24
743 (Vlll).

General Assembly-Eighth Session
Educational conditions in Non-Self•
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by resolution 445 (V) adopted on
12 December 1950, it approved the special report 2
on education drawn up in 1950 as a brief but considered indication of the importance of educational advancement and of the problems still to be faced in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the further report prepared in 1953 by the
Committee on Information s from Non-Self-Governing Territories on educational conditions in these Territories,
1. Approves. this further report of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
as a supplement to the report approved in 1950;
2. Emphasizes that the objeLtives of education in
Non-Self-Governing Territories are:
(a) To develop moral and civic consciousness and
responsibility among the peoples, and to enable them
to take an increasing share of responsibility in the
conduct of their own affairs;
(b) To raise the standards of living of the peoples
by helping them to improve their economic productivity
and standards of health;
(c) To promote the social progress of the Territories, taking into account the basic cultural values
and the aspirations of the peoples concerned;
( d) To secure the extension of the intellectual
development of the peoples so as to provide for them
access to all levels of culture;
3. Affirms that, in accordance with the above objectives, the process of education should be designed
to familiarize the inhabitants with and train them
in the use of the tools of economic, social and political
progress, with a view to the attainment of a full
moo.sure of self-government;
4 .. Recommends to the Administering Members
that, m order to carry out the said objectives and in
general to solve the educational problems of the NonSelf-Governing Territories, they should seek the technical advice of the United Nations Technical Assistance Administration and make the greatest possible use
of the facilities of the specialized agencies;
5. Recomme!"d~ further to the Administering Members that they similarly make the greatest possible use
of offers that may be made to them by other States
Members of the United Nations through the SecretaryGei:ieral or through_ the specialized agencies concerned
or m other appropriate ways, for the purpose of facilitating the educational advancement of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories by such means as making avail~ble fellowships, scholarships and internships to qualified students from these Territories·
6. Invites the Secretary-General' to communicate
the report on education and the present resolution to
the Mer:i~ers '?f the United Nations responsible for
the adm1mstrat~on of Non~Self-Governing Territories,
to the Economic and Social Council to the Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agencies concerned
for their consideration.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly Fifth Session
Supplement No. 17, part II.
'
·
s Ibid., Eighth Session, Supplement No. 15, part II.

744 (VIII). Association of representatives from
Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work
of the Committee on Information from Non•
Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Whereas the direct association of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies has been considered as an effective means of promoting the progress
of the populations of these Territories towards a status
of equality with the States Members of the United
Nations,
Whereas it has been recognized that the direct association of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
work of the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories can be of further assistance in
promoting the p;ogress of these Territories and their
peoples towards the goals set forth in Chapter XI of
the Charter of the United Nations,
. Whereas the Administering Members have been invited to. make po~sible the association of qualified rep:
resentattve inhabitants of the Territories in the work
of the Committee,
Consid_e~ing .the technical difficulties advanced by
!he Admm1stermg _Mer:ibers on the question of acceptmg the collaborat10n m the work of the Committee
of Non-Self Governing Territories as "associate members",
. Considering th~t t~e principle of unity of representation must be mamtamed,
Noting th~t the M_em?er States administering NonSelf-Governmg Terntones have from time to time attached representative inhabitants of the Territories to
their delegations,
Considering that this practice should be stimulated
and developed,
l. Invite~ the M~mb~r State~ administering NonSelf-Govermng Terntones, the mhabitants of which
have_ attai1:ed a large measure of responsibility for economic, _social a!ld educational policies, to attach to their
?elegattons, without prejudice to the principle stated
m the fitth parag:raph of the preamble, indigenous representatives specially qualified to speak on these matters as they relate to these Territories;
2. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to.continue in accordance with General Assembly resolution 647 (VII) of
10 Decem?er. 1952, the study of means of securing
~ progressive mc_rease in the participation of duly qualified representatives of the peoples of the Non-SelfGovernmg Territories in its work.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
745 (VIII). Representation on the Committee
o'!1 l~ormation from Non-Self-Governing Terntor1es
The General Assembly,
. Noting that the work of the Committee on lnforma!JOn fro;n N on-Self-G~verning: Territories, particularly
m rel~tl?~ to the special studies of certain functional
fields 1mttated under General Assembly resolution 333
(IV) of 2 December 1949, has been materially assisted
~Y th~ action <;Jf States members of the Committee,
mcl_u~mg c~rtam 7:1-on-administering Members, in assoc1atmg with their delegations perspns with special
