TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th

MEETING: 4 DECEMBER 1971
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l606)

...... . ... ........ ...... ......

Page

1

Statement by the President , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I , . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

1

,....,,.......

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .

(a) Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent Representatives of

Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1041 1);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/l 0410) . . . , . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . ,

1

S/PV.1606

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 11964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. .The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEENHUNDREDANDSIXTHMEETING
Neldin
President:

New Yorkon

I&. 1. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

Saturday,

(Sierra Leone).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l606)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. (al Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representatives
of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United King
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10411);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/10410).
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: Today I have received a request from
the representatives of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United Kingdom and the
United States [S/10411] to convene immediately an urgent
meeting of the Security Council to consider the recent
deteriorating
situation which has led to armed clashes
between India and Pakistan. I have received a letter from
the representative
of Tunisia /S/10413/ supporting the
request for a meeting of the Security Council.
Adoption of the agenda

4 December1971,at5 p.m.
debate in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Council.
3. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I understand the very deep concern
of zo many delegations and countries about the question
with which we are confronted and which we are going to
discuss today. But I do believe that, owing to the urgency
of the crisis we are facing, we should restrict the deliberations to the members of the Council and to the main parties
concerned. In this connexion, Mr.President, I would ask
you to convey invitations to the representatives of India
and Pakistan to come to our table and present their views. I
repeat: I think we should restrict our deliberations to the
members of the Council and to the two main parties
concerned.
4. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated fvom Russian): I agree with the suggestion of
the representative of Italy that it would be desirable for the
Security Council to hear the representatives of India and
Pakistan, if, of course, they wish to be heard. In the
Russian interpretation I heard the word “propose”.,But
that is too strong a word. In the Security Council at least, it
is not the practice to “propose”, i.e., to issue orders. But if
those two delegations really do wish to speak, the Council
must, of course, hear them.

5. One further question arises in this connexion. The
members of the Council have had distributed to them a
letter from the representative of Bangla Desh. I assume that
the members of the Council have made themselves familiar
with that document. It is dated 3 December. It raises a very
large number of important questions concerning the item
included in the Security Council agenda and now under
discussion. A study of this letter about the events in East
Pakistan shows why the situation arose which has led to
today’s meeting of the Security Council.

The agenda was adopted.

(4 Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent
Represeutatives
of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/l 0411);
W Report of the Secretary-General (S/10410)
2. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter from
. the
..
representative
of Tunisia [S/10414/ requesting that IUS
delegation be allowed to participate in the present debate
without
the right to vote. If I hear no objection, I shall
invite the representative of Tunisia to participate in the

6. In this connexion, I should also like to draw attention
to the letter from nine members of the Security Council,
which indicates that there is a deterioration of the situation
in the Indian subcontinent. It is that very cause which the
Signatories of the letter put forward as grounds for their
proposa1 to convene the, Security Council. It is directly
stated in the letter that they request the President of the
Security Council to convene immediately an urgent meeting
of the Security Council to consider the recent deteriorating
situation.
7. Consequently, both the cause of the current situation
and the fact that the ,deterioration of that situation has
been noted in an official document are well known. It

would, therefore, be appropriate to hear not only the
representatives of India and Pakistan, but also the representatives of Bangla Desh.

tinue with consultations on this particular subject so asnot
to raise some problem that would delay the Security
Council’s work.

8. The Soviet delegation has two proposals to make: first,
that the document from the Bangla Desh mission be issued
in the form in which documents are customarily published
in the United Nations and the Security Council and,
secondly, that the representatives of Bangla Desh be invited
to and heard at a meeting of the Security Council. That
concludes the first part of the Soviet delegation’s remarks
on the proposal made by the representative of Italy.

13. I agree with the Soviet representative that we can
certainly have very interesting views and assessments and
perhaps even suggestions from Members outside this body,
but I believe that at this preliminary stage, at this first
meeting, we should try to restrict deliberations to members
of the Council and the main parties concerned, if they wish
to join us at this table. Later on, we can decide whetherwe
will accept participation of non-members of this Council in
our deliberations.

9. I cannot, unfortunately, agree with the second part of
the Italian representative’s proposal, which I consider to be
restrictive, alI the more so as it followed our receipt of an
official request from the delegation of Tunisia that it be
allowed to participate in the discussion of ,this matter and
to express its opinion. We cannot say that there’ are not
other delegations which, with equal right and justification
and in strict accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, might expressa wish to
take part in the discussionson the question on the Security
Council’s agenda. There have not normally been any
limitations or obstacles in the Security Council to participation by any delegation or representative of any State
Member of the United Nations in the work of the Security
Council, and I do not think it would be appropriate for us
to create such a precedent in the system and working
practice of the Security Council as to impose restrictions on
the participation by representatives of States Members of
the United Nations in the discussion of matters at meetings
of the Council. Therefore, on the basis of these considerations, the Soviet delegation will be unable to support the
restrictive proposal made by the Italian delegation.

14. I am sure that we shall be seized of this question for a
long time to come, so there will be no harm in not
accepting any requests at this stage; and when I say “at this
stage”, I mean at this very first meeting.
15. I wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the representative of Tunisia, who supported
our initiative, and to address an appeal to hi. If 1 am
making this suggestion at this stage I am sure he under.
stands our deep concern at this time that we should not
only discuss the question before us but should also act
promptly. With all my respect for his views and his
dedication to the principles and purposes of our Organizae
tion, I would appeal to him and to others not to request to
be allowed to participate in our debate at this meeting.
16. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): I should like to associate
myself with the remarks of the representative of Italy and
his proposal that we extend Invitations to the representatives of both India and Pakistan to participate in the
Council’s discussion.

10. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I fully agree with the representative
of the Soviet Union on the first point, namely, that we can
only invite the representatives of India ‘and Pakistan to take
part in our dqhberations without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisional rules of the Security
Council. As a matter of fact, I only proposed that you,
Mr. President, convey an Invitation to those parties on
behalf of the Security Council, Of course, it is up. to the
representatives of India and Pakistan to accept that
invitation or not.

17. I would also support the view expressed by my Italian
colleague that, in order to expedite the discussion and in
view of the urgency of the matter before us, at least at this
stage the participation of other Members of the Organization and representatives of outside bodies be restricted.
18. Mr. KUI$AGA (Poland) (interpretation from I?-ench):
My delegation does not wish to prolong this discussion, but
it seems to me that we are discu$sing a most important
question. We all agree and none of us can deny that the
problem inscribed on our agenda is a most complex and
serious one. We all need to obtain maximum elucidation on
an issue in which positions are not only different but often
diametrically opposed. Quite briefly, that is why we favour
extending invitations to the delegations of India and
Pakistan to participate in the debate-obviously’ on the
condition that they wish to do so. I too would Iike to say
that, according to the documents we have received from
Bangla Desh, we believe that there exist data the Security
Council will need in order to have the best picture of the
situation and to be able to reach the best solution. TO that
end, it should hear the representatives of Bangla Desh.

11. On the second point, I would refer to the communication Ambassador MaIik cited. I believe that you, Mr. President, have acted in accordance with the appendix to the
provisional rules of procedure, which reads, in part, as
follows :
“A list of all communications from private individuals
and non-governmental bodies relating to matters of which
the Security Council is seized shall be circulated to all
representatives on the Security Council.”
As a matter of fact, my delegation and, I am sure, all other
delegations have received a copy of that communication.

19. I would add that in my delegation’s opinion the
Council should consider extending an invitation to the
delegation of Tunisia, which has requested an invitation to
participate without the right to vote.

12. It was my understanding, after the consultations that
took place this morning-and we had already had some
consultations with you, Mr. President-that we would con2

invoked in the future by any group from any country
which is a Member of the United Nations, whether the
group resides in,that country or is in exile. Perhaps even
groups which are in exile from the country which presented
the proposal could ask to be allowed to participate in the
debates of the Security Council. My delegation considers
this to be a most dangerous practice. As the representative
of China has indicated, this could well be tantamount to
interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations. Apart from this question of
substance, I am not at all sure that this would be in accord
with the provisions of rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

20. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is of the view that inviting the
so-called representatives of Bangla Desh-that is, the representatives of rebellious elements within East Pakistan-to
participate in the deliberations of the Security Council and
distributing
the documents of this rebellious so-called
organization would be &mtamount to asking the Security
Council to interfere in the internal affairs of a sovereign
State, Pakistan. That is totally contrary to the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations with regard to non-interference in the internal affairs of Member States. Therefore,
the Chinese delegation is opposed to the proposal of the
Soviet delegation. We cannot agree to the participation of
the so-called representatives of Bangla Desh in the deliberations of the Security Council, nor can we agree to
distribution
in the Security Council of the so-called
documents of Bangla Desh.

26. With respect to the request of the representative of
Tunisia, I agree with the views expressed by Mr. Vinci.
While I do believe that the Council should be open to
hearing constructive points of view, because of the urgency
of the situation with which we are dealing it would perhaps
be better, as Mr. Vinci suggested, to invite the representative of Tunisia to address the Council at a later stage in our
deliberations.

21. We deem it regrettable that at the very beginning of
the deliberations in the Security Council on the question of
the situation
between India and Pakistan, the Soviet
delegation has seen fit to make a proposal which is
tantamount to interference in the internal affairs of a
Member State by the United Nations or by the Security
Council. I believe that that will not be of any help to the
progress of our work. It can only obstruct our progress.

27. Mr. BUSII (United States of America): As I understand the proposal made by our colleague from Italy, it is
to invite the delegations of India and Pakistan to the
Security Council table, if they desire to appear, and because
of the urgency of the situation to defer extending an
invitation to Tunisia or to this Bangla Desh delegation. We
share our colleague’s sense of urgency about this matter. I
hope that the Council can vote promptly on the Italian
proposal. Our delegation supports that proposal, and I
would hope that we could move forward to the substance
of the matter, because we view it with the utmost
seriousness, I repeat that we support the proposal of the
representative of Italy, as we understand it, and we would
strongly urge that it be put to the vote immediately.

22. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
fram Spanish): I shall refer to the proposals in the order in
which they have been submitted.
23. I shall refer first to the proposal made by the
representative of Italy that the Council should invite the
two parties directly concerned in this question, that is to
say, the delegations of India and Pakistan, to participate in
our debate if they so desire. My delegation supports that
proposal.

J
28. The PRESIDENT: I wish to state at this juncture that
just before the meeting started the permanent representative of India sent me a letter in which he asked that that
letter and an attached communication addressed to me by
the delegation of Bangla Desh be circulated as a document
of the Security Council. I have given instructions that the
letter and its annex shall be circulated. I would suggest that
the Council defer consideration of this aspect of the
problem bifore us until the document containing the letter
and its annex is before the Council.

24. I shall now refer to the proposal made by the
representative
of the Soviet Union, namely, that the
document which has been xeroxed and distributed to the
members of the Council should be circulated as a Security
Council document. I should like to recall that this type of
document is circulated to members for consideration when
a request to do so is submitted in writing by a Member of
the United Nations. That has always been the practice
followed by the Council, Since the representative of the
Soviet Union wishes to observe our practice with regard to
the participation
of other delegations, I take it that he
would wish to observe the Council’s practice also with
regard to this document.

9 9. In addition, representatives will remember that we had
exhausted the discussions in connexion with the question
of inviting both India and Pakistan to address us in the
event that they did not ask to intervene. I am sorry that my
intention was prejudged, and if two more minutes had been
allowed me to read what I have been saying the Council
would have realized that I have some further information,
which I may also wish to read out. I never had the intention
of ignoring what the consensus had been after all the
deliberations-that
is, that both Pakistan and India should
be invited to speak if they had not asked to be allowed to
do so.

25. With respect to the third proposal, namely, to invite
representatives of the so-called Bangla Desh, I should like to
remind the Council that, since its inception, it has
addressed 18 invitations to 10 persons in the years 1946,
1948, 1965, 1967, 1968-and the two most recent cases
concerned Namibia and, a few days ago, the situation in
Southern Rhodesia. All those cases have, along general
lines, referred to colonial situations. I wish to emphasize
this point strongly, because the proposal put to us now
affects a sovereign State Member of the United Nations. If
the Council were to accept this proposal, it could constitute
a very delicate and dangerous precedent, which could be

30. Thus if, with the Council’s permission, I read this, the
question of voting may not arise. This is what I was going
to read:
3

“I wish to inform members of the Council that neither
of the two States mentioned [that is India and Pakistan]
in the matter of requests for this meeting has so far asked
to participate in the discussion.
“The members of the Council are aware that any
Member of the United Nations which is not a member of
the Security Council may participate without vote in the
discussion of any question whenever the Security Council
considers that the imerests of that Member are especially
affected.”
And I was going to ask whether any member wished to
comment on this matter. If I had been allowed to reach this
juncture I would easily have imparted the view that India
and Pakistan should be invited to participate, because we
know that they are not members of the Security Council
and have to apply to be allowed to speak. And if they have
not ,applied it is at the Council’s request that I would ask
them to participate.
31. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): Mr. President, may I be
permitted to remind you that, under Article 32 of the
Charter, “Any Member of the United Nations which is not
a member of the Security Council . . ., if it is a party to a
dispute under consideration by the Security Council, shall
be invited to participate, without vote, in the discussion
relating to the dispute.” So it is the view of my delegation
that in this case, since both India and Pakistan are direct
parties to the problem which we are now considering, it is
mandatory for the Security Council to extend invitations to
the two countries. Of course, if both or either of them
should wish not to participate, they are free not to do so.
But I think that the invitations should be extended.
32. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I listened carefully to the
argument repeated in the second statement by Mr. Vinci,
the representative of Italy. If I understood the interpretation correctly, he employed in his statement the somewhat
unusual term “a preliminary meeting of the Security
Council”. This is something new and original. It has not so
far been the practice of the Security Council to hold
preliminary, subsequent and concluding meetings; there has
been only one category: meetings of the Security Council.
For this reason I would not be in favour of introducing
novelty into the work of the Security Council and of
creating a new, special, and what I would call unpreceden
ted category of meetings, namely, “preliminary” meetings.
Thus, if this is advanced as an argument against inviting
other delegations, it is the type of irgument with which I
cannot agree. The Soviet delegation cannot support a
position which consists of considering today’s meeting on
such an important matter as a preliminary meeting and of
refusing on that basis to invite delegations to participate in
the work of this preliminary meeting of the Council if they
wish to do so. That is my first comment.
(translated

from Russian):

petent for !the purpose, to supply it with information or
give other assistance in examining matters within ifs
compefence.”

t0

That is stated very clearly and specifically and is readily
intelligible. Use wasmade in one of the speecheshere of the
terms “rebel” and “rebel forces”. But who has determined
the existence of a rebellion and of rebel forces? In order to
have a better idea about this, it would be useful for the
Security Council to hear the representatives of Bangla Desh.
I am talking of the representatives of the 75 million
inhabitants of East Pakistan, of the 10 million people who
have left their own country and fled to a neighbouring
State. To call all these people who have undergone
intolerable and unbelievable suffering rebels would be, to
say the least, premature without having heard from their
representatives at a Security Council meeting.
34. In addition, the whole world knows, and it has even
been mentioned in the United States press, that one of the
parties in East Pakistan, the Awami League, won a majority
in the parliamentary elections: it obtained I67 seats our of
313. But as a result of measures taken by the military
authorities against the majority party a situation has arisen
which, as I have already said, wasactually recognized in an
official document signed by nine members of the Security
Council, including people who now object to hearing the
representative of Bangla Desh. They officially recognized
the recent deteriorating situation. What is that situation?
Where is that situation?
35. If we decide to follow the policy of the ostrich and
hide our head in the sand, we can avoid thinking about this.
But if we take note of reality, of the true state of affairs,
the main and fundamental reason, officially recognized by
the nine members of the Security Council, for the recent
deteriorating,, situationr that has led to armed clashes
between the two States becomes quite obvious, Those are
the facts, that is the reality of the situation. That being SO,
we could approach this reality in different ways. We could
speak of rebellion, rebels and rebel forces, but there is
another conception of this situation which frequently
figures in the work of United Nations organs, namely, that
of national liberation forces and a national liberation
movement. There are various possible interpretations and
approaches to these questions.
36. It is, however, an actual fact that there are approximately 10 million refugees, I am profoundly convinced that
not one of the 15 members of the Security Council who are
present in the chamber at this meeting, not one of the
many ambassadors, of the permanent representatives of
States Members of the United Nations who are present here
today, would want his Government and his people suddenly
to find on its own territory within such a short space of
time such a huge number of refugees, forced to flee from
their own country to the territory of a neighbouring State.
These are actual facts. And when the representatives of
these people, of an enormous number of people of the
75millionstrong
population of East Pakistan and of
approximately 10 ‘million refugees, ask to be heard, an
attempt is made, under the pretext that they are rebels, to
deprive them of the opportunity to speak.

33. The second concerns the support for Bangla Desh.
RuIe 39 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure states:
“The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers com4

idea of the cause which has led to the deteriorating
situation on the Indian subcontinent.

37. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, such an
approach is not fitting when considering a concrete
question. Moreover, the question of these refugees and the
situation which gave rise to this fearful event, together with
the difficulties caused to the country to which they have
gone, have been and are being discussed in numerous organs
Of the United Nations. This too is a reality; this too is a
fact. In addition, the question is being discussed there in its
fullest context. But, of course, the main aim of the
discussion is to provide aid and assistance to the Government of India, which has found itself in a difficult situation
because it has allowed such a vast number of foreign
refugees into its territory,

43. The PRESIDENT: May I now ask the members of the
Security Council whether they agree that the representativ,es of Pakistan and India should be invited to participate,
as indicated in my statement?
44. There being no objection, I invite the representatives
of Pakistan and India to participate in the debate in the
Council without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan)
and Mr< S. Sen (India) took places at the Council table.

38. Why should the Security Council not get to the heart
of the matter, to the essence of the problem and of that
situation which, as the nine members of the Security
Council recognized in their official document, has recently
begun to deteriorate and has brought about the consequences which we see today?

45. The PRESIDEVT:
I call on the representative
Pakistan to make a statement.

of

46. The representative of the Soviet Union has asked to
speak on a point of order.

39. Thus, in the light of all these considerations and
bearing in mind the fact that the, United Nations is already
dealing with this problem and dealing with it in earnest,
bearing in mind also the fact that many States Members of,
the United Nations, including the Soviet Union, have
already provided some kind of aid, to a greater or lesser
degree, to alleviate the situation of the Government and the
people of the country where these 10 million “rebels” (to
use the terminology employed here) have appeared, we see
why the Security Council must not side-step this question.
Moreover, it should be stressed that in this case Bangla
Desh, its mission and representatives speak in the name of
the 75 million inhabitants of East Pakistan, and not only in I
the name of 10 million people, although even that would be
sufficient.
40. That is the true situation, and it was in the light of this
situation that the delegation of the Soviet Union proposed
not only that the letter from Bangla Desh should be
distributed
amongst the members of the Security Council,
but also that the representatives of Bangla Desh should be
heard here.

47. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): A proposal has been made to
invite the representatives of Bangla Desh and the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to participate in the Security
Council meeting. The Soviet delegation supports this
proposal and insists that a decision should be reached on
this matter forthwith,
prior to the statement by the
representative of Pakistan.
48. The PRESIDENT: I had craved your indulgence earlier
to allow this matter of Bangla Desh to be deferred until the
next meeting. The application reached me only a few
minutes before I came to this meeting. I immediately took
action by handing it over to an officer of the Secretariat to
have the application copied and circulated to members. Up
to now I have not received a copy of the application, and it
appears that many other representatives do not have copies.
It will take some time to have these copies made. In the
circumstances, unless representatives wish to proceed with
the matter further, I would ask that it be deferred until a
later date.
49. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Am I correct in understanding
that the question of an invitation to the representative Of
Bangla Desh will be considered after the statement by the
representative of Pakistan?

41. I have only one remark to make about the request
from the delegation of Tunisia that it should be heard at
the meeting of the Security Council, There is an inaccuracy
in the letter. It is stated in the letter from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia, Mr. Rachid Driss, that his delegation requests permission to participate, without the right to
vote, in the Security Council’s consideration of the deteriorating situation ‘between India and Pakistan, That is not
accurate. There is no such question on the agenda. On the
agenda approved by the Council today there are two other
questions
and ,two titles, so it would be desirable for
Ambassador Driss to make some corrections to his letter.

50. The PRESIDENT:

I call on the representative of India.

5 1. Mr. SEN (India): I should not like to make substantive
comments at this stage, but it is most important for us to
have a decision on this request of Bangla Desh to
participate in the Council’s debate, because anyone who is
familiar with this problem-and I like to think that all the
members around this table, and many besides, are familiar
with it-would
know that to discuss this problem without
hearing the voice of Bangla Desh is like playing Hamlet
without
the Prince of Denmark. They are the basic
sufferers. They are the people who have been victimized.
Unless we know what their view is, I do not really know
what we are going to discuss

42. Those are the additional remarks which the Soviet
delegation felt it necessary to make on the matter under
discussion and, for its part, it considers it appropriate and
desirable that the representative of Bangla Desh be given a
hearing-if,
of course, he so desires-at a Security Council
meeting in order that the members of the Council as
individuals
and the Council as a whole may have a clearer
5

52. Secondly, my delegation-and we are most grateful to
you, Sir, and to the Council for th’e invitation that has been
extended to us-will find it difficult to make our comments, even to know how far we can speak on behalf of
Bangla Desh. Indeed we cannot speak for them; we can
only guess what their views are. Therefore, for a realistic
assessment of the situation and in order to get to the root
of the problem, it is essential in our opinion to listen to the
voice of Bangla Desh.
53. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I have the greatest respect for the
representative of India, but I am sorry to say that it wasnot
in order for him to speak on this particular subject. He is
not allowed to speak on such a subject.
54. Secondly, may I make it clear that there was a
proposal, which was made Into a ruling by you, Sir, that
this question should be deferred.
55. Since I am speaking, I should like to address some
brief remarks to the representative of the Soviet Union. I
certainly did not mean to say that there were preliminary
meetings of the Council and other sorts of meetings. There
are only meetings of the Security Council, My linguistic
knowledge is not so wide as to enable me to know what is
interpreted into Russian. Next time I shall ask one of my
collaborators who knows Russian well to follow the
interpretation so that I may be sure what is being said.
What I said-and I think I should emphasize this-was that I
felt that at this first meeting on the item under consideration, in order to move ahead with our work and reach,
hopefully, a positive decision, we should restrict our
discussions to ‘the members of the Council and the
representatives of the main parties concerned, if they
wished to take part in the discussion and wereinvited to do
so. They have’indeed now been seated at the table. To
revert to what I said. at the outset: you have made a ruling,
Sir, which I support.

I read that out a few minutes ago and I think it is q@
clear.
57. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republ@)
Could we not overcome tie
formal and technical reasons, in order not to postp@@
consideration of the question of the invitation to the
representative of Bangla Desh?
(translated from Russian):

58. The point is that in the work of the Security CoUnd
there has been a large number of cases where a request for
the granting of an opportunity to participate at a meet@
of the’ Security Council without’ the right to vote hs
immediately been brought to the notice of the Council tid
where .a decision has been taken-even prior to the
distribution of the official document, of the piece of pa@r
setting out this request.
59. There have been ,su& cases. If I am mistaken, the
Secretariat will correct me.
60. As a’ result, it may be possible, bearing in mind the
seriousness and importance of this matter and the fact that
these representatives might be able to give the Council
useful inforfnation, to solve the question of their .being
given a hearing without delay. A situation has arisen which
has attracted the attention of many United Nations organs
and with which they are already dealing by arranging for
aid to the millions of refugees. Incidentally, it is somewhat
strange that, when discussing the question .of aid to the
refugees they are called “refugees”, but when a requcrr ii
made to the Security Council they are called “rebels”; it 19
difficult to understand the logic of this and to tie the two
things together. But that is not the point; it may be possibl’e
to overcome these technical and formal reasons and 10
reach a decision on the matter now. If these reasons am
insuperable, then it might be possible to do this after the
first statement. at the meeting; and if it is impossible after
that to overcome the technical and formal reasons and to
distribute the ietter, this could be done after the second
statkment, and if not then, after the third. But we should
‘not defer taking a decision uritil the next meeting.

56. The PRESIDENT: I wafit to repeat the statbment I
made which was in writing. There may have been some
difficulties in the interpretations. There was never any
intention that, as soon as the two parties had spoken,
Bangla Desh would come to the table and speak. The
applidation was given to’me only a few niinutes before I
61. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the SoviM
entered the Council Chamber. According to the usual Union has, on a point of order, raised the question of
practice, the application has to be copied and circulated to
permitting the representative of Bangla Desh to speak at
members for consideration. ,The copies have not yet been this. time. I have made a statement whicli I regarded ‘as a
made; it will take some time to do so. If the copies iire not
ruling, and the further request made by the representative
before us it is rather: difficult to take a decision or to ask to take the floor I consider a challenge to that ruling, lu the
circumstances, as required by ruie 30 of the provfional
me to say tihether I, intend to call them.,I:repeat for the
rules of procedure, I am now appealing to the representabenefit of all me:tibers what I have written, so that there
will be no difficulty in hearing it and interpreting it. I said tives for a decision.
this:
I
:! 62. I made a statement, a&ing that this matter be
“I wish to state at this juncture. tha!: just before the \ deferred, but the representative of the Soviet Union has
meeting started the permanent representative of India
repeated that it cannot be deferred. I regard this as a
sent me a letter in which he asked that that letter and an challenge to my ruling, and in the circumstances rule 30
attached communication addressed to me by the delega- provides that:
tion of Bangla Desh be circulated as a document of the
Security Council. I have given instructions that the letter
“If a representative raises a point of order, the President
and its annex shall be circulated. I would suggestthat the
shall immediately state his ruling, If it is challenged, the
Council defer consideration of this aspect of the problem
President shall submit his ruling to the Security Council
before us’until the document containing the letter and its
for immediate decision and it shall stand unless overannex is before the Council.”
ruled.”
6

Therefore, unless representatives feel otherwise, I am
referring my ruling to them for an immediate decision.

diplomatic relations with another Member State demanding
that the latter withdraw its troops from its own territory
and thus yield possession and control over it. India has not
only made the demand but, in pursuance of it, has escalated
its aggressiveactivities to bring about the disintegration of
Pakistan. A challenge was thus hurled at Pakistan, and
Pakistan has decided to meet it resolutely.

63. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): We have spent a considerable
portion of our time on the procedural aspect of this
important question and, while we have been discussing the
question of who shall address this Council, the war on the
India-Pakistan border continues. My delegation proposes
that, under rule 33, we postpone the consideration and
discussion of whether the representatives of Bangla Desh, or
Of any State Member of the United
Nations, should
participate in this meeting of the Council until we first.hear
from the representatives of Pakistan and India.

74. From this point of view, the situation that has been
brought before the Security Council is not one which
involves P&Stan alone. It involves every State that believes
in the principle of territorial integrity of States, which is
fundamental to the Charter of the United Nations. It
concerns’ all who are in danger of being overkun by larger,
more’powerful and ‘predatory neighbours.

64. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): -‘I wish to
support the proposal made by the representative of
Somalia, because it is our understanding that the matter
that has thus far caused such a controversy is the subject of
consultations.

75. AS far as Pakistan is concerned, I can pledge that we
will not surrender. Whatever tomorrow may bring, it will
not be capitulation by Pakistan. Our freedom is too
precious for us to bargain it away. Our stake in our national
integrity is so great that we cannot possibly falter or fail.
However, should the Security Council temporize with the
situation, should it equivocate, should it become paralysed,
should it fail to suppress the aggression, one thing will
certainly happen. The Charter of the United Nations will
have been shattered. The basic understanding behind the
very functioning of the United Nations will have been
demolished. A damage will have been done to the inter‘national order symbolized by the United Nations which can
never be repaired.

65. -Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, unless you stand on
your ruling, I would supp&rt the proposal of the representative of Somalia, seconded by the representative ‘of Syria,
with one small addition-that
after the statements of the
representatives of India and Pakistan, the statements of the
members of the Security Council who are already on your
list be heard first.
66, The PRESIDENT: I regret that I shall have to stand on
my ruling, I appeal to representatives to decide on it, as it
has been challenged, I now request the representatives to
make an immediate decision.
67.

There being no objection, my ruling stands.

68.

I call on the representative of Pakistan.

76. Since it is India which, after having resorted to
large-scale use of force against the territorial integrity and
‘political independence of Pakistan in total violation of the
United Nations Charter, is now talking of defending itself
against Pakistan’s full-scale attack, the sequence of events
of the past two weeks, since 21 November, needs to be kept
clearly in mind.

69. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President, and
the members of the Security Council, for inviting the
Pakistan delegation to this Council meeting to be heard.

77. Pakistan’s eastern province has been under a massive
attack, since 21 November, by India’s regular troops, tanks
and aircraft. The attack was launched simultaneously at
half a dozen points along three sides of India’s land frontier
around East Pakistan.

70. This meeting of the Security Council is being held in
one of the most extraordinary situations in the history of
the United Nations. A State Member of the United Nations,
India, has not only launched aggression on the territory of
another Member State, Pakistan, but ‘has openly demanded
-that Pakistan dismember itself and give up that part of its
territory which contains the majority of its population.

78. The Indian attack was unprovoked; it was on a large
scale; it wasco-ordinated; it was preceded by heavy artillery
fire; and it was made under air cover. It was definitely not,
as the Indians initially tried to maintain, only a stepping up
of activity by the secessionist guerrillas. In the engagements
that have taken place between the Pakistan and Indian
armed forces, several of the Indian army units have been
identified through Indian soldiers killed or captured.

71. This is not just an allegation that I am making before
the Council. The world knows about the statement of the
Prime Minister of India, made on 1 December, that Pakistan
should withdraw its troops from its eastern part. The world
also knows that Indian troops entered the territory of
Pakistan and have been there since 21 November at least.
The two facts are undeniable and are acknowledged by
India.

79. On 21 November the Indian armed forces launched
the following attacks. On the south-eastern sector of East
Pakistan, an Indian army brigade group, supported bY
armed helicopters, entered the Chittagong Hill Tracts
district of East Pakistan, overran our border outposts and
penetrated approximately 10 miles into our territory. To
the north of this sector, another brigade group of the 23rd
Indian Division, supported by the rest of the Division,
launched an attack in the Belonia salient of the Noakhali
district of East Pakistan, pushing eight miles deep into

72. These are the two cardinal facts of the situation, on
which its consideration by the Security Council has to be
based. Nothing like this has happened before in the
contemporary age.
73. There is no other example of a State Member of the
United
Nations which has recognized and had normal
7

Pakistan territory. In the Brahmanbaria sub-division, to the
north-west of Belonia, attacks were launched by a battalion
each from the 57th Indian Division against two of our
border posts at Mukandpur and Saldanadi, which were
overrun. Further north, on the eastern front’ of East
Pakistan, the Indians made repeated attacks against our
border outposts at Karitola, in the Mymensingh-also
known as Mominshahi-district. These attacks were repulsed. In the north-east comer of East Pakistan, two
Indian ,battalion groups attacked and overran our border
outposts at Dhalai, Atgram and Zakigang in’ the Maulvi
Bazar sub-division of the Sylhet district. These Indian
forces included two companies of Gurkhas. In the northwestern area of East Pakistan, the Indians launched another
attack in the Rangpur district. This was in the Burangmari
salient, where an Indian brigade group penetrated 15 miles
into Pakistan territory up to Nageshwari. In the south-east
sector-completing the three-sided front-in the Jessore
district, a major offensive was launched by a brigade group
of the 9th Indian Division, supported by armour and air
cover, opposite Chaugacha. Indian tanks penetrated ‘about
‘eight miles into Pakistan territory. An Indian air attack was
challenged by the Pakistan Air Force. One Indian aircraft
was destroyed, and we lost two over Pakistan territory. Six
Indian tanks were destroyed in the engagement, and eight
of ours were disabled. The Jessore air field wasshelled by
Indian artillery. All these attacks were synchronized and
launched at widely separated parts of the frontier on
21 November last.

Indians have used tanks and heavy artillery fire. Some of
the attacks were in brigade strength. The Indians had some
successes,against thinly-held Pakistani positions, and cap.
tured Chaugacha, six miles inside our territory, and also
Jibannagar. Their attacks were blunted in the Buinda, _
Simulia, Krishanpur, Jamalpur and Nabgram areas. Indian
casualties in the Jessore sector were estimated at about 150
killed and over 500 wounded. Several Indian tanks were
destroyed. Units of the Indian armed forces, identified in
the Jessore sector, included those belonging to the 14th
Punjab Regiment and the 1st Jammu and Kashmir Battalion
of the 350th Brigade of the 9th Indian Infantry Division.
84. In the Dinajpur-Rangpur sector, Indian pressure en
this northeastern front was concentrated for several daysin
the Hilli area of Dinajpur district. Other areas in which
fighting took place were Pachhagarh, Nageshwari, Aurpara,
Bantasa and Mirzapur.
85. Indian tanks and aircraft were used in these attacks.
Units of the Indian armed forces identified in the DinajpurRangpur sector included the 165th Mountain Brigade of the
10th Indian Mountain Division, the 4th Rajput Regiment,
the 7th Marhatta Light Infantry and the 9th. Indian
Mountain Division.
86. The Sylhet sector, which is in the north-east, was
subjected to heavy Indian pressure from the very first day
of the attack against East Pakistan. Heavy fighting continued near Atgram, two miles inside Pakistan, and at
Zakigang, Radhanagar, Kanairghat, Gauripur, Chanderpur,
Lakshmipur, Latumura and Shamsfiernagar. Indian casual.
ties were estimated at over 225 dead and 100 wounded.
Indian units were identified in the Syl.het sector, including
the 4th Kumaon Rifles of the 81st Mountain Brigade and
the 85th Indian Border Security Force.

80. As many as 12 Indian divisions were reported on
21 November to have been deployed around East Pakistan.
In addition, there were 38 battalions of the Indian Border
Security Force. The 2nd and 5th Indian Mountain Divisions, which were previously stationed in India’s North-East
Frontier Agency, were also moved towards East Pakistan.
The 8th Mountain Division, consisting of six brigades, was
brought to the East Pakistan border towards Sylhet from
Nagaland, where only one brigade was left. Twelve squadrons of the Indian Air Force were placed around East,
Pakistarz. A sizable Indian naval force comprising an aircraft
carrier, frigates, landing ships and two submarines was
standing by, near Vizagapattam, in the Bay of Bengal,
po$ng an amphibious threat to the ports of Chittagong and
Chalna. ‘The approaches to the port of Chalna were mined
by the Indian forces. As a result, two merchant ships,
chartered for carrying food grains and other essential
supplies, were damaged, seriously disrupting food supplies
to East Pakistan.

87. In the Comilla sector, the Indians in this part of East
Pakistan exerted pressure on Kasba, Akhaura, Angadar
Bazar, Phatabanagar, Gazipur, Chuddagram and MorachaIe.
In one battle alone 197 Indian soldiers, belonging to the
19th Punjab Battalion of the 57th Indian Mountain
Division, were killed. Other Indian army units identified in
the Comilla sector included a Dogra battalion, raised in
Jammu. Elements of a new Indian division have been
moving into this sector in the last few days.
88. In the Mymensingh district, also ‘known as Monkshahi, on the eastern front of East Pakistan, Indian forces,
includihg a battalion of the 13th Guards’, fought in the
Kamalpur area. Fresh Indian troops arrived in this sector on
2 December.

81. That &as the position ‘on 21 Novembdr. Since then’ the
Indian a&id forces have continued their aggressiveactions
against Pakistan, including the crossing of our internatitinal
borders and hostile action on our soil. In the past two
weeks the Pakistan awed forces have continued to resist
Indian aggressionin all sectors.

89. In the Chittagong Hill Tracts, which are the south*
eastern segment of the East Pakistan front, the fightingh~
been mainly in the Chota Harina area. The 9th Cur&a
Battalion wasidentified as being in action in this area.

82. To understand the nature of the present hostilities, it
is necessary to bear in mind the details of the fighting that
preceded and culminated in the full-scale war on.3 December.

90. That is a brief record of direct Indian aggression,in
the last two weeks, against the eastern part of Pakistan, and
of the continued presence of Indian armed forces inside our
borders on that front. Thus the fact is established beyond
denial or dispute fiat the Indian Army, backed by its air
force, has been committing aggression against Pakistan from

83. I sh.all refer first to the Jessore sector. On this
south-western front of East Pakistan since 21 November the
8

I
‘_ _.

at least 21 November. Governments which have their own
independent means of information about developments in
the India-Pakistan subcontinent have been aware of these
unprovoked large-scale armed attacks.
91, On the afternoon of 3 December, India opened new
fronts, this time against the western part of Pakistan. This
action was launched by India’s ground forces operating
undr 1’ air cover, and followed four days of aggressiveaerial
rectinnaissance by the Indian Air Force over West Pakistan.
Early in the afternoon, the Indian army moved towards
border posts manned by the Pakistan Rangers. On being
challenged, the Indians opened fire with small arms,
wounding our men. The Rangers fired back on the Indians
in self-defence. Incidents took place simultaneously in the
Shakargarh salient, Kasur, Hussainiwala and Rahimyar
Khan, opposite the Rajasthan province of India.

97. When it had to admit that it wasdirectly participating
in the fighting in Pakistan territory, India cited the right of
self-defence. But since when is it permissible under the
Charter of the United Nations for a Member State which is
not attacked to enter the territory of another Member State
in the name of self-defence?
98. It would be fantastic to allege that,Pakistan, which is
one fourth India’s size, whose armed forces are vastly
outnumbered by India’s in both manpower and equipment,
and which at present is grappling ,with a severe internal
crisis, launched-or even contemplated-an armed attack on
India in November. The territory of Pakistan in the East is
surrounded on three sides by India and separated by the
whole width’of northern India from our territory in the,
west. The direct air link between the two parts of Pakistan
was severed in February this year by the Indian Government through an illegal act banning overflight by Pakistan’s
aircraft. Moreover, only a small part of our army is
stationed in the east. In the face of these facts, what could
be more mythical than a plan of armed attack on India by
Pakistan in November? Indeed, hardly any situation is
conceivable where the plea of self-defence would be more
grotesque.

92. Indians also mounted a military action in the Poonch
area in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir. Two
hours later the Indians began major attacks with massive
artillery support. Those major attacks were directed towards Charnb in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir,
and across the international frontier in the Sialkot area, also
in an area between Jassar Bridge and Lahore, and on the
Rajasthan front opposite Rahimyar Khan. The Indian army
attack was supported by the Indian Air Force.

99. It was, of course, to be expected that India should
have contrived an excuse for launching an armed attack on
Pakistan by alleging that Pakistan’s forces intruded into
Indian territory at a certain time and place. When listening
to these allegations, regardless of their falsehood, the
Security Council ‘has to bear in mind the principle that a
State which is the victim in its own territory of subversive
and/or terrorist acts by irregular, volunteer or armed bands
organized by another State, is entitled to take all reasonable
and adequate steps to safeguard, its existence’ and its
institutions. This principle, recognized in int’ernationaf law,
has been well stated by Member States of different
continents and political alignments in their proposed
definitions of aggression, Pakistan by no means exceeded
this right in suppressing armed and terrorist bands which
aimed to bring about a dismemberment of the State.

93. In the face of this obviously pre-planned and largescale offensive along a 500-mile front, the armed forces of
Pakistan could not but fight back. The air force, therefore,
struck the forward airfields, close to the Pakistan border, at
Srlnagar and Awantipura in Indian-occupied Kashmir and at
Pathankot and Amritsar.
94. The perfidious nature of the Indian aggressionis clear
from the outright and irresponsible falsehood perpetrated
by India. The falsehood lay in India’s denial that its forces
were involved in the serious fighting which began in the
territory of Pakistan on 21 November. On 22 November, a
spokesman for the Defence Ministry of the Government of
India stated: “Our troops are under strict instructions not
to cross the border.”

100. The facts of the situation prior to 3 December which
are ‘beyond controversy are first, that:Pakistan has been the
victim of acts of sabotage, subversion and terrorism
committed by armed bands organized by India.; second,
that these acts have involved incursions into Pakistan by
those bands operating from Indian territory and having
their bases in India; and third; that even the most
elementary considerations of internal security for Pakistan
demanded the capture or expulsion of those bands from
Pakistan.

95. That statement was made .when those troops had
already crossed the border and when fighting was,taking
place inside the territory of Pakistan. On 24 November,
however, a Reuter’s dispatch reported as follows:

“An Indian Government spokesman admitted today
that Indian tanks had, crossed the border into East
Pakistan last Sunday [that is, 21 November], when they
destroyed 13 Pakistani tanks. The spokesman said that
the Indian forces had acted under modified instructions
which allowed them to cross the frontiers in self-defence.
He confirmed that ‘our [that is,,Indian] tanks have been
in action in self-defence on Sunday’. Asked whether they
had gone into East Pakistan, he replied, ‘Naturally; they
had to cross the border’.”

101. ‘I can state with a full sense of responsibility that at
no time and place did the armed forces of Pakistan
stationed in the east take any steps beyond those which’
were adequate to safeguard the borders of the State and to
maintain internal security in Pakistan.
102. Even if it could be assumed, contrary to the facts,
that some excessin the form of a local encroachment across
the border might have occurred somewhere, there was no
warrant for India’s claim that the invasion of Pakistan was
justified by recourse to the right of self-defence.

96. I would appeal to you, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Security Council, to keep this square
contradiction
between a denial and an admission of the
same fact on the part of India clearly in view.
9

103. No less frivolous and unwarranted was the Indian
claim that Indian attacks on Pakistan werejustified because
they werein support of insurgent forces in Pakistan. Even if
these insurgent forces were not stationed in Indian territory
and were not operating from it, the acknowledgement by
India that it wasgiving them arms and other support would
amount ,to an admission not only of interference in the
affairs of Pakistan but also of indirect aggression.Since the
incontrovertible fact is that these forces are trained,
organized, financed, given arms and equipment and furnished basesby India, and that their operations are directed
by. India, they are nothing but irregular Indian forces. Their
continuing sabotage and incursions, accompanied and supported by the military activity of the regular Indian armed
forces, constitute aggression by India as much as does an
assault by an unmixed regular Indian force.
104. I need hardly cite any evidence here of the fact that
the insurgent forces are organized, supported and directed
by India. The fact is self-admitted. On 20 July the Foreign
Minister of India stated in the Indian Parliament that “India
is doing everything possible”-1 repeat “everything possible”-“to support the liberation army”.
105. The situation that has been brought before the
Security Council is, as I submitted at the outset, one of a
breach of the peace. This is but a culmination of a seriesof
menacing acts of interference in Pakistan’s internal affairs
committed by India. The nature of Pakistan’s internal crisis
is outside the Security Council’s concern. I shall not walk
into the trap laid by the New Delhi Government, which
seeks to justify its interference and aggression by dwelling
on Pakistan’s internal crisis. I hope and trust that the
Security Council will similarly guard against the debate
ranging over areas outside the jurisdiction of the United
Nations. The Security Council is concerned with international peace, not with the internal peace and political life
of a Member State. Whatever be the private evaluations of
the happenings inside Pakistan, whatever judgement may be
made by individuals and groups of the rights and wrongs of
the situation in Pakistan, there can be no valid ground,for
India’s interference in it.
106. One principle is basic to the maintenance of il
peaceful world order, and it is that no political, economic,
strategic, social or ideological considerations may be invoked by one State to justify its interference in the internal
affairs of another State any more than they can be cited as
a ground for aggression, direct or indirect. We all know the
many declarations of the General Assembly which ,have
affirmed this principle, I shall not refer to all of them here
because recognition of this principle and its incorporation
into the law of the United Nations is not dependent on
those declarations. It is enough to refer to the Declaration
on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic
Affairs of States and the Protection of Their Independence
and Sovereignty, adopted by the General Assembly in 1965
[General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX)]. Paragraph 1 of
that Declaration states:

attempted threats against the personality of the State or
against its political, economic and cultural elements, are
condemned.”
Paragraph 2 states:
“ . * I no State shall organize, assist, foment, finance,
incite or tolerate subversive, terrorist or armed activities
directed towards the violent overthrow of the r@ime of
another State, or interfere in civil strife in another State.”
Paragraph 4 states:
“ . . . the practice of any form of intervention not only
violates the spirit and letter of the Charter of the United
Nations but also leads to the creation of situations which
threaten international peace and security.”
107. I may recall here that India was a member of the
Committee which prepared that Declaration. It is well
known that India has been prominent at the United Nations
for its advocacy of the principle of non-interference. What
has motivated this advocacy is ill-concealed, and we in
Pakistan know it very well. Oblivious, of the fact that
Jammu and Kashmir is not, and cannot be, recognized as
part of India unless an impartial plebiscite in that state
returns a verdict in favour of its accession to India, India
has vainly sought to close all avenues for Pakistan giving
moral and political support to the people of Jarnmu and
Kashmir in their struggle for self-determination. But I shal1
leave that aside for the moment. What is interesting is that
India’s motivation has been strong enough to prevail over
its relations even with those Powers with whom it professes
to be friendly. Speaking at the 1441st meeting of the
Security Council on 21 August 1968, which had develop.
ments in Czechoslovakia on its agenda, the Indian representative read the statement made that day by the Prime
Minister of India. Here is part of that statement:
“The principle of non-interference by one country in
the internal affairs of another constitutes the very basis of
peaceful coexistence. We have always believed that
international relations should be governed by respect for
the sovereignty and independence of nations, big and
small. We have always stood for the right of every
country to develop its personality according to its own
traditions, aptitudes and genius. India has always raised
her voice whenever these principles have been violated.”
(1441st meeting, para. 125.1

108. That was the statement of the Prime Minister of
India against interference in the internal affairs of other
States.
109. In startling contrast to those pronouncements,
India’s interventionist role in Pakistan’s affairs has been
blatant from the beginning of this year. This roIe has
preceded and caused Pakistan’s internal crisis. The object
has been nothing else than to ensure that the outcome of
political and constitutional developments in Pakistan
should be the dismemberment of Pakistan.

“No State has the right to intervene, directly or
indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or
external affairs of any other State, Consequently, armed
intervention and all other forms of Interference or

110. To avoid undue length I’shall only briefly list these
major acts of interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan
by India.
10

c
8
I/
/

111. First, even before elections were held in Pakistan in
December 1970, a pipeline for the supply of arms and
ammunition by India to certain elements which were
plotting the disintegration of Pakistan had been set up.
112. Second, in February 1971, India engineered the
hijacking to Pakistan of one of its aircraft flying from
Jammu and Kashmir. The hijackers were Indian intelligence
agents. From this incident India obtained a pretext to ban
overflights by Pakistan aircraft from West Pakistan to East
Pakistan over Indian territory, This ban was totally illegal,
but it cut the direct air link between the two parts of
Pakistan, Indian official sources even said that the restoration of the air link would be viewed with deep misgivings
by the people of East Pakistan.
113. Third, immediately after the negotiations towards a
political consensus in Pakistan with regard to the future
constitution
of the country broke down, the Indian
Parliament adopted a resolution pledging support to one of
the parties. I put it to the members of the Security Council
here: would any of your Governments ever think of such
action in relation to an internal crisis in a neighbouring
country?
114. Fourth, the upheaval in East Pakistan was accompanied by, and gained in malignancy from, the propaganda
barrage unleashed by India. It was the vastly exaggerated
aad aensationalized reports published by the Indian press
and picked up by foreign news media which produced the
panic in East Pakistan that resulted in a large-scaleexodus.
11% Fifth, India exploited the refugee problem for
military, political and diplomatic purposes. Militarily, it
created an irregular army from among the displaced
persons. Politically, India cultivated the belief among the
displaced persons that they would go back not to Pakistan
as constituted, but to a new sovereignty in East Pakistan,
There are on record numerous statements to this effect
made by Ministers of the central Government of India.
Diplomatically,
India made use of the refugee situation for
its campaign to secure the stoppage of all economic
assistance to Pakistan.

to be restored their properties and to live in their own
country in perfect security of life and honour. Since, far
from denying their right, Pakistan is most anxious to
receive them back, since Pakistan has welcomed the
assistance of the United Nations in facilitating their
voluntary repatriation, since Pakistan is anxious to arrange
this rehabilitation as speedily as possible, the problem is
purely a humanitarian one. It is a problem which can be
solved with compassion and understanding. It is a problem
whose solution demands co-operation between India and
Pakistan and the co-operation of both countries with the
United Nations. Of all problems, it is the one where playing
politics is totally indefensible.
118. But that is what India did. In fact, by blocking the
return of the displaced persons to Pakistan as constituted,’
India tried to link the fate of this mass of human beings
with the dismemberment of Pakistan.
119. It is being said that a climate of confidence is
necessary for the return of the displaced persons. The
statement is unexceptionable, if the phrase “a climate of
confidence” is understood in its normal sense. The Govemment of Pakistan has done its utmost to restore such .a
climate. Would these efforts not have been much more
effective if India had also co-operated? Would India’s
co-operation with the United Nations not have greatly
strengthened the Organization and its presence in East
Pakistan? Would this not have furnished another element
of reassurance and thus itself contributed to restoring the
climate conducive to the repatriation of the refugees? ‘I
leave it to the members of the Security Council to judge
how vastly different the present situation would have been
but for India’s intransigence.
120, In short, the present situation, now gravely threatening international peace and security, is nothing but an
outcome of India’s sustained hostility towards Pakistan.
This hostility did not begin with Pakistan’s internal crisis. It
merely found in that crisis a potent means for the
execution of its designs, an occasion and opportunity
unlike any that had been presented before. The head of the
Indian Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses stated:
“What India must realize is the fact that the break-up of
Pakistan is in our own interests, an opportunity the like of
which will never come .”

116. Sixth, whatever the nature of the crisis in Pakistan, it
posed no military threat to India. But India immediately
massed a force of over five divisions on or near the borders
of East Pakistan soon after the internal crisis broke out.
What other motive than that of intimidating Pakistan and
encouraging saboteurs and subversionists could have m,oved
India to make this demonstration of its military might at
the time that the garrisons in East Pakistan were hard
pressed in overcoming armed insurgency?

121. An Indian pdlitical publicist, Mr. S. Swamy, wrote in
Motherland, New Delhi, on 15 June:.

“The break-up of Pakistan is not only in our external
security interests but also in our internal security interests. India’should emerge as a super-Power internationally
and we have to nationally integrate our citizens for this
role. For this the dismemberment of Pakistan is an
essential pre-condition.”

117. This is a mere summary of India’s interference in
Pakistan’s internal affairs, which has now culminated in
aggression against Pakistan territory. There is only one
result of the internal crisis in Pakistan which is truly
international
in its nature, and we readily acknowledge it to
be so. That is the problem of a large number of people who
left East Pakistan and are at present on Indian soil. But this
problem, while international in nature, is not political. It
would have been a political problem if Pakistan had denied
the right of these uprooted people to return to their homes,

122. Yet another publicist, Mr. J. A. Naik, saw in Pakistan’s disintegration the road to great Power status for India
in the region. The consensus at a political symposium held
in New Delhi, as reported in the Hindustan Times of
1 April-that
is, immediately after the outbreak of the
internal crisis in Pakistan-was that India must “make the
best of what was described as the opportunity of the
century”.
11

123. Lest it be thought that these are merely the
pipedreams of political theoreticians, let me quote here
some official pronouncements made from India, Addressing
the Rotary Club in New Delhi on 11 August, as reported in
the Statesman of New Delhi the next day, Mr. Jagjiwan
Ram, the Defence Minister of India, said: “Bangla Desh has
got to become a reality and it will become so, otherwise
there would be an imminent danger to India.”
124. This clearly means that India considers the preservation of Pakistan’s territorial integrity as an “imminent
danger” to it. In fact, the Prime Minister of India said on
1 December that the presence of Pakistan troops in East
Pakistan-that is, in Pakistan territory-constituted a threat
to India’s security.
125. On I8 September, as reported in the Statesman of
19 September, the Defence Minister of India further said:
“It is inconceivable that Pakistan would grant independence
to Bangla Desh, but we ahall have to work towards a
situation in which Pakistan will be left with no alternative.”
126. What that situation would be was spelled out by the
Indian Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, to which
I referred a moment ago. Its head, writing in the Illustrated
Weekly of India of 15 August under the heading “Must we
go to war? “, stated that “A war with Pakistan would be a
brief affair.”
127. In the event of such a brief war, the sequence was
visuahzed as follows by the Institute, and I am sure the
quotation will be of interest to the members of the Security
Council :
“There is no doubt that the Security Council would
meet to call upon both nations to end the fight. Whether
the fight should be ended immediately or continued for a
period of time is a matter for India to consider. At this
stage it should be India’s endeavour to get Bangla Desh as
one of the recognized parties to the dispute. In fact, that
is the appropiiate way to win international recognition
for Bangla Desh. It should be made clear that the
cease-fire cannot be signed in the Bengal sector unless the
Bangla Desh commander is recognized as an independent
sector commander for the purposes of cease-fire,and the
Bangla Desh government is recognized as a party to the
dispute as a whole.”
128. The paper from which that quotation wasan excerpt
was fully reported in The Times of London on 13 July.
Again, there is no room for doubt that this thinking was
consistent with official policy.

130. It is thus clear that it was India’s belligerence which
gave a dimension to Pakistan’s internal crisis that it would
never have had otherwise. To say this is not to make light
of our domestic situation. The crisis we have faced this year
has been a supreme tragedy for our country. But may I not
ask this: have not other nations-nations which are models
of cohesion now-gone through similar traumatic
experiences in the past? One difference is that they
escaped the distortions of international publicity of wltich
Pakistan has been a victim. Another and much greater
difference is that they did not have a hostile and bigger
neighbour that had first fomented their civil strife and
exacerbated it and then committed aggression, as India has
done in our case.
131. The Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his
memorandum of 20 July to the President of the Security
Council that “the crisis is unfolding in the context of the
long-standing and unresolved differences between India and
Pakistan-differences which gave rise to open warfare only
six years ago”. (See S/l 0410, para. 3.1
132. The India-Pakistan question has been on the agenda
of the Security Council since 1948. The outstanding
dispute between the two countries relating to the disposition of the State of Jammu and Kashmir is one which has
been discussed at more than a hundred meetings of the
Security Council and has been the subject of asmany as22
resolutions and two statements of consensus of the Security
Council. Let me make it clear that there will never be real
peace between India and Pakistan-and I use the word
“peace” in the sense of something more than an absence of
fighting-unless this dispute is resolved in accordance no1
with India’s or Pakistan’s wishes, nor with the interests sf
any foreign Power or group of Powers, but with the will of
the people of Jammu and Kashmir. An international
agreement exists-concluded under the auspices of the
United Nations-that the disposition of the State should be
determined by an impartial plebiscite under the auspices of
the United Nations.1 India has persistently refused to
implement that agreement. The strain thus caused in
relations between India andPakistan has never been reIaxed
during the last 23 years, for the simple reason that while
the rest of the world may at times forget the K.ashmir
dispute neither the people of Kashmir themselves nor their
brethren the people of Pakistan can ever be oblivious to it,
even if the dispute is nothing but a manifestation of India’s
chauvinism and its refusal to arrive at an equitable
settlement with Pakistan that would establish neighbourly
relations between the two countries on a lasting basis.
133. The root cause of the hostilities between India and
Pakistan is therefore not the occurrences of this year but
the policy so far pursued by Indian rulers-the policy of
denying Pakistan’s international rights and refusing to
resolve outstanding issues between the two countries
according to the recognized means of pacific settlement.
Normalcy in relations between the two neighbours in South
Asia will come not by waving a magic wand, nor WItb
declarations, nor with no-war pacts, but with the readiness
of both parties to resolve situations of friction and to settle
disputes in the only way that that can be done-namely,

129. In October Mr. Jagjiwan Ram, the Indian Defence
Minister-and I apologize for quoting him again and again,
but though his volubility furnishes some useful material it
cannot be supposed that he does not express the thinking
of the Government of which he is a prominent memberstated that any war with Pakistan would be fought on its
soil and India would not vacate the territory occupied
during the conflict. He added, “We shall go right up to
Lahore and Sialkot and shall not Come back whatever be
the consequences.”

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Rwth
Special Supplement No. 7, document S/1430, para. 143.

12

year*

employing the meanS listed under Article 33 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
134.

HOW anxious Pakistan has been to avert the eruption
hostilities is amply borne out by the fact that the
Government of Pakistan responded affirmatively to every
proposal that would bring about the peaceful resolution of
the present India-Pakistan situation. The President of
Pakistan some months ago declared his readiness to meet
with the Prime Minister of India anywhere, at any time.
The
response from India was totally negative. On
20 November the President of Pakistan extended a hand of
friendship to India. India’s answer was the major armed
attack on Pakistan launched the next, day.
of

135.
Lastly, the Security Council is aware that on
20 October the Secretary-General addressed a letter to the
President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India, in
which he said:

“In this potentially very dangerous situation, I feel that
it is my duty as Secretary-General to do all that I can to
assist the Governments imniediately concerned in avoiding any development which might lead to disaster. I wish
YOU
to how,
therefore, that my good offices are entirely
at your disposal if you believe that they could be helpful
at any time.” [Ibid., para. 5.1
The President of Pakistan promptly welcomed the
and invited the Secretary-General to visit India and
Pakistan to discuss ways and means for the withdrawal of
forces of both sides from their borders. But what was
India’s response ? The Prime Minister of India answeredthe
Secretary-General’s letter on 16 November, 27 days later, in
a situation of daily increasing tension, and in her letter
made the allegation that Pakistan was “seriously preparing
to launch a large-scale conflict with India”. [Ibid., para. 7.1

withdrawal to peace-time stations was not possible then at
least the troops, along with armour and artillery, could be
pulled back to a mutually agreed safe distance on either
side of the border to provide a sense of security to both
sides. Could anything be more fair? Could any guarantee
better prove Pakistan’s desire to avoid war with India? In
brief the present situation confronting the Security Council
is one in which one Member State has resorted to every
means, including the classical form of aggression, namely,
an armed attack, to break up another Member State. Since
India’s aggression could have succeeded if not firmly
opposed, Pakistan could not abdicate its right to take
appropriate countermeasures. It is now for the Security
Council to find the means to make India desist from its war
of aggression, Only those means devised by the Security
Council which are consistent with our indipendence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity and with the principle
of non-intervention in the domestic affairs of Member
States will command my Government’s support and cooperation.
140. Before I end, I feel compelled to make a few
observations on the debate which arose in this Council from
the proposal of the representative of the Soviet Union to
invite the representatives of a so-called entity. The representative of India was out of order when he intervened on this
question, because only members of the Security Council
can participate in a procedural debate.

136.

offer,

137.
Now, if that allegation were correct it would have
been all the more reason for India to invite the SecretaryGeneral to visit the’ subcontinent and help to defuse the
situation.
But the Prime Minister of India laid such
conditions
on the exercise of his good offices by the
Secretary-General
as would make him far exceed his
competence.
She demanded, politely but unmistakably,
that the Secretary-General “view the problem in perspective”
and that he interfere in Pakistan’s affairs by making
efforts
“to bring about a political settlement in East
Pakistan”
[ibid.]. Needless to say, the messagewas that the
Secretary-General
would be welcome if he executed India’s
poEtical designs; otherwise, not.
138.
ments

For some weeks the refrain in Indian pronouncewas that Pakistan was planning a large-scale conflict
with
India. But in October the President of Pakistan
suggested a mutual pull-back of the forces of both countries
from their borders. If the Indian leaders believed in their
uwn propaganda they would have welcomed the offer. But
the Prime Minister of India summarily rejected it on the
grounds
that Pakistan’s lines of communication to the
borders
were shorter than those of India.
139.

Pakistan

Wishing to avoid controversy, the President of
modified his earlier suggestion and said that if

141. Rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council was quoted in favour of extending $e invitation.
But let me remind the Security Council that the rules of
procedure must be subordinate and subservient to the
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations and one of
the fundamental principles of the Charter is that of the
territorial integrity of Member States. Any move under rule
39 of the Council’s rules of procedure which runs counter
to this fundamental principle of the Charter is outside the
competence of the United Nations and of the Security
Council because the Security Council must interpret its
rules in consistence With the fundamental provisions of the
Charter.
142. The proposal to invite the so-called delegation in
question is only seemingly innocent, We have been told that
the Council would benefit from the information that may
be given in regard to the deteriorating situation leading to
the armed clashes between India and Pakistan.
143. But with regard to such information, all members of
the Security Council and those of the General Assembly
and of the Non-Governmental Organizations have been
deluged with matedal submitted by the so-called representatives of a particular entity, and so much has appeared in
the press that no further purpose could be served by giving
it official recognition and circulating its documents to the
members of the Security Council.
144. I said that this proposal is only seemingly innocent
because fundamentally it would mean that at one stroke,
by seating such so-called representatives, the Security
Council would have struck at the territorial integrity of a
Member State, and sought to dismember Pakistan by
according this kind of recognition.

145. What is this entity on behalf of which the representative of India -has circulated a document and which it now
demands be seated at this Council table and be given a
hearing? It is. a group of men contrived, organized and
established by India, a country which has carried out
subversion, has aided secession and rebellion against Pakistan, has engagedin aggression against Pakistan and is now at
war with Pakistan. And this group of men has its seat in
Calcutta. We know that right here in New York there are a
number of organizations and entities which claim to speak
in the names of certain legitimate Governments, or so-called
legitimate Governments, and they deluge us with material
and request us to have it circulated as official documents of
various organs of the United Nations. Should we begin to
adopt this practice of complying with their request in
contravention of the principles of the Charter?
146. It has been contended that the letter of the nine
delegations asking for a meeting of the Security Council
refers to “the recent deteriorating situation which has led
to armed clashes between~Ind.ia and Pakistan” [S/10411].
147. What is the situation that occasioned the request for
this meeting by the nine delegations? The situation in
Pakistan was brought to the attention of the members of
the Security Council by the Secretary-General in his
memorandum of 20 July [see S/10410, para. 31, and again
in November [ibid., para. 131; the members of the Security
Council refused to meet on the basis of the information
that was supplied by the Secretary-General, when he was in
fact, though not explicitly, exercising his functions under
Article 99 of the Charter. For there is no other provision of
the Charter under which the Secretary-General can bring a
situation affecting peace and security to the knowledge and
attention of the members of the Security Council. The
situation which occasioned the letter from the nine
delegations is that which erupted yesterday because of
full-scale hostilities between India and Pakistan. I would
submit that the Security Council should interpret this
document strictly and not with retrospective effect because
it had not thought it fit to meet to consider the situation
when certain aspects were brought before the members of
the Security Council by the Secretary-General.

150. Mr. SEN (India): I am grateful to the Council for the
invitation to India to participate in this important
debate,
but I should like to make it quite clear, at the beginning,
“that we are not here under Article 3 1 of the Charter. We are
here under rules 37 and 38 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, This point is most
important for us, and I shall elaborate on it somewhat.
15 1. We have heard a long statement from the Ambassador of Pakistan, which tells the story from 21 November,
and quickly-and I thought rather casually--brushes
aside
much that had happened before. We do not represent a
military regime and I do not wish to go into many military
details now. But I would, however, suggest that it is neither
right nor proper that we should start our discussion on any
particular date. The history which lies behind this great
tragedy has been reported by many people, but I shall only
quote a few paragraphs from the Secretary-GeneraI’s reporl
which is part of the agenda item. The Secretary-General
says:
“It is for these reasons that I am taking the unusual step
of reporting to the President of the Security Council on a
question which has not been inscribed on the Council’s
agenda. The political aspects of this matter are of such
far-reaching importance that the Secretary-General is not
in a position to suggest precise courses of action before
the members of the Security Council have taken note of
the problem. I believe, however, that the United Nations,
with its long experience in peace-keeping and with its
varied resources for conciliation and persuasion, must,
and should, now play a more forthright role in attempting
both to mitigate the human tragedy which has already
taken place and to avert the further deterioration of
the situation.” [Ibid., para. 3./
152. Therefore, the first problem we are facing, the
particular situation we are confronting today, has a long
history behind it. This history is essentially a history
between the West Pakistan regime and the peopIe of Bangla
Desh. Therefore, without the participation of the people of
Bangla Desh, it would be impossible for us to obtain a
proper perspective of the problem,

148. Finally, we believe that the refugee problem is a
humanitarian one. We are ready to do anything that the
international community requests us to do on the basis of a
humanitarian approach to ensure the repatriation of these
refugees in conditions of honour, security of life and
restoration of property. And to say now that in a situation
in the subcontinent when the flames of war threaten to
envelop 700 million people the refugees who are in India
should be accorded a kind of representation in and before
the Security Council is something which is so unprecedented that the Security Council would have to ponder deeply
the consequences of its actions. I would make an appeal
that the Security Council act with every sense of responsibility and respect for the fundamental principles of the
Charter; and should~ a dangerous precedent be set, then
Pakistan would have to reappraise seriously its co-operation
with the Security Council and the United Nations.

153. The Ambassador of Pakistan brushed aside these
people as groups of either refugees or rebels. They are
nothing of the sort. They are the elected representatives of
75 million people. There is neither normalcy nor peace in
East Pakistan, and as a result, we have suffered aggression
after aggression. Now, in order to come to a soIution which
would be acceptable to the Council and acceptabIe to those
who are responsible for running the country, it is essential,
in our opinion, that the representatives of BangIa Desk
should be present here. I am most grateful to the
representative of Italy for having mentioned that I was
perhaps out of order in bringing up this question but, as the
representative of Pakistan has already pointed out, this is a
substantive matter.

149. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
India.

154. Now, the Ambassador of Pakistan starts the story
from 21 November. I have here a report which has just
come in:
14

“On 3 December 19’71, the Chief Military Observer, on
the basis of reports from United Nations Military Observers, reported as follows:
“(a)

Srinagar airfield
3 December.

bombed

“lb)

United Nations Military Observers at Field Station
Punch reported at 2020 hours that Pakistan
troops had crossed the cease-fireline at the Punch
crossing point . . . at 1910 hours. At 2140 hours,
the station reported that shelling had commenced
from the Indian side of the line towards the
Pakistan side, and at 2256 hours it reported that
the area of Punch was under fire from Pakistan
artillery.

Mr. Bhutto produced his book, which is now known as me
Great lYagedy.

at 1745 hours on

158. We are most grateful that the concern of the Council
has been shown over the recent events, but it still is a
matter of great surprise and infinite regret to us that when
so many men, women and children were butchered, raped,
massacred, no action was taken. We cannot forget this
background if we are to consider the problem seriously.

“(c) Field Station Kotli reported at 2145 hours that
small-arms fire from Pakistan pickets towards
Indian pickets had commenced at 1930 hours and
was continuing.
“(d)

157. I shall not weary the Council by reading this book,
but it will show what machinations, what intrigues, had
gone on in order to hold’ East Pakistan by force. We had
repeatedly told United Nations Members, bilaterally and in
various United Nations forums, that one cannot hold 75
million people by force of arms. Did anybody listen then?

159. After the elections were held, Mujibur Rahman was
then described as a future Prime Minister of Pakistan,
Today he is rotting in gaol. No one knows what has
happened to him. I have not met any man, woman or child
who can come here and say “I have seen Mujibur Rahman
in person.” After that, military repressions were unleashed
in a manner and in a way that would shock the conscience
of mankind. Villages were burnt, children killed, women
raped. And those of you who have seen the films of these
incidents can bear testimony to them.

Field Station Jammu reported at 2245 hours that
heavy artillery fire from both sides had commenced at 2215 hours and wascontinuing.

“(e) Field Station Sialkot reported at 2250 hours that
rounds of artillery were landing in their vicinity.

160. It is not good enough to say’ that Pakistan has gone
through a great tragedy and therefore we must all sympa
thize with it and forget these incidents. These incidents
happened and, as a result, 10 million people came to India
as refugees.

“(f) Field Station Rajouri reported at 2250 hours that
they had been informed by the local military
authority that fighting was taking place along the
cease-fire line from Punch to Naushera.

161. Now, wasthat not a kind of aggression? If aggression
against another foreign country means that it strains its
social structure, that it ruins its finances, that it has to give
up its territory for sheltering the refugees, if it means that
all its schools have to be closed, that its hospitals have to be
closed, that its administration is to be denuded, what is the
difference between that kind of aggression and the other
type, the more classical type, when someone declares war,
or something of that sort?

“(g) The Chief Military Observer considers that hostilities along the cease-fire line have commenced, and
he will instruct the Military Observersto remain at
their stations.” /S/10412, para. 4.1
155. Therefore, to begin with, the whole picture given by
the Ambassador of Pakistan is a build-up for military
action. Now, he asked the question, why is it necessaryfor
Pakistan to take military action against India, which is SO
much more powerful, has a more numerous population, and
SO on? The answer to that question is very simple.
Pakistan, for the last 23 years, has not been broken up by
India. Pakistan has been ruling its own people by military
might and at one stage, when they had the opportunity to
say what kind of government they wanted, the Pakistan
military machine was put into operation to suppress the
wishes of the people. So it is not India that is breaking up
Pakistan; it is Pakistan that is breaking up Pakistan itself
and, in the process, creating aggression against us.

162. But that is not enough. The Ambassador of Pakistan
gives details showing that we went into Pakistan territory
after 21 November. We did; I do not deny it.
163. We did this because we had no option. The Pakistan
Army put its cannons on the frontier and started shelling
our civilian villages. They have been accustomed to killing
their own people. I do not believe that is their privilege. I
think this is a barbaric act. But after having killed their own
people they now turn their guns on us. Eight hundred and
ninety complaints of border violations have been made to
Pakistan since 25 March. What was the response to these?
They rejected them all. They continued to shell our villages,
kill our civilians. What is the remedy left to us? To kill
their villagers with guns on our side, or to go and silence
their guns? We decided to silence their guns, to save our
civilians.

156. The first stage of this problem wasthat when Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, the elected leader of Pakistan, held his
election on the basis of a six-point programme, there was
not a single complaint, even from the military rulers of
Pakistan. They accepted that programme and, as a basis of
it, the elections were held. When the elections were held
and it was found that Sheikh Mujibur’s party had won 167
seats out of a total House of 300, what wasthe responseof
the Pakistan military rulers? They negotiated all over the
place. Nothing was known of these negotiations until

164. Pakistan made a great rhetorical statement that it had
not taken any military actions, that President Yahya Khan
15

.

offered to withdraw, and so on and so forth. What are the
facts? Pakistan moved its troops to the frontier long before
we did. We responded by moving our troops. Pakistan
declared a national emergency on 23 November 1971. We
declared it on 3 December 1971. Pakistan has launched a
campaign to “crush India”, “conquer India”, and has
engaged in a completely orchestrated campaign of war
mentality. As a response, we have said that we are not going
to start a war; we shall not fight a war; but if anyone starts
a war, we shall defend ourselves.
165. The question arises: “Why is Pakistan doing all
this? ” The answer again, as I said, is simple; but I had to
give this little background. After having failed totally to
suppress the Bengali rebellion, as they call it-the Bengali
liberation front, as we call it-they have to find some device
to justify their peculiar dilemma. They have sought to
justify this dilemma by making rather fantastic proposals
for inviting India to join and co-operate with them in
repressing and punishing the Bengalis. In other words, we
should enter into a partnership with Pakistan for carrying
out the unspeakable deeds that they are perpetrating
against the Bengali people. Well, we refused. We still refuse.
166. Then there wasa great hue and cry to internationalize the problem: diplomatic moves, various moves in the
United Nations through these proposals for observers, and
this, that and the other-all designed to make it into an
Indo-Pakistan dispute. Once it is turned into an IndoPakistan dispute, people will forget what the Pakistan army
is doing in East Pakistan. They can go on burning their
villages, raping their women and so on. People will then
forget and say that it is an Indo-Pakistan dispute. It is
extraordinary, therefore, to find that today, when pressure
for action is SO great in some quarters, this background is
forgotten.
167. Here we have three or four main factors, none of
which has been properly considered by the Security
Council. What happened to the campaign of genocide? Did
the United Nations respond? What happened to the total
elimination of all democratic rights? Did the United
Nations respond? What happened to the millions of people
who had been driven from their homes and who are
creating such a burden on India? Was any solution found?
After this position has been reached, a large number of
appeals are made. All kinds of unreal statements of
“normalcy” having returned to Pakistan are put out. To
what extent normalcy has been restored can be judged by
the fate of the United Nations relief programme in East
Pakistan itself. Time and again assuranceswere given that
this relief equipment-trucks, vehicles, boats-would not be
used by the Pakistan Army. But this is precisely what has
happened. Time and again assuranceswere given that relief
operations would reach the victims for whom they were
intended. Only the other day, Mr. Paul-Marc Henry explained in great detail before the Third Committee (1877th
meeting] that ‘this was almost impossible. So there is no
normalcy; there is only butchery. As a result of butchery
more people have come over to our areas.

Pakistan. They are coming because they are being terrorized, they are being butchered, That is why they are
coming. And we cannot take any more. Wehave told the
international community time and again that we have come
to the end of our tether. The situation is intolerable. We
cannot go on paying $3 million a day to look after the
refugees. And still they come-not becausewe are looking
after them well; in fact, we are looking after them
extremely badly with our limited resources. There are bad
sanitary conditions and many other evils, The refugees are
living in most horrible conditions. None the less they come.
Nobody wants to leave his home to live in such conditions
unless there are compelling reasons for doing so. These
compelling reasons are the brutalities of the Pakistan Army,
the denial of the rights of 75 million people, the total
negation of everything that human life stands for, the
deliberate attempt to hold under colonial rule 75 million
persons whom they have exploited for 23 years, I have all
the statistics here. I shall make a fuller statement to
establish all these points. There is complete domination,
complete subjugation, complete military butchery. Against
that, the people revolted.
169. We hear a great deal about the revolutionary doctrine: peoples’ rights. I do not know how these revolutionaries will behave when Bangla Desh becomes independent, as it certainly will. It will become independent, not
merely because India helps it-India will continue to help
it-but because the spirit of man in 75 million persons
cannot be crushed. They have tried everything. They have
tried military means. They have tried fictitious administration. They have tried phantom elections. They have put
out bulletins, declarations. Nothing has any effect.
170. Now the Security Council is meeting and we arc
regaled with a long tirade about Indian wickedness for
breaking up Pakistan in our selfish interests, to become a
great Power-quotations from various books andjurists and
academicians. They have broken themselves up. We are
facing the consequences.
171. The only question now is: how do we stop this? It is
not a Pakistan representative that we have heard today; it is
half a Pakistan representative that we have heard today.
The other half is waiting somewhere in the wings to be
called. If the Security Council, in its wisdom, does not do
it, the situation will not get better; it will get worse.
172. Much has been said about a cease-fire.I have looked
at some of these documents about a cease-fire that are
floating around. A cease-fire between whom and whom?
Shall we release the Pakistan soldiers by a so-called
cease-fire so that they can go on a rampage and kill the
civilians in Dacca, in Chittagong, and in other places? Is
this the kind of cease-fire we desire? Are the soldiers meant
to fight and die for whatever causethey believe in, whether
it is the cause of civilization or the cause of darkness, or are
they to be relieved from this particular duty for which they
have taken an oath so that they can go and butcher women
and rape young girls of 19, 17, 15, 13, 11 and evenIess?
173. I hear some jocular comments from the gallery.
Perhaps we are privileged to hear this humour, but I do not
find it humorous at all. The Pakistan delegation 11%
probably arranged aI this. Thank you.

168. Much has been said about the return of the refugees.
It would be interesting to know why the refugees are still
coming if such normal, heavenly conditions exist in
16

-

174. I do not find it at all humorous that women should
be raped. And this raping is not because of lust, but because
of a deliberate campaign to humiliate people. In our part of
the world, if a woman is raped it has various social
consequences of an unbearable nature, and many people,
rather dramatically perhaps, say that it is better to be killed
than to be raped. The Pakistan army knows that, and this
campaign of rape is on a systematic basis so that the people
of East Pakistan can be humiliated.
175. This is the situation in which Pakistan finds itself,
t0 extricate itself? The only way to extricate itself is
* to involve India, and this has been done, as I said, first
through refugee aggression, and now through military
aggression. We have suffered at the hands of Pakistan four
aggressions, and we are not going to take it any more. I
wish to give a very serious warning to the Council that we
shall not be a party to any solution that will mean
continuation of oppression of East Pakistan people, whatever the pretext, whatever the ground on which this is
brought about. So long as we have any light of civilized
behaviour left in us, we shall protect them. We shall not
fight their battle. Nobody can tight other people’s battles.
There are great Powers seated around this table that have
found out to their own cost that people cannot fight other
people’s battles, that they have to fight them themselves.
But whatever help we can give, whether in the form of aid
to the refugees, in the form of medicines, or in any other
form, we shall continue to give it. Secondly, we shall
continue to save our own national security and sovereignty.
If Pakistan, by bombing our villages, by raising a hue and
cry of internal interference or crossing the frontier, believes
that we shall just quietly take all these killings, I think they
should think again. We will not permit our national
security, our safety or our way of life, to be jeopardized by
any of these means. Let there be no doubt about that.
HOW

176. I should also make it quite clear that this build-up of
military attack has been accompanied by the most absurd
statements. Pakistan now comes up and says,‘Why do you
not shake hands and be friends? ” Yet President Yahya
Khan made a statement in Le Monde of Paris in which he
described our Prime Minister in such offensive terms that,
in spite of all my bad training, I cannot bring myself to say
those words. This is the kind of people we are dealing with.
They have neither a solid base nor any civilized standards
nor any political wisdom at all.
177. Pakistan is saying “We offered to have observers;we
offered withdrawal”, and so forth. Why are the situations
first oreated and then all these offers made? But about one
thing they could do, not a word is said. They could come to
a political settlement with the elected leaders. That could
be quite peaceful. But no, that is not to be done. All our
friends tell us that great pressure has been brought to bear
on President Yahya Khan to come to a political settlement.
And what is the result? Nil, absolutely nil. The great
General does not listen to the other great generals, perhaps,
178. So there is no way open for Pakistan now except tc
heat up the military situation-which it has done, as I
explained, first on the eastern front by bombing our
villages, and on the western front by a wanton attack on
our cities, by suddenly, on the second night, sending several

planes. The Ambassador of Pakistan says, “We bombed
only a few cities and villages near the frontier.” But they
came as far and as deep down as Agra-300 miles.
179. Is that a picture of premeditated armed intervention
on the part of India? Would the Prime Minister of India go
to Calcutta to see the refugee camps if she was thinking of
launching an attack on Pakistan on that day? If the
Security Council believes that, let it believe it, but I would
warn again that nothing will stop us from protecting our
own territory, integrity and sovereignty and our national
security and our human values.
180. Without taking too much time, I wish to say that I
hope I shall be able to reply to all the little details which
the Pakistan Ambassador gave; but today I want to put this
broad picture in front of the Security Council and to hear
what the others have to say before I come back again. My
purpose is again to say that the main parties to this dispute,
whether militarily, politically, civilly or any other way we
look at it are East Pakistan and West Pakistan-East
Pakistan as represented by Bangla Desh-who were elected,
as I said, with the army’s full consent.
181. Incidentally, the army had the full authority to
cancel the Constitution, even after it had been drawn, but
then got cold feet, according to Mr. Bhutto. If such a
request is made, President Yahya Khan will find it very
difficult to reject the proposal.
182. So there was no alternative left but to crush. And
how was that process of crushing carried out? Negotiations
were carried on in Dacca in most extraordinary circum.
stances, and at the same time the Pakistan army was
reinforcing itself. Today we are told that some plane which
was hijacked washijacked by Indian agents. If it wasdone
like that, if it was done by Indian agents, why was the
hijacking incident, the blowing-up of a plane, greeeted with
parades in the Lahore streets and televised asif it were
some kind of civilized conduct that any State should be
proud of? And if anyone knows anything about Pakistanand I do know a little-none of these things could happen
without direct Government approval.
183. Now again we are told that all these massacreswere
necessary because something had happened before
25 March, If anything did happen, the world did not know
about it. Thirty-five foreign correspondents were bundled
out, on the night of the 28th, from the Lahore Note1 and
the Dacca Hotel. They were there, they did not write. They
are not worried about reprisals in West Pakistan. In fact,
nothing of the sort happened. It is one of the many
afterthoughts that have been built up on the propaganda
front of Pakistan over the last nine months.
184. Over the last nine months the struggle of the
weaponless, defenceless people of East Bengal has been
going on against the regime of military men in West
Pakistan. It is not West Pakistanis who are involved; it is the
military regime that is doing all this, and there is already a
murmur of protest even in West Pakistan, little as they have
heard of what has actually gone on. They have little wish to
believe all this. They are decent human beings. They do not
believe that their own army-of which, I think, they are

quite rightly proud-could stoop to these low deeds, these
massacres and these barbaric attempts to suppress a
population of 75 million people.
185. Under the resolutions of the United Nations General
Assembly there are certain criteria laid down concerning
how and when an area can be regarded as non-selfgoverning. If we applied those criteria to East Bengal, and if
we had a little more morality, we could declare East
Pakistan a non-self-governing territory. Let it not be said
that becauseI talk of morality I am self-righteous-although
I think that, between Pakistan and India, we are so right
and they are so wrong that I have every right to be
self-righteous. This is treated as if it were some kind of
monstrous charge to be right. It is not a monstrous charge
to be right. We are glad that we have on this particular
occasion absolutely nothing but the purest of motives and
the purest of intentions: to rescue the people of East
Bengal from what they are suffering. If that is a crime, the
Security Council can judge for itself. However, if a crime is
to be perpetrated by actions such as some of the proposals
for resolutions today envisage and India is to be made a
partner to that crime, we shall resolutely and stoutly say
no. No one can remove us from our path by mere
resolutions and mere exhortations. The question of a
cease-fire, as I have already mentioned, is one not between
India and Pakistan but between the Pakistan Army and the
Bangla Desh people. Therefore let us hear them before we
go further into this debate.
186. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): From reports
that we have all received today it appears that a state of
open hostilities exists between India and Pakistan. There is
a grave threat to the peace and stability of Asia. This
recourse to war by the nations of south Asia is tragic and
unnecessary.
187. In the months since last March we have all been
witnesses to the unfolding of a major tragedy. Coming on
the heels of the cyclone last year, one of the greatest
natural disasters of modem times, civil strife in East
Pakistan has caused untold suffering to millions of people,
has created a new and tragic refugee community in India of
unparalleled dimensions and has brought India and Pakistan
to open hostilities. It is time for the United Nations to act
to bring the great moral authority of this body effectively
and quickly to bear to preserve the peace between two of
its largest Members,

:
‘,

:
I
:

8 :

188. These events of recent months have been profoundly
disturbing to the United States. As the President made clear
in his report to Congress earlier this year, our aim in south
Asia has been to build a structure of peace and stability
within which the great economic and social problems of the
region can be addressed. The effectiveness of our efforts in
this task is necessarily determined by the ability of the
nations of the area to solve their mutual political problems
and to build domestic political and economic systems
within which orderly change is feasible. The deteriorating
military situation with which we are now confronted makes
it increasingly impossible for us to contribute to the
economic development and political stability of the area, to
which we are committed.

190. We are not oblivious of the complex factors that are
at the root of this tragic and dangerous situation. But the
United States cannot over-emphasize its conviction that
nothing can come out of a resort to force except greater
tragedy for the peoples of south Asia,
191. The United States Government has made a major
effort in south Asia to ease the human suffering caused by
the present crisis, to prevent war and to facilitate a political
solution to the problem. The United States early recognized
the need to assist refugees in India and to help avert famine
in East Pakistan and promptly responded by providing
major assistance to United Nations efforts in both countries. We have already committed $245 million to these
international humanitarian efforts. The danger of famine
has been averted, but large relief requirements remain in
both countries. The President, therefore, has requested the
Congress to appropriate an additional $250 million to
which would be added further food shipments if necessary.
192. The United States Government, which values its close
relations with both India and Pakistan, has made a vigorous
effort to avert war, which would increase human suffering
and delay the return of refugees to their homes. We have
called on both India and Pakistan to avoid actions which
would increase military tensions. Specifically, the United
States Government has proposed that both sides withdraw
their military forces from their borders, Pakistan accepted
this proposal. Regrettably, India did not. The United States
has repeatedly made clear its view that increasing military
tensions prevent progress towards resolution of the political
problems that caused the refugees to leave their homes and
provided the stimulus for guerrilla war. The United States
Government has sought to facilitate negotiations leading to
a political settlement of the East Pakistan problem. The
United States pointed out to the Indian Government that
an increase of military tensions could only stand in the way
of necessary progress towards a peaceful political settlement and the return of refugees.
193. We recognize that a fundamental political accommo.
dation still has not been achieved in East Pakistan. While we
continue to feel that the only proper solution is a political
one, we do not find justification for the repeated violation
of frontiers that has taken place in East Pakistan, The
immediate cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of
forces are essential conditions for progress towards a
political solution in East Pakistan.
194. This body cannot accept recourse to force to solve
this problem. Indian officials have now announced that
regular Indian forces have been instructed to move into
East Pakistan in what the Indian Defence Secretary is
quoted in the press as calling a “no-holds-barred” opera-

‘/
,‘!

189. My Government is therefore deeply concerned by the
hostilities which are now taking place along the bordersof
India and East Pakistan. Hostilities have intensified in East
Pakistan. There have been admitted incursions of Indian
troops across the border of East Pakistan, It is now clear
that the forces of both countries are involved in military
actions along the frontier between West Pakistan and India.
It is of the utmost urgency that there be an end to these
hostilities, which could escalate into all-out conflict.

18

--_ _

--

tion. The very purpose which draws us together here-building a peaceful world-will be thwarted if a situation
is accepted in which a Government intervenes across its
borders in the affairs of another with military force in
violation of the United Nations Charter.

requirements of the situation before us. I should like very
briefly to read it.
‘T&e Security Council,
“Having heard the statements of the representatives of
India and Pakistan,

195. We ask this world body to join us now in calling
upon the Governments of India and Pakistan to terminate
their military confrontation by agreeing to an immediate
cease-fire and to the immediate withdrawal of forces from
foreign territories. Surely this Council, in this troubled
situation, can ask no less.

“Convinced that hostilities along the India-Pakistan
border constitute an immediate threat to international
peace and security,

“1, Calls upon the Governments of India and Pakistan
to take all steps required for an immediate cessation of
hostilities;

196. The Secretary-General has endeavoured on several
occasions to impress upon all of us the gravity of the
situation in south Asia, He has offered his personal good
offices to assist in a solution of these probIems. Regrettably, the Government of India has not welcomed his
initiatives. Most recently, on 20 October, he warned, in
letters to the Prime Minister of India and the President of
Pakistan that the situation could all too easily be disastrous
to the two countries principally concerned, but might aho
constitute a major threat to the wider peace, While both
Governments have professed a continuing commitment to
peace and a determination not to initiate hostilities, the
situation has continued to deteriorate until now regular
forces are engaged at various points.

“2. Calls for an immediate withdrawal of armed
personnel present on the territory of the other to their
own sides of the India-Pakistan borders;
“3. Authorises the Secretary-General, at the request of
the Government of India or Pakistan, to place observers
along the India-Pakistan borders to report on the implementation of the cease-fire and troop withdrawals,
drawing as necessary on UNMOGIP personnel;
“4. Calls upon the Governments of India and Pakistan
and others concerned to exert their best efforts towards
the creation of a climate conducive to the voluntary
return of refugees to East Pakistan;

197. It is time all of us heeded the SecretarYGeneral’s
It is time both countries accepted an immediate
cease-fire and agreed on immediate steps to withdraw their
forces from foreign territory. It is time the Government of
India joined the Government of Pakistan in heeding the
Secretary-General’s offer of his good offices to assistin the
process of reconciliation that must then begin.
call.

“5. Calls upon all States to refrain from any action
that would endanger the peace in the area;
“6. Invites the Governments of India and Pakistan to
respond affirmatively to the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral offering good offIces to secure and maintain
peace in the subcontinent;

198. We have all seen too much of war. We have all seen
and heard too much of a resort to force to resolve the
problems that divide us. The time is past when any of us
could justifiably resort to war to bring about change in a
neighbouring country that might better suit our national
interests as we see them. All of us know-certainly the
leaders of India and Pakistan know-that the human needs
of our people are not met through the terrible cost of war.

“7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council as soon as possible on the implementation of this resolution.”
201. Mr, VINCI (Italy): Most distressing news from the
Indian subcontinent has been reaching us with increasing
intensity in the last few days: news of suffering and death,
involving the populations of India and Pakistan, as well as
their armed forces-news that has prompted the Secretary
General to state, in his report circulated today, that there
has been “a further grave deterioration in the situation
along the ‘borders of East Pakistan and elsewhere in the
subcontinent” and that “this situation constitutes a threat
to the maintenance of international peace and security”.

199. Let us then all, and quickly, agree that a cease-tirein
this tragic hour is essential and that a withdrawal of forces
from foreign territories must take place without delay so
that progress can be made in building the conditions in East
Pakistan-political,
economic and social-in which the
refugees will return and in which peace can be ensured. The
United States is prepared to support appropriate and
effective measures by the Council to bring about a cesssition
of hostilities and a withdrawal of forces so that conditions
may be created for progress towards a political solution
conducive to a lasting peace in the area.

[S/10410, para. I,]

202. In the light of the menacing events of the last few
days I hardly need to explain why my delegation, together
with the delegations of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Japan,
Nicaragua, Somalia, the United Kingdom and the United
States, has decided to submit to you, Mr. President, an
Immediate request to convene an urgent meeting of the
Security Council in order to consider the recent deterlorating situation which has Ied to armed clashes between India
and Pakistan. I am most grateful to you, Sir, for having

200. In an effort to end the bloodshed, to savelives, to
reduce the untold suffering, we are introducing a draft
resolution which, if promptly enacted, offers the world a
chance to escape another ghastly war. On behalf of mY
Government,
I have the honour -to submit this draft
resolution
/S/10416],
which, in our view, meets the
19

acted so expeditiously in responseto our request. You have
thus confirmed the great sense of responsibility you have
shown since your assumption of the Presidency of the
Council and your talents, on which we are relying this
month-a month in the course of which our deliberations
will have far-reaching effects on the international situation
and on the future of the United Nations.
203. For the last few months my Government has been
following the development of the events in the Indian
subcontinent with increasing anxiety. The plight of the
population involved in a civil strife and the tragedy of
millions of refugees has evoked deep concern and emotion,
both among political leaders and public opinion in my
country, as well as elsewhere.We had, therefore, taken due
note of the memorandum submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council on 20 July
to draw the attention of the members on the consequences
of developments in East Pakistan and in the adjacent Indian
States. We were gratified by the action taken by Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet of France as President of the
Council in July, on the basis of which I myself, during the
Italian presidency in August, held extensive consultations.
204. Acting as President of the Security Council I had put
three questions to my colleagues: should we exchange
informal views about the problem? If so, should we try to
see if the Security Council is in a position to do
something? In case there is something we can do, how do
we do it?
205. I should like to place on record that all membersnone excluded-had agreed to move from the first to the
second stage of consultations. At the same time, I wish to
express my gratitude to all my colleagues for having
responded so positively to my suggestion, and also to the
representatives of India and Pakistan, who have shown such
good understanding throughout all those elaborate consultations,
206. Unfortunately, in such a complicated and complex
situation, raising, as it does, constitutional and juridical as
well as political problems of all sorts, we could not discover
one course of action among the several we discussed that
would at that time have commanded the full support of the
Council. Nevertheless, members of the Council were all
willing to help-at least in materially assisting the populations involved, in facilitating the voluntary repatriation of
the refugees, and in preventing further deterioration of the
political situation in the subcontinent.
207. Since then, the course ‘of events-certainly not
unexpected by us-has led us to the situation which the
Secretary-General and we had feared from March on; and I
should like to seize this opportunity to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General for his sense of responsibility and for his
political foresight,

information from which I was ready to quote only a few
words, but since the representatives of Pakistan and India
have given more detailed information in their statements
today-statements which were most impassioned and
moving in some parts and which we folIowed with great
attention and some emotion on our side; since we have an
addendum to the report of the Secretary-General [S/
1041O/Add.l] and a full report by the Secretary-General
on the situation along the cease-fire line in Kashmir, which
has just been circulated as document S/10412-since all this
information is now in front of us, I will abstain from going
through my own list in order to spare the time and patience
of my colleagues around the table.
209. These official statements and documents and these
reports of the Secretary-General justify abundantly and
more than ever, we believe, this meeting and prompt action
from the Council. They show that we were right in feeling
that our action could not possibly be delayed. We were
strengthened, besides-and still are strengthened in our
decision-by a humanitarian concept of the populations
involved.
210. May I add immediately in this connexion that we
should be most grateful to the Secretariat if we could
receive assurances that the personnel, equipment and
supplies sent for the relief of the populations in East
Pakistan and the refugees in India will continue to be used
for such a noble purpose. We know that we place a heavy
burden on the United Nations staff involved, but we do
believe that international civil servants, material circumstances permitting, are no less prepared than their national
counterparts fully to carry out their duties where emep
gencies occur, even if these entail dangers for them
personally. Our aim at this stage is very simple and clear.
Our starting-point the principles and purposes of the
Charter, which request Members to refrain from coercive
actions, as well as the deep conviction that no situation,
however serious it may be, lies beyond the possibility of a
successful solution through peaceful means, provided all the
parties concerned act in good faith and with the earnest aim
of achieving such a solution.
211. Our objective, therefore, is for the Governments
concerned to agree as a first step to an immediate cease-fire,
to the cessation of all military activities and to reciprocal
disengagement. Furthermore, we think that the Govemments concerned should intensify their efforts to bring
about conditions necessary for the speedy and voluntary
repatriation of the refugees and that all States should fully
co-operate with the Secretary-General in rendering assistance to and relieving the distress of those refugees.
212. Considering the complexity of the problem COW
fronting us, we feel, moreover, that the Secretary-General
should keep the Council promptly and currently informed
on the further course of events and that the Council itself
should closely follow the situation and meet again as soon
as necessary.

208. The most recent events-indicate that the situation,
unfortunately, is now deteriorating more rapidly. In fact,
official statements from both parties have referred to armed
clashes and to acts of war; further measures are announced
by both sides, which speak openly about all-out war. I have
in front of me a list of such statements and of other

213. Mr. President, I am confident that all the members of
the Security Council will share the deep concern of the nine
delegations that requested you, Sir, to convene this meeting
and that they will recognize that it is our immediate duty
20

to take the first necessary step to stop the bloodshed and
turn away the frightening spectre of an over-all war from
hundreds of millions of innocent people.

22 1. No Power can itself alone resolve an infinitelv serious
crisis which the ethnic and political geography of the region
renders even more complex. But when war exists-and,
tragically, it does exist-it is up to the entire international
community, and particularly the Security Council and its
members, upon whom the Charter confers special duties, to
unite so as to shoulder their responsibilities to bring an end
to acts of war and to find a basis of understanding between
the parties concerned.
L

214. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Italy
for the kind words he said about me.
215. Mr, FARAH (Somalia): My Government and the
people of the Somali Democratic Republic value highly the
close and traditional ties that bind our country with India
and Pakistan. For that reason and for reasons of international peace and security, the tragedy that has overtaken
relations between those two countries has caused my
country considerable concern and anxiety.

222. The present situation has two aspects. One is at the
root of the crisis and is political in nature. It affects
relations between the Government df Islarnabad and the
population of East Pakistan. It is subject to a political
solution susceptible of receiving acceptance by both sides.
The second aspect is derived from the first, by reason of the
influx of refugees to India, It affects relations between that
country and Pakistan, It has created a state of tension
which after much violence has eventually reached the stage
of open acts of hostility. A civil war has thus been
transformed into a war between nations.

216. We have witnessed with anguish the steady detcrioration in relations ever since the Secretary-General drew
attention to the situation in his letter of 20 July 1971 to
the President of the Security Council. In recent days the
situation has deteriorated to such an extent that in the view
of my delegation the Council would have reneged on its
responsibilities and on its duties had it not been called upon
today to consider the threat to international peace and
security which the situation on the Indian-Pakistan subcontinent currently poses.

223. This dual aspect of the crisis gives rise to a dilemma.
If we were to consider only the first aspect of the crisis, our
action risks being considered as interference in internal
affairs, and we appreciate the fact that Pakistan is attached
both to its sovereignty and its integrity. But if we were to
consider only the second aspect, our action risks being
considered as partial and as not going to the root of the
matter, and we appreciate the fact that India cannot feel
satisfied with superficial solutions when it has millions of
refugees under its care.

217. In associating itself, therefore, with the request of
several Member States to have this meeting of the Security
Council convened, my delegation had one immediate
purpose: to assist in bringing to a halt the open warfare
now being waged between India and Pakistan on several
fronts and with the use of air, land and naval forces. The
Council will surely have to come to grips with some of the
issues that have given rise to this conflict. But its first
responsibility
is to demand an immediate cease-fire, an
immediate withdrawal
of Indian and Pakistan forces from
each other’s territories where penetration has occurred and
a scrupulous
regard by both States for each other’s
territorial
integrity. This is a crisis situation where every
hour means great loss of life and an additional tragedy for a
region already undergoing suffering beyond the bounds of
human imagination.

224. It is this dilemma which explains the difficulties
confronting
the United Nations, the warnings of the
Secretary-General
and the hesitation of the Security
Council for three months to be seized of the question. But
we think that it is no longer permissible for us to remain in
the grip of this dilemma, We consider that the crisis requires
a global approach to which all the interested parties must
contribute, If they do so in this spirit, we feel sure that a
just and reasonable solution can be found.

218. My delegation appreciates the fact that there are
complex issues involved in this great tragedy, which will
require of the Council the most careful and objective
exercise of its duties and responsibilities under the Charter.
But my delegation does not believe that the Council at this
stage should attempt to link the call for an immediate end
to hostilities with a solution of these complex issues.

225. My Government has, since the beginning of the crisis
and during the last few days, intensified its efforts to
convince those with whom it is dealing on both sides and to
avoid a bloody conflict which could only add additional
burdens to a population that has already been decimated
and severely devastated. With the necessary discretion we
have made suggestions in order to lay the basis for a
peaceful settlement, which of necessity must be political
and which must be based on the consent of the populations
concerned. Other States which share our concern to avoid a
catastrophe have acted in the same direction, and we have
not ceased to let it be known that we are prepared to join
in our efforts to prevent, in the words of our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, “the supreme injustice, namely, war, from
completing the martyrdom of millions of people who seem
to be the victims of so many cataclysms”.

219. My delegation reserves its right to speak ‘on the
substantive
issues of the situation later in this debate, as
soon as the preliminary stage-the cessation of hostilitieshas been accomplished.
220.

Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) [interpretation
French): In speaking now we are discharging a
twofold
duty: that of contributing as a permanent member
of the Council to the restoration of peace by every means
and that which is dictated to us by the ties of friendship
which bind us with both India and Pakistan, by the great
esteem which we feel for these two countries and peoples
and our desire to see them devote in peace all their
resources to development.

from

226. While these bilateral efforts have not so far brought
about the desired results, it is now the duty of the
international community to issue an appeal to these two
Powers, our friends, so that arms will be silenced, so that a
21

remedy will be brought to the distress, so that the
courageous work of the United Nations East Pakistan Relief
Operation (UNEPRO) will be resumed, work which has just
been halted by the growing insecurity of the area, thus
adding to the sufferings of the people. It is therefore
necessary for the solidarity of our community to be
affirmed and organized first to put an end to the fighting,
but also to alleviate the most immediate sufferings of the
people and to deal with the causes of the crisis, and with
the consent of the parties, by negotiation, to promote a just
and peaceful settlement, because only a generous and
peaceful settlement can bring to the expectant people a
response which the latest events have rendered even more
urgent, a political response commensurate with the scope
and diversity of the problem. We are deeply convinced that
we have to make a great effort to rise above our own
differences, an effort because division can only perpetuate
the conflict.
227. For all these reasons, we hope that a substantive
draft resolution will be submitted, which will be capable of
receiving the unanimous support of the Council. It is in this
spirit that we shall continue consultations with the various
delegations so as to endeavour to reach a solution. It is with
these considerations in mind that we shall vote in due course
on the draft resolutions that will be submitted.

rendering necessary assistance to the suffering people, and
wishes to urge other countries to intensify their efforts to
co-operate with the Secretary-General in his noble and
laudable endeavours. Such humanitarian measures may
alleviate the suffering of the distressed people, but they will
not cure the cause of such suffering.
232. The Third Committee of the General Assembly
recently adopted a draft resolution, with the concurrence
of both India and Pakistan, which called for the creation of
conditions conducive to the speedy and voluntary repatria
tion of the millions of refugees to their homes in East
Pakistan.2 My delegation believes that the principles em.
bodied in that draft resolution should be reaffirmed,
especially in view of the further aggravation of the situation
in the subcontinent.
233. I have underlined the basic position of my Govern
ment vis-a-vis the item now under discussion, In this
connexion, the draft resolution submitted a short time ago
by the representative of the United States [S/10416] is
certainly worthy of careful study. My delegation is prepared to give it sympathetic consideration.
234. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my country
will do whatever possible within its capacity to collaborate
with the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, to restore peace and stability in the Indo.
Pakistan subcontinent.

228. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): My delegation strongly
believes that the Security Council should take effective
steps to discharge its responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security in the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent,
which now seems to be on the precipice of a full-scale war.
We have for months followed with deep apprehension the
fact that an immense number of refugees has been flooding
from East Pakistan to the adjacent state of India, thus
creating a tremendous burden for the economy of the latter
country. Recent reports of armed clashes on an increasing
scale along the border of India and Pakistan have stirred
widespread anxiety among the friends of India and Pakistan. Japan, as an Asian country, has been seriously
concerned with the aggravation of the situation of the
subcontinent, which will have a vital impact on the peace of
Asia and of the world at large.

235. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from ChineseJ:
Recently the Government of India openly dispatched
troops to invade East Pakistan, thus giving rise to a
large-scale armed conflict and thereby aggravating tension
in the India-Pakistan subcontinent and in Asia as a whole.
236. The Chinese Government and people wish to express
deep concern about this, and are paying close attention to
the development of the situation.
237. The question of East Pakistan is purely the internal
affair of Pakistan. No one has the right to interfere in it.
The Government of India, using the question of East
Pakistan as a pretext, has committed armed aggression
against Pakistan. That is not permissible. The Government
of India says its dispatch of troops into East Pakistan is
purely for purposes of self-defence. That is the law of the
jungle. The facts prove that India has committed aggression
against Pakistan, not that Pakistan is threatening India’s
security.

229. Mr. Sato, the Prime Minister of Japan, sent messages
last month to the Prime Minister of India and the President
of Pakistan expressing deep concern about the situation and
the wish that the tension should be eased,
230. However, in view of the recent escalation of hostilities, such bilateral appeals must now be reinforced by the
concerted efforts of the Members of the United Nations.
My delegation believes that the Security Council should
take steps to effect an immediate cease-fire and the
cessation of all military activities by the armed forces of
India and Pakistan.

238. According to the logic of the Indian Government,
any country can use self-defence as a pretext for invading
other countries. What kind of guarantee is there of a State’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, then? The Government of India says it is sending troops to invade East
Pakistan to help with the repatriation of Fast Pakistan
refugees, That is completely untenable. At present in l&a
there are a large number of so-called Chinese Tibetan
refugees, The Government of India is grooming the chieftain of the counter-revolutionary rebels, the Dalai Lams.
Using the Indian Government’s logic, is it going to use that
as a pretext to invade China?

231. We have here,a report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral on the humanitarian efforts launched under his
initiative to alleviate the ‘difficulties of the East Pakistan
refugees in India and the distressed people of East Pakistan,
Japan,for its part, has made a modest contribution to this
humanitarian programme. My country will continue to
co-operate with other States and the United Nations in

2 Subsequently adopted as General Assembly resolution.
2790 (XxX1).

22

239. The Government of Pakistan proposed that the
armed forces of both sides withdraw from the front,
disengage and solve the question of the refugees of East
Pakistan through negotiations between both Governments.
That is completely reasonable. But the Indian Government
has most unreasonably rejected that proposal. That shows
that the Government of India has not the least intention of
settling the question of the East Pakistan refugees but
intends to capitalize on the question as a pretext for
committing further subversion and aggressionagainst Pakistan.
240. The Chinese delegation is of the view ‘that in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations the
Security Council should surely condemn the act of aggression by the Government of India and demand that the
Indian Government immediately and unconditionally withdraw all its armed forces from Pakistan.

of the refugees. ‘Fifth, there should be a complete and
effective implementation of the general amnesty decreed by
Pakistan, so that no refugees can be subjected to duress or
humiliation.
246. It is in that spirit that we hope the Council will act.
We are confident that within that framework India and
Pakistan will not find it impossible to engage in a pacific
process of solving the problem which constantly strains
their relations, in a spirit of co-operation and in the
common interest of a prosperous subcontinent.

247. Finally, to echo what the Ambassador of France said
at the conclusion of his speech, with his usual brilliant logic
and eloquence, our stand on any draft resolution or
resolutions will be conditioned by the adequate treatment
of the dual aspect of the problem that saddens us all. I
reserve the right of my delegation to intervene at a later
s$ge in the debate.
241. Lastly, on behalf of the Chinese Government 1 A
should like to state that the Chinese Government and y248.
Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
people resolutely support the Government and people of/ (translated from R&an}:
We cannot but express our
Pakistan and support their just struggle against the Indian
profound concern and alarm in connexion with the
Government and its aggression.
problem which is the subject of discussion at today’s
meeting of the Security Council. We have deep respect for
242. I should also like to point out to the Security
both India and Pakistan. The Soviet Union has developed, is
Council, the United Nations and the people of the entire
developing and will continue to develop friendly relations
world that this act of aggression of the Indian Government
with both these States, which are worthy of all respect. We
was launched with the support of social imperialism.
are proud that at one stage, when conflict arose in the past
Countless facts have proved that,
on the Indian subcontinent between these two countries
which are friendly to us, the Soviet Union itself acted as a
243. That is all I wish to say now. I reservemy right to say mediator; the Soviet Union and the head of the Soviet
more at a later time.
Government, Mr. A. N. Kosygln, devoted all their efforts to
achieving an agreement at Tashkent between the two sides
244. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): The hour is too
and to averting the serious threat of the spread of the
late and the situation is too grave and too solemn to justify
conflict. We are proud that the spirit of Tashkent has gone
a long statement on my part. There is a large-scale war
down in history as an example of the noble efforts of the
going on. It must be stopped. Otherwise its dimensions will
Soviet Union, the Soviet people and the Soviet Government
be catastrophic, It arose out of the plight of the East
to settle the bitter conflict which has arisen between the
Pakistani
refugees but it now involves the whole subtwo States on the Indian subcontinent and to establish
continent. We are bound equally to India and Pakistan by
stability and peace.
the strongest ties of friendship and goodwill. In the name of
249. In the light of these facts, any nonsense about “social
those ties we appeal to both friendly States to stop the
imperialism” is simply playing into the hands of imperialfighting.
ism. It is precisely this tittle-tattle and demagogy about
“social imperialism” which are protecting imperialism and
245. Our position is this. First, there should be an
its policy of aggression, defending its policy of creating
immediate
cessation of military operations and the immeaggressive military blocs and of retaining within them
diate withdrawal of troops from beyond their positions,
countries
including Pakistan; such talk justifies military
and any agreed-upon United Nations machinery should
dictatqrship, terrorism and violence, it hides the crushing of
supervise both the cease-fire and the withdrawal. Second,
democracy and of democratic forces, and aids those who
Pakistan should immediately take all efficacious and comare
fighting against the national liberation movement.
prehensive measures so that the right of the refugees to
pacific and voluntary return will be fully respected and
250. Because it is interested in peace and tranquillity
confidence that they will enjoy their full rights will be
throughout the world, including the Indian subcontinent,
created-this
taking into consideration the fact that the
the Soviet Union approaches the situation which has arisen
plight of the refugees from East Pakistan, which deeply
there objectively and impartially, What is the cause of that
moves us all in the Council, wasbrought to the attention of
situation, which, as I have already pointed out, nine
the members of the Security Council by the SecretaryGeneral in his memorandum of 20 July 1971 [see S/10410,
members of the Security Council recognized in their official
letter as a “deteriorating situation”? And who would dare
pura. 31, which, among other things, gave the background
to declare again, at this table, that the deterioration of the
to the tragic plight of those refugees from East Pakistan.
situation dates from 3 December, and that all was well
Third, the unity and territorial integrity of Pakistan should
be respected. Fourth, there should be massive international
before that? I submit that not one of the people now here
support for India to alleviate its burden and help the return
would be so bold as to say such things. That is why the

attempt of some speakers to close their eyes to the past,
and to what has been happening at least since the beginning
of this year or even since the month of March would be an
ostrich-like policy, a policy of closing one’s eyes to reality,
a policy of hiding one’s head in the sand. We disapprove of
such a policy.
251. It is clear to all of us that the subject of discussion in
the Security Council, as has already been pointed out more
‘than once, is the situation which has arisen in East Pakistan
as a result of the actions of the Pakistan military authorities. We must be objective and call things by their proper
names. We have a right to do so. And this right was
confirmed by history when we acted as impartial mediator
between the two countries, in our capacity as a country
which has been and is striving and will continue to strive for
further improvement in relations with both these highly
respected States and their peoples. It is nothing other than
the result of the use of violence and terrorism against the
population of East Pakistan of which the representative of
India, Mr. Sen, so convincingly informed the Council today.
Millions of people were forced to leave their homeland, to
forsake their land and property and to flee to the
neighbouring country of India, to become political refugees. That is a reality, and those are the facts. And anyone
who closes his eyes to reality will have difficulty in finding
the right way out of the situation.
252. The worsening of the situation on the Indian
subcontinent was the direct consequence of the events in
East Pakistan, which are known to all. A serious political
crisis arose in that country, and its timely settlement by
peaceful political means would have eliminated complications on the subcontinent.
253. It is known that as long ago as December 1970
Pakistan held its first general elections to the National
Assembly, the Parliament, in the history of its independent
development. Among other political parties in Pakistan, the
Awami League took part, under the leadership of the
important political figure, Mujibur Rahman, whom the
Indian representative has already mentioned in his statement. The Awami League went into the elections with
slogans calling for implementation of a six-point programme, which provided in particular for the granting to
East Pakistan of political and economic autonomy within
the framework of a Pakistan State. I emphasize that it was
to be within the framework of a Pakistan State. The
programme also called for progressive socio-economic
changes in Pakistan. On the foreign front, the political
platform of this League provided for the development of
friendly relations between Pakistan and all countries,
including its neighbour, India. The progranune called for
efforts to withdraw Pakistan from the aggressive military
blocs, the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) and the
South-East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). This is the
essence of the problem. This is something that not a single
member of the Security Council can ignore, even those who
are trying to divert attention from it. In the elections this
party won an absolute majority of the seats. As the
representative of India has already confirmed in his
statement, it obtained 167 of the 3,13 seats in the
Parliament. According to the logic of things, it had the right
to form a government. However, that did not happen.

Under various pretexts, the Pakistan authorities prevented
this party from participating in the Government. Moreover,
Rahman was arrested on a charge of betraying the interests
of his country, and mass repression began of his supporters
and the population of East Pakistan, using guns, tanks and
aircraft. The East Pakistan crisis, which began within the
geographical confines of East Pakistan as a result of the
oppressive actions of the military authorities, subsequently
became a source of tension on the whole subcontinent
because of the scope of its development and intensification.
254. From the very beginning of the serious political crisis
in East Pakistan and of the tragic events which followed,
the Soviet Union pursued a consistent policy designed to
settle by political means, -without the use of force, the
problems which had arisen in East Pakistan. The Soviet
Union and its Government made frequent appeals to the
Government of Pakistan to take the most urgent measures
to cease its repression of the population of East Pakistan
and to avert any further complication and aggravation of
the situation. The continuation of the repressive measures
and bloodshed in East Pakistan, as was to be expected,
merely complicated and rendered more difficult the solution of the problems which had arisen there.
255. In connexion with the events in East Pakistan, the
President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr. N. V. Podgorny,
addressed to the, President of Pakistan, Mr. Yahya Khan, in
April of this year, an “earnest appeal to take the most
urgent measures to put an end to bloodshed and the
repression of the population in East Pakistan and to turn to
methods of peaceful political settlement”. It was also stated
in that appeal that “We are convinced that this would be in
the interests of the entire Pakistan nation and of the
preservation of peace in the region. A peaceful solution to
the problems which have arisen would be welcomed with
satisfaction by the whole of the Soviet people.”
256. Unfortunately, however, the events in East Pakistan
took quite another turn. The Government of India, for its
part, also made numerous appeals both to the United
Nations and to other States in the world for measures to
solve the problem of East Pakistan, Yet despite these
appeals no measures were taken to solve this problem. On
the contrary, certain allies of Pakistan in the military blocs
insisted on putting Pakistan and India in the same position
and in attributing equal responsibility to the country where
the serious internal crisis had occurred and to the country
which subsequently became the victim of &thatcrisis. That is
the main and basic reason why no measures were taken at
the appropriate time. The people who approached the
problem from those positions prevented the taking of
timely and just measures and delayed the solution of the
problem.
257. Nor did the Government of Pakistan take any active
steps to settle the problems which had arisen in East
Pakistan. As a result of this, the population of East Pakistan
finds itself as before in a position where it is persecuted and
lives in fear and uncertainty for the future. This is shown
by the unceasing flow of East Pakistan refugees to India.
258. Let each of us imagine the situation of India, into
whosf territory there flowed a stream of foreigners-10

milbon people. Ten million-that
is an entire State. The
population of one State was mixed with that of another on
a huge scale. Why do I make a comparison with the size of a
State? Let us take the United Nations. It has 131 Member
States. Of them, according to information derived from the
Demographic Yearbook of the United Nations Secretariat,
88 States have a population of less than 10 million. Therein
lies the concrete reality.
259. Eighty-eight States Members of the United Nations
have a population which is smaller +&anthe population that
moved as refugees, for reasons which are known, from East
Pakistan to the territory of India. I am profoundly
convinced that not one of the representatives of the States
present at this table would ever wish such a misfortune
upon his own country as to have 10 million foreigners move
into the territory of his own State. But in this case that is
reality, and those are facts. Or else it is “social imperialism”, as one of the previous speakers tried to make out.
260. The existence of a serious internal crisis in Pakistan
was even recognized by the Ambassador of Pakistan,
Mr. Shahi, when he spoke here. He acknowledged and
stated here that a serious internal crisis is in progressin East
Pakistan. That is the first point. Secondly, he recognized
and stated in his speech that this crisis had acquired an
international
character, Thus, the official representative of
Pakistan has officially recognized in his statement in the
Security Council these two important and decisive factors:
first, that there is a serious internal crisis in the country,
and secondly that this crisis has now acquired an international character. It is true that Ambassador Shahi was not
entirely consistent when he objected to the Security
Council dealing with the reason for that crisis. He presented
the matter as though that would mean interference in
Pakistan’s internal affairs. And that same thesis was
repeated by another speaker after him.
261. But we all know that under the Charter the Security
Council unquestionably has the right to study the causes
for the emergence of dangerous situations which threaten
international
peace and security. The Security Council ~SO
has the right to call upon a State or States to take measures
to remove those causes and to ensure that those causes do
not aggravate the international situation and create a danger
of armed conflict.
262. The deteriorating situation on the Indian subcontinent has been officially recognized in a letter from nine
members of the Security Council. But after stating point A,
they did not state point 13.They recognized the existence
of a deteriorating situation, but remained silent about its
cause. And so once again in their proposal, in their
statements and in their draft resolutions we see they have
dragged in the idea-which is typical of SEATO and
CENT0 and, I would say, of NATO-of placing on an equal
footing both the country where the cause originated and
the country which has become a victim of that causeand of
the deterioration in the situation. ‘Ihat method has been
used more than once by a certain group of States when
matters are being considered in the Security Council.
263. Yet the right of the Council to take measuresand to
draw the attention of States to the need to eliminate the

causes of deterioration in the international situation is
directly derived from Articles 39,40 and 41 of the Charter.
Article 40, for example, specifically provides that the
Security Council, in order to prevent an aggravation of the
situation, “may . . . call upon the parties concerned to
comply with such. . , measures as it deems necessary or
desirable”.
264. In other words, the Security Council has discretionary, i.e. unlimited, authority to select measures to
prevent an aggravation of the international situation.
265. Thus, the Council does not have the right to close its
eyes to the main cause for the existence and aggravation of
a situation and to the effective cause of a conflict. But the
events which have occurred and which are still going on in
East Pakistan, those very events have outgrown their
national boundaries, have aggravated the situation on the
Indian subcontinent and, as a result, have acquired an
international character.. And that must now be recognized
by all on the basis of the statement by the representative of
Pakistan.
266. The complete absence of grounds for the accusations
by Pakistan and its powerful protectors that India is
“inspiring” the struggle of the people of East Pakistan
against the Pakistan authorities is entirely obvious. It is
perfectly clear that the flood of refugees has not been
caused by the “plotting” of India or by its “intrigues”why should it intrigue in order to receive 10 million
foreigners and assume such a heavy burden as that of
feeding and clothing them, providing them with shelter
from the cold and the rain and with a roof over their
heads? Why should India “plot” to bring such disaster
upon itself? For this is a real disaster. Yet someone here, in
the Security Council, has been spinning tales to the effect
that it is India which, by its plots, has created the situation
in East Pakistan.
267. In actual fact, it is the inhuman acts of repression
and terrorism being perpetrated there which are the main
cause, They are continuing on a massive scale. It is as a
direct consequence of this that nearly 10 million East
Pakistan refugees have appeared on Indian territory and
that a most serious problem has arisen which is, perhaps,
without parallel in the extent of the personal suffering of
millions of people. Why should we close our eyes to this
reality and to this actual state of affairs?
268. We all know what chfficulties have been caused for
India by this flood of refugees into its territory. This has
placed a serious strain on the social, economic and political
life of India and made it difficult to implement the social
and economic programmes designed and intended for that
country. Some speakers have said here that India has moved
a certain portion of its forces towards the frontiers of East
Pakistan. But what self-respecting Government which cares
for its country, for its security, would not move a part of
its armed forces to the territory whence came a flood of as
many as 10 million refugees? Any Government which did
not do that would simply be ignoring its fundamental
obligations. Ten million foreigners can do all kinds of things
in the territory of another State. To accuse India of
transferring part of its armed forces to a spot where there

were 10 million foreigners is, to say the very least, inventing
pretexts for trumped-up charges against that country.

that shelling had commenced from the India side of the
line . . .”

269. At the current session of the General Assembly,
during the Third Committee’s consideration of the question
of the East Pakistan refugees, the representatives of many
States have already given high praise to the humanitarian
approach of India to the problem of these refugees. They
spoke with understanding of the difficulties which face this
country as a result of this massive flood of refugees. Th.e
Indian side has on numerous occasions showedits goodwill
towards the refugees, and has spoken of its determination
to take all the necessary measures to stop‘them flooding
into India and to provide for the speedy return to their
homeland of those refugees who have entered Indian
territory. The leaders of the Indian Government have
indicated that India cannot take the responsibility for the
upkeep of the millions of East Pakistan refugees in its
territory, and have justly demanded their speedy return to
their homeland, where the refugees should be guaranteed
security and normal living conditions.

-in other words, after Pakistan troops had crossed the
cease-fire line.

270. The objective facts demonstrate, however, despite
the widely proclaimed amnesty in East Pakistan, that,
judging by reports in the international press, only an
insignificant number of prisoners have been released. The
majority of the active members of the Awami League,
including the IawfulIy elected representatives to the National Assembly and the legislative assembly of East
Pakistan, cont.$ue to languish in prisons and a trial of
Mujibur Rahman has been organized.
271. Judging from press reports, as a result of such
conditions in East Pakistan, the already great dissatisfaction
among the population is growing and they are speaking out
in defence of their fundamental rights and freedoms and
their human dignity. Those are the facts and that is the
reality. In the light of this, anyone who tries to place equal
responsibility for the situation which has arisen on Pakistan
and India is making a serious mistake.
272. It is perfectly obvious that, if the military administration in Pakistan had not broken off negotiations with the
lawfully elected representatives of the East Pakistan people
and if it had not carried out acts of mass repression, the
Security Council and the international community would
not have had to consider the question of the internal crisis
in East Pakistan and its international repercussions.
273. Much has been said here about who started the
hostilities. In this respect an attempt was made completely
to shift the blame from the guilty to the innocent party.
Some people are tmaware of the official comments contained in the Secretary-General’s report of 4 December
(S/.20412/. Apparently, some people find it inconvenient
to note or turn their attention to these documents, but
none the less in paragraph 4 (b) of that report it is clearly
stated that:
“United Nations Military observers at Field Station
Punch reported at 2020 hours that Pakistan troops had
crossed the cease-fire line at the Punch crossing point (NR
0567) at 1910 hours. At 2140 hours, the station reported
26

274. That is from the official report of the United Nations
Observers. Let anyone who does not believe this try to
disprove it. Reference has also been made to this by the
representative of India. There is also a statement by the
Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Ghandi, made in
Parliament on 4 December. In that statement we read the
following:
“Today, 4 December, the Government of West Pakistan
declared war on us. On the evening of 3 December, the
West Pakistan Air Force deliberately violated our air
space and attacked many of our airfields.”
27.5. You may say that this is the statement of one side.
But this statement is confirmed by an official documentby the report of the Secretary-General with a reference to
the report of the United Nations Military Observers.
276. The dangerous trend of events on the Indian subcontinent demands an immediate political settlement in East
Pakistan which would take into account the desires, the
inalienable rights and the lawful interests of its population.
It is essential to reach the kind of political settlement which
would create safe conditions for the return of the refugees
to their homes and places of birth and would provide them
with every guarantee from the Pakistan authorities that the
refugees would not be persecuted but would be given a
chance to live and work peacefully in East Pakistan, in an
atmosphere of security.
277. The Soviet delegation listened with great care to the
statement by the representative of the United States. The
first thought which occurs to us after listening to this
statement is that it would be good if all those wishes and
proposals to which the representative of the United States
referred, or at least a part of them, could be applied in
Indo-China and, above all, in respect of the immediate
withdrawal of troops.
278. The Soviet delegation is studying the draft resolution
submitted by the delegation of the United States from the
standpoint which I mentioned in my statement. We shall
have occasion to make our views known, but our first
impression is that it is a one-sided and unacceptable draft,
reflecting precisely that approach which is peculiar to those
who try Q shift blame from the guilty party to the
innocent. /
/ )’
279. M:. VAN USSEL (Belgium) (interpretation fvont
French): As a co-signatory of the letter which was
addressed to you this morning, Mr. President, in which ulne
members requested an immediate meeting of the Security
Council to consider the grave situation which prevails ln Ihe
Indian subcontinent, my delegation wished to reflect the
concern which all Belgium feels at the tragic developmerrts
which have occurred in the last few days between India aad
Pakistan.

/

280. My Government not only fears the possibility of
irreparable damage and accumulated sufferings of which

peaceful people would be the victims, but we perceive, too,
the danger that peace and security may be jeopardized on a
far vaster scale.
281. On 4 October last; addressing the United Nations
General Assembly [295&h plenary
meeting],
the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Belgium emphasized that every effort
should be made to bring the two parties to conciliation and
arbitration,

289. As I said a few moments ago, the Council has before
it a task of extreme urgency. It is peace and security in the
Indian subcontinent which are at stake for peoples who
have already had to suffer so much from under-development, famine and natural disasters. Only a state of peace, or
at least the absence of hostilities, will make it possible to
create conditions for a settlement of the fundamental
problems, that is to say, the search for a political solution
in East Pakistan which in turn must facilitate the rehabilitation and return of the refugees.
290. May I be permitted to launch an appeal to the
Governments of India and Pakistan-two loyal,Members of
the United Nations which have made such valuabIe contributions to the work of our Oganization and, more
particularly, to the strengthening of international peace and
security-immediately
to cease all acts of hostility. No
country is more devoted to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, which is
enshrined in our Charter, than is Belgium. My appeal is
therefore also addressed to the authorities of Rawalpindi to
consider, within the framework of their sovereignty and
their jurisdiction, the necessary measures for solving the
political crisis which broke out some months ago.

282. Our firmest desire and hdpe at that time was that
humanitarian
action, together with diplomatic efforts,
might prevent that which we feared: the unleashing of a
real conflict,
283. Actually, for several months the Government of
.Belgium has followed anxiously the events in the Indian
subcontinent. We felt that the deterioration of the situation
would be inevitable if no effective diplomatic action were
taken.
284. On several occasions my delegation has drawn the
attention of members of the Council to the threats and
dangers entailed in the persistence of the crisis in that part
of the world. Furthermore, Belgium has constantly joined
the Consultations and initiatives on this matter within the
Security Council, In this connexion, I would wish to pay a
particularly
cordial tribute to Ambassador KosciuskoMorizet and to Ambassador Vinci for their efforts and
initiatives to bring peace during the months of their
respective presidencies-that is, during July and August.

291. My country maintains relations of the utmost trust
with noble Pakistan; we know of its generosity of spirit and
the peaceful ideals which inspire its leaders. We are
confident that faithful to its traditions it will do everything
to bring about normality in the situation in East Pakistan,
292. The Security Council has a duty to act, and to act
promptly. ‘It cannot disappoint the international community, which has placed its hopes in action by the
Council. The clash of arms must be silenced so that the
appeal to peace may be heard.

285. I also recall with appreciation the attempts made by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations to come to the
assistance of the millions of refugeeswho have had to leave
their homes, and the offer of his good offices to ease the
situation and prevent the irreparable.

293. Mr.

TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation
from
The reasons which led the delegation of Burundi
to join in the request for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council can be summarized in one phrase: our unswerving
devotion to peace, In this imperative undertaking, my
delegation is inspired by the constant and immutable
principle which governs the policy and diplomacy of the
Government of Burundi, namely, a conciliatory neutrality
at all costs, This impartial conduct seems to us all the more
imperative since the countries involved have established
with the Republic of Burundi mutually appreciated and
reciprocally beneficial ties. The representatives of India and
Pakistan are both placed in the category of our closest and
most esteemed friends. Their talents and their dynamism
have on many occasions made a major contribution to the
cause of Africa and to the task of the United Nations.
French):

286. Since then, the situation has worsened, and Belgium
has multiplied
its contacts, appeals and consultations with
its European partners, first of all, within the framework of
European
political
co-operation, through diplomatic
channels, with the Governments of India and Pakistan, and
finaly,
in New York, with members of the Security
Council.

287. Today, hostilities have broken out, and the Council,
mindful of the specific mandate which the international
community
had entrusted to it for the preservation of the
cause of peace, has met without further delay. It has the
imperative duty to do everything to discharge that responsibility. It must immediately put an end to the incidents
which have become open hostilities, carrying with them the
real danger of an escalation, The Council cannot remain
passive or indifferent, nor can it overlook any effort to
prevent, with the co-operation of the parties concerned, the
horrors of a war.

294. In view of the facts and the principles that I have just
enunciated, the position of the delegation of Burundi at
every level of the debate on the Indo-Pakistani crisis-from
beginning to end-will be totally devoid of all partiality or
partisan approach. Accordingly, our efforts will be exerted
toward a twofold objective: on the one hand, ruthlessly to
eliminate anything which might lead to antagonism between the twin belligerent Republics and, on the other, to
work for the achievement of an immediate cease-fire.

288. At the same time, we express the sincere hope that
conditions will be created soon, and without harmful delay,
which will permit the voluntary return of millions Of
refugees to their homes.
27

295. It is in that perspective that the delegation which I
have the privilege of leading will co-operate fully with all
the members of this Council that are prepared to work for
the restoration of peace between India and Pakistan,
without any regard to ideological criteria.
296. While it is true that the political neutrality of
Burundi, as an ardent champion of peace, can stand any
test, we are nevertheless at all times the unswerving allies of
peace. That is why we cannot fail to be in solidarity with
peace, whatever its protagonist or its origin.
297. From sporadic clashes, border incidents and limited
conflicts, the Indian subcontinent is becoming a powderkeg. Why is this so? For months on end, despite periodic
warnings-even S 0 Ss issued by the Secretary-General-the
Security Council has limited itself only to informal consultations, as if these would suffice to remedy the underlying
causes of troubles which each day were assuming more
tragic dime&ions.
298. Since July the Security Council has contented itself
with delaying tactics. Today this organ of the United
Nations is confronted with a heart-rending human tragedy,
since 10 million refugees are languishing in indescribable
misery. War has broken out on several fronts. This is the
twofold harvest by which the Security Council had distinguished itself. Having unfortunately been unable to prevent
tragedy, will the Security Council now permit itself to
procrastinate when it is its imperative duty immediately to
put an end to the hostilities?
299. For our part we are in favour of urgent measures
which would first put an end to the war so that an over-all
solution may be considered afterwards.
300. Mr. KU$AGA
(Poland) {interpretation
from
French): It is with growing concern that we have followed
these last few months the development of the situation in
East Pakistan. This concern grew as the crisis which
prevailed there produced an unceasing flow of millions of
persons seeking refuge in neighbouring India, thereby
causing that country-and in particular the State of West
Bengal-numerous problems and immense difficulties.

which were crossed by an unceasing flow of refugees from
East Bengal, yas bound to endanger India’s security. This
danger and also the actual violation of India’s borders
during and following military action inside East Pakistan
has led to fighting with Indian forces on the border
between India and East Bengal.
304. What is worse is that there has also been miIitary
action from West Pakistan, action which constitutes a
further and dangerous escalation of the conflict, leading to
its expansion to the whole of the Indian subcontinent. The
development of the situation has gone quite far, and
everybody is aware of the dangers created by the present
situation.
305. Our delegation is of the opinion that the Security
Council, since it is examining this question, must consider it
in alI its aspects, especially if it wishes to recommend the
adoption of measures that would make it possible to
overcome the present crisis and eliminate the roots of the
conflict. Our delegation has always been of the opinion that
the situation in East Bengal constituted the principal source
of the present crisis. That attitude was expressed in the
intervention of the head of the Polish delegation, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, during the general debate at
the present session of the General Assembly /1953rd
pknary meeting]. Speaking of our concern resulting from
the aggravation of the situation in the Indian subcontinent
and the problem of the refugees, our Minister for Foreign
Affairs appealed to the Government of Pakistan to take
steps to achieve a political settlement of the critical
situation in East Pakistan, a settlement which would make
it possible for the refugees to return to their homes,
thereby contributing to the easing of tension in relations
between India and Pakistan. Unfortunately, the situation
has evolved in an entirely different fashion.
306. We know that the siiuation is now marked by new
elements which relate to the marked alienation of the
Pakistan authorities and to a broad military and political
movement which is actively opposing and fighting it. This is
the result of the action of massive repression, the details of
which were presented to us today. The Pakistan authorities
are clearly attempting to overcome and stifle the resistance
movement of the population of East Pakistan solely bY
military means, by oppression and force. This, it seems to
us, is a basic mistake. We are firmly convinced that only a
political settlement which would take into account the
aspirations and demands of the people of East Bengal could
be effective and could ease the tension and overcome the
crisis with its implications in the international sphere.

301. The number of refugees from Pakistan on the
territory of India is enormous. The figure of 10 million
illustrates the scale of the numerous and different implications that this problem has for India.
302. First and foremost-and as far as we are concerned
this is of special importance for the Security Council-we
note how this problem is contributing to the deterioration
of the situation in the border regions of East Pakistan and
India. Nevertheless, the problem is not limited to this
question, however complicated it may be. The disturbances
which took place in East Pakistan in the spring of this year
and which engendered this great flood of refugeeshave also
caused a military conflict which has been growing in gravity
and which today has extended to virtually the whole of the
territory and the whole of the population of East Pakistan.

307. It might be said that these opinions go beyond the
competence of the Security Council, since they relate to
the domestic affairs of another country. But it is not
possible to consider the external phenomena and the
consequences of this conflict without speaking of the mdn
causes of the conflict and without considering the need and
the measures to eliminate those causes and their roots. we
should like to repeat that the source of the conflict cannot
be eliminated and peace restored in the Indian subcontinent
except through a political settlement in East Pakistan, a
settlement which would take into account the will of the
people of East Bengal, which found its expression both in

303. The conflict, the situation of internal war near the
very borders of India, if not on the borders themselves,
28

the result of the elections of December 1970 and in the
massive pobtical emigration, as well as in the development
of the present resistance and the armed struggle inside East
Pakistan.
308. We are deeply convinced that if these fundamental
problems were resolved, the question of the deterioration
of the military situation between India and Pakistan would
not present any serious difficulties. On the contrary, we
believe that to limit oneself to the elimination of consequences without taking into account the actual essenceof
the problem cannot produce any positive results and cannot
bring lasting peace to the subcontinent.
309. The position of our delegation is determined soleIy
by our desire to see peace and security prevail in this highIy
important region, a region which is faced by so many
problems of development. Poland has been developing and
maintaining with the countries of this region political,
economic and cultural relations. For many years we have
been developing such relations on an increasingly extensive
and fruitful basis with the Republic of India, and especially
over the last few years we have ‘developed our co-operation
in the economic field with Pakistan. We wish to intensify
and expand our co-operation with these countries as well as
with other States of that region, That is why any wish to
recriminate is alien to us. Our position is based exclusively
upon goodwill and, at the same time, upon sincerity. It is
guided by our concern to see peace maintained, to serve
peace which is the fundamental element of our foreign
policy.
We are convinced that disputes and conflicts
fomented among the nations of the Indian subcontinent
can only serve the interests of the imperialist forces which,
in the past, in practising their insidious policies under the
Slogan of divide and rule, brought so much suffering and
material loss to the peoples of this region.
310. These were the comments that my delegation wished
to make at this stage.

once. It is for that reason that, together with eisht other
members of the Security Council, we requested &r urgent
meeting of the Security Council.
315. Our action was inspired by a single purpose: avoidance of the prolongation and extension of an armed
conflict between two countries, India and Pakistan, with.
which Argentina maintains the best relations of friendship.
316. The question we are considering has many and
complex facets. One has been repeatedly recalled here-the
grave problem which the exodus of 9 million refugees
means, with the consequences of every kind which this
mass influx has caused and continues to cause for India.
The tragic fate of that large human conglomerate and its
return to Pakistan must command the greatest and promptest attention to this Council.
317. Argentina’s solidarity in the face of this grave
situation has been reflected in material assistance within the
measure of our possibilities. But, without setting aside or at
all forgetting the need to solve this acute problem of the
refugees as quickly as possible, it is obvious that what is
most urgent and indispensable is the restoration of peace in
the area.
318. We therefore support the proposals that have already
been mentioned in the course of the debate that a decision
be taken in favour of an immediate cease-fire. That
cease-fire cannot constitute an end in itself; it can be but a
first step towards an over-all solution in the preparation of
which India and Pakistan must participate.
319. On 29 November last the President of Pakistan,
General Yahya Khan, requested consideration of “stationing a force of United Nations observers on our side of
the East Pakistan border immediately, to observe and
report upon violations of our territory” [S/10410,
para. IZ].

311. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (z’ntelpretation
from Spanish): For several months now we have followed
with concern the events which regrettably have led to the
explosive situation necessitating the convening of the
Security Council today. At all times we have participated in
the consultations between members of this organ and also
with the two parties directly concerned so as to find an
adequate solution to the problem we are considering.

320. My delegation considers that that proposal could be
an additional safeguard against the resumption of hostilities
as soon as the cease-firehas been agreed upon and complied
with by the parties concerned, At that time it will also be
necessary to consider the Secretary-General’s offer to
exercise his good offices to find a peaceful solution, and in
this connexion, in view of our ties of friendship with India,
we appeal to it to accept that offer, which the SecretaryGeneral has made with full responsibility and which already
has the approval of the Government of Pakistan.

312. Our concern was all the greater when we read the
realistic rep& provided by the Secretary-General in his
memorandum of 20 July 1971 addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

321. Tonight, we shall certainly not find a complete
solution to the many and delicate issues that have been
brought out in the course of our discussion. The Council
will have to keep this item under constant review and weigh
different possible courses of action. But we trust that ,no
one will oppose the Council’s now taking the most
elementary and urgent decision in favour of a cease-fire so
as to safeguard peace-that peace which is the fundamental
objective of the United Nations Charter.

313. Unfortunately
the pessimistic forecast of an aggrava.
tion of the situation on the Asian subcontinent has been
confirmed by events with the open initiation of hostilities
between India and Pakistan.
314. We are not confronted with a minor conflict. The
territorial
extension and the hundreds of millions of
persons involved give a clear and alarming idea of the
proportions
the conflict can reach unless the measures
necessary to put an end to the hostilities are adopted at

322. Mr.

ROMAN (Nicaragua) finterpretution
&m
The delegation of Nicaragua signed the letter
dated 4 December addressed to you, Mr. President, request-

Spanish):

29

ing that you immediately convene this urgent meeting of
the Security Council to consider the recent and deteriorating situation which has led to armed clashes between
India and Pakistan.

331. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of tic
United Kindgom for his special reference to me.

323. The delegation of Nicaragua was prompted to be a
signatory of that request out of humanitarian feelings and
because of the special affection we feel for the people of
both India and Pakistan. We hope that those two great
countries will heed the call of reason and accept the
peaceful mediation the Security Council offers them to
avoid a cruel war that will lead to nothing but suffering and
wretchedness.

333, Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): At this moment when the
Security Council is confronting the most urgent task of
trying to extinguish the conflagration that threatens to
consume 700 million people of the subcontinent, 1 shall not
take up the time of the Security Council in .exercising my
right of reply; there will be another time for that, At thii
moment I shall content myself with drawing attention to
particular points of my statement which perhaps were not
correctly interpreted and may therefore not have been
correctly understood.

324. The delegation of Nicaragua reserves its right to
speak again in the course of this debate,
325. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): MY delegation
is one of the signatories of the letter requesting you,
Mr. President, to convene immediately an urgent meeting of
the Security Council to consider the recent deteriorating
situation which has led to armed clashes between India and
Pakistan. We are grateful to you for having acted so
promptly on that request.
326. We have listened with care to the debate so far, and it
is clear that we are nearly all of us inspired by an urgent
desire to stop hostilities, to stop the flow of blood, My
delegation’s purpose in joining in the request to you to
convene this meeting was to ensure that the Security
Council became seized of the situation,
327. Over the last few months, as other representatives
have pointed out, efforts have been made through informal
consultations to see if the Security Council could take
useful action to avert a crisis, to develop the possibility of a
peaceful solution. Similarly, many Governments, including
my own, have tried through direct contacts with both sides
to achieve the same purpose. Unfortunately these efforts
have all so far failed.
328. My delegation realizes that the mere fact that the
Security Council has now met and been seized of the
matter does not of itself make a solution any easier. It is a
complex matter, and for that very reason requires a
comprehensive solution. This will require careful thought,
and we are in no position to apportion blame, to pass quick
judgements on the present or on the past. We must exert
every effort to find a satisfactory, peaceful sohrtion in
accordance with the Charter. But the recent outbreak of
large-scale hostilities has brought us up short.

332. I call on the representative of Pakistan,

334. When I said that Pakistan has an internal crisis I said
nothing which has not been acknowledged in Pakistan. I
clearly stated that in this crisis our neighbour found a
potent means for the execution of its designs as the
opportunity of a century to break up Pakistan.
335. Turning now to my statement that the problem of
the displaced persons is international I also made it clear
that it was not of a political nature because Pakistan had
not denied the right of the displaced persons to repatria.ion. It is only in its humanitarian aspects that the refugee
problem is international, because a large number of
Governments have made contributions in response to the
appeals of the Secretary-General for humanitarian assistance enabling the international community to launch the
United Nations East Pakistan Relief Operation and relief
operations through the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees as the .focal point. ‘I wish it to be clearly
understood that it is only in this humanitarian sense thal I
said that the problem of the displaced persons is international.
336. At this moment, when the people of West Pakistan
are united in their determination to undergo the same peril
and sacrifice that their brothers in East Pakistan have faced
for all these months from outside aggression, when they are
laying down their lives in the defense of East Pakistan, a
new unity of hearts and minds is being forged among our
people to defend every part of our homeland. At this
moment the people of West Pakistan are braving death and
destruction by deflecting the weight of Indian armed
attacks from East Pakistan to themselves. I feel that I am in
duty bound to state this because I have heard several
speakers talk of the divisions between the people of East
and West Pakistan.

329. We cannot evade our responsibilities. What must we
do now? Our task, as members of the highest world body
charged with responsibility for the maintenance of world
peace and security is to exert our influence to restore
peace, to bring the fighting to a stop and to secure the relief
of suffering. My delegation will be guided by that criterion.

337. The PRESIDENT:
The list of speakers is now
exhausted. First I wish to make a statement at this stage as
the PRESIDENT of the Security Council and later in mY
capacity as the representative of Sierra Leone.

330. I suggest that any proposals made should be considered in the context of whether or not they are likely to
help us towards a satisfactory solution, and in this
connexion I share the view of the Fepresentative of France
that unanimity is of the essence. It is in this spirit that my
delegation will examine all draft resolutions submitted here.

338. I wish to clarify a situation which came up during the
earlier stages of our meeting this afternoon, It is mY
understanding that when the representative of Italy rcquested that, in view of the urgency of the situation on the
Indian subcontinent and the necessity, generally reoognized
by all, for a swift end to be put to the conflict, only the
two parties to the conflict should be invited to speak on the
30

subject at today’s meeting, In a ruling on the consideration
of the procedural matter as to whether or not to invite the
representative of the Bangla Desh at this stage, we do not
for one moment include the request made by the representative of Tunisia who, as a Member of the United Nations,
falls under a completely different category. I might perhaps
at this point add that although the representative has, in his
letter contained in document S/10414, dated today, requested an opportunity to address the Council, he has not
in any way indicated an intention to speak on the matter
during this meeting, Under the circumstances, therefore,
my ruling does not apply to the request of the representative of Tunisia.
339. I should now like to make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of SIERRA LEONE. The
deteriorating situation in the Indian subcontinent, which
has given rise to this meeting today, has been of very
serious concern to my Government. The present grave
situation now existing in that area, where untold destruction to life and property is being inflicted, is a matter for
deep regret. My Government has already addressed an
appeal to both India and Pakistan, the parties directly
involved in the dispute, to exercise restraint and to desist
from the use of force to settle their dispute.
340. As we speak here the war continues. My delegation is
anxious to see an immediate end to the hostilities and
would therefore support any genuine move by the Council
which seeks to achieve that objective. It is important for
the members of the Council to act now and with
unanimity.

344, In view of the seriousness of the matter under
discussion and of the existence of substantial differences of
opinion on the draft resolution submitted by the United
States representative [ibid.], which the Soviet delegation
cannot accept betause we consider it a highly one&ded
document, I propose that we postpone the vote until
tomorrow.
345. Mr, BUSH (United States of America): I believe that
under the provisional, rules of procedure our motion for
suspension of the meeting takes priority. I believe that our
motion for a short suspension should be disposed of before
the motion of the representative of the Soviet Union.
Therefore, I would ask the President to act so as to accord
us the brief suspension we have called for under the rules of
procedure, and I would hope that others would concur in
this.
346. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
States has asked for a 20.minute suspension of the meeting
before the vote is taken on the draft resolution.
347. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): Technically,
we would be acting under rule 33, subparagraph 1, which
would be a suspension, and we would like to set the time of
the suspension at 20 minutes, or 30 minutes if representatives so desire.
348. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
States has asked for a suspension of the meeting for
20 minutes.
349. Mr, MALIK

341. I reserve the right of my delegation to speak again
during any further consideration of this item.
342. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): As there are
no further speakers in this debate, the next order of
business on the agenda is to vote on the draft resolution
which we have submitted [S/10416]. It seems to our
delegation that the Security Council must act tonigbt. If it
does not, it is going to look weak and it will be failing to
live up to its obligation. The world is going to be looking at
us and we ought to do something. My suggestion at this
point would be that we should take a 20-minute recess
which
would give the various delegations time to consult on
the draft resolution that is before the Security Council.
Perhaps we could have prompt action by the Council after
the reconvening of the meeting at the end of 20 minutes, if
that length of time would suit the convenience of the Chair
and the rest of the Council. The United States delegation
requests a 20-minute recess with a prompt reconvening of
the Council so that it can act with the eyes of the world
upon it.
Mr.

MALIK

(translated

343.

porn

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Under the rules of procedure, I

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
When discussing such acute
international
situations I am always envious-a human
failing-of
our United States colleague. He has his State
Department so close at hand. All he has to do is to pick UP
the telephone, wake up the Secretary of State, report on
the situation which has arisen in the Council and ask for
further instructions. Unfortunately, no one else amongst US
is so privileged.

have the right to make an amendment to that proposal. I
suggest an addition to the proposal of the representative of
the United States: namely, that we adjourn the meeting for
24 hours instead of 20 minutes.
350. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): Mr. President,
under rule 33 of the rules of procedure, the motion to
suspend the meeting takes precedent over an amendment.
We are entitled to a decision by the Council on our request
for a suspension. An amendment is subordinate to the
motion for suspension. We would like to get a ruling and
the decision of the Council on whether we might suspend
the meeting, in accord with the priority motion that we
have offerid’here.
35 1. Mr. FARAH’(Somalia): My delegation would like to
make an appeal-in which I hope we will be joined by the
other non-permanent members of the Council-to
the
permanent members of the Council to refrain from making
this issue a platform for political rivalries or differences.
The issue is complex and tragic enough without having
another dimension added to it.

Russian):

3.52. A war is raging on the frontiers of Pakistan and India.
The Council has a duty at least to call for an immediate
cease-fire. Otherwise, if we delay it for 24 hours, or for 12
hours, whatever deaths result will surely be on the
conscience of all of us. I would therefore ask that any draft
resolutions that might be in hand, which members might
wish to submit for consideration by the Council, be
31

presented here and that we have an opportunity of
exchanging views on their content. I think it would be
against the- pracedure of the Council to have a draft
resolution presented to us and to go to an immediate vote
without having an opportunity of exchanging views on the
content.
353. The PRESIDENT: May I refer the Council to rule 33
of the rules of procedure. The motion to suspend the
meeting, as requested by the representative of the United
States, takes precedence over the request for an amendment
by the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. In the circumstances, I would suggest, there
being a motion for suspension, that a vote be taken
immediately.
354. I shall now put to the vote the motion of the
representative of the United States to suspend the meeting
for 20 minutes to allow discussions outside.
A vote WQStaken by show of hands.

1rz favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Against: None.
Abstaining: France, Poland, Syrian Arab Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.
One member (China J did not participate in the vote.
The motion
4 abstentions.

was adopted by 10 votes to none, with

The meeting was suspended at 11 p.m. and resumed on
Sunday, 5 December, at I.2 05 a.m.

355. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I should like
formally to move that we take a vote at this time on the
United States draft resolution contained in document
S/10416. We are prepared to vote-and I think the speakers’
list has been exhausted-and we should now like to move
for a vote on that draft resolution,
356. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I have already stated on behalf
of the Soviet delegation that we find the draft resolution
submitted by the United States representative unacceptable. I also drew attention to the fact that it is easier for
him to reach an immediate agreement on any draft with the
State Department. It is not so easy for other representatives.
(translated

from Russian):

“Having considered the letter of nine members ofw
Security Council (S/10411]
and the report of the
Secretary-General [5’/10#.20],

“1. Calls for a political settlement in East Pakistti
which would inevitably result in a cessation of hostfljtits;
“2. Calls upon the Government of Pakistan to take
measures to cease all acts of violence by Pakistani fortes
in East Pakistan which have led to deterioration of the
situation,”
359. If there is to be a vote today, the delegation of the
Soviet Union will insist that a vote is also taken today on
that draft resolution,
360. The PRESIDENT:
India.

I call on the representative of

361. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, I know that you are
very tired and we have taxed your patience beyond
endurance, but I think I should be remiss if I did not make
a short statement before the vote is taken tonight.
362. I should like to take this opportunity to make a few
comments and state my Government’s views on the
proposals as frankly and as fairly as I can. The main
concern shown during the debate is to arrest any further
fighting immediately. That is in our view quite understandable but quite unrealistic. It is unrealistic in the sense
that it would not stop the Mukti Bahini from fighting or
the Pakistan Army from continuing its oppression and
sending more and more refugees into India. As I hak*
already explained, we cannot take any more refugees.
363. I should like to say that had this concern for saving
lives been matched with a similar concern for saving
countless lives during the last nine months, it would have
been a source of some comfort to my Government and the
Indian people. What, indeed, has happened to our conventions on genocide, human rights, self-determination, and
so on?
364. It is in this context that we find it very regrettable-indeed most deplorable-that
a decision of this
nature, which concerns 75 million persons, should be taken
without listening to. their own representatives.
36.5. I therefore state again that, while we shalI make a
fuller statement later, we do protest and resent the fact that
this kind of decision is being taken without consulting the
people who are most deeply and intimately concerned.
366. Secondly, I should like to say-as I have said
before-that this is the fourth time Pakistan hascommitted
aggression against India. On previous occasions India llas
not had a proper discussion of this problem, and certaia&
not a proper solution, and we have a strong sense of
grievance in this respect. We are therefore not going t*
submit to any pressures or threats from any’ quarter. We
reserve our right to take, and to continue taking, all
appropriate and necessary measures to safeguard our
security and defence against aggression from Pakistan. We
should be failing in our duty if we did not make it

357. I submitted a specific proposal, but the United States
representative insisted on his own. We have wasted approximately an hour on this point, but the results are still the
same: the United States representative still insists on a vote
being taken on his draft resolution.‘That is up to him.
358. The Soviet delegation is formally introducing its own
draft resolution [S/10418], which states:
“Th_e Security Council,

32

absoiutely clear that any interference in India’s right of
self-defence or any encouragement or cover to Pakistan’s
aggression would have grave consequences for the peace and
security of this whole region; let the United Nations and all
the members of the Security Council not fail to take full
note of this warning. We should be extremely sorry if they
failed to pay heed to our considerations, as they have done
on previous occasions.
367. Lastly, we deeply regret that Pakistan has been
encouraged over these last nine months to commit $1 kinds
of atrocious deeds and aggression against India because it
has been supported by -&era1 countries-for whatever
reasons, and I shall not go into those reasons. We are
absolutely convinced that, but for this encouragement, such
an attitude on the part of Pakistan would not have been
evident.
368. The PRESIDENT: The Council now has before it
two draft resolutions: one submitted by the United States
delegation and the other by the Soviet delegation. If there
are no further speakers, we shall proceed to the vote.
369. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to introduce on
behalf of the delegations of Argentina, Burundi, Nicaragua
and Sierra Leone, and my own delegation, a draft resolution which will appear in document S/10419. I should
like that draft resolution to be placed before the Council at
the appropriate time so that it may be given the consideration which it deserves,
370. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I should like to announce to the
members of the Council that, after the voting has taken
place on the two diaft resolutions which have been
submitted,
my delegation and two other delegations are
prepared to introduce our own draft resolution. Indeed I
would suggest that after the first vote we should be allowed
to introduce our draft resolution in order that the different
proposals may be before the members of the Council. The
draft resolution submitted by the delegation of Somalia and
other sponsors is now before the Council, and the Council
should also have before it our draft resolution.

draft resolution has failed to condemn the armed aggression
against Pakistan committed by the Indian Government with
the support of the Soviet Union and it has failed to express
support for Pakistan’s just struggle against aggression. At
the same time, the Cllinesedelegation has reservations in
principle against the practice of sending observers by the
United Nations.
373. The Chinese delegation voted for this draft resolution
and at the same time would like to make the above-mentioned two points of reservations,
374. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation
voted in favour of the draft resolution for the following
reasons. We are fully aware that it is not perfect; indeed, it
is far from being perfect. If we had had the time to devote
to it and if the gravity of the situation had not imposed on
us the obligation to act urgently, there would have been
room for a great deal of improvement. We voted affirmatively because the draft tied together what we believe to be
the three main aspects of the problem: the solution of the
refugee problem immediately, without any risk to the
refugees and without discrimination; cease-fire; and immediate withdrawal. Those three aspects, in our view, are
intertwined. They are of great concern and of great gravity
and have great repercussions and vital importance for
everybody-so much so that any deficiency of languhge or
shortcoming of expression in the draft must yield to the
higher consideration of stopping the bloodshed, preserving
territorial integrity and fulfilling the human rights of the
distressed East Pakistan refugees in India.’ It was that
consideration which compelled us to cast an affirmative
vote.
375. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated ,/Yom Russian): The delegation of the Soviet

Union firmly rejects the usual slanderous statement made
by one of the delegations at this meeting. In connexlon
with the results of the vote, the Soviet delegation notes that
three permanent members of the Council did not support
the United States draft resolution. Only two permanent
members of the Security Council voted for it. The duet
continues.

37 1. The PRESIDENT: As there are no other speakers at
this time, the Council will now proceed to vote on the draft
resolution
submitted by the United States, which is
contained in document S/10416.

376. Mr. VINCI (Italy): We have now voted on the first
draft resolution. As I announced earlier, three delegations
would like to present their own draft resolution.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
liz favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, Italy,

377: The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.

Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, United States of America.
Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Against:

372. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (interpretation porn
Chinese): In the opinion of the Chinese delegation, this

378. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): You stated that the Security

Council was about to vote on the two draft resolutions that
have been submitted, one by the United States and the
other by the Soviet Union. A vote has been taken on the
United States draft. Under the rules of procedure and in
accordance with established practice, voting should continue; only after it has been completed can new proposals
be submitted or views be expressed. I would therefore
request you to proceed with the vote.

France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland.

Abstaining:

Northern
The

result of the vote was II in favour, 2 against, with

2 abstentions.

Vze- draft resolution wasnot adopted,one of the negative
voies being that of a permanentmemberof the Council.
33

379. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has always asked members to be realistic in
everything they do. Now, earlier the representative of Italy
requested that as soon as the first vote had been taken he
be allowed to intervene and present his own draft resolution before another w&s voted on. There wasno ejection
then, and in the circumstances I thought everything was in
order.

L’Gravely concerned that hostilities have broken @jl
between India and Pakistan which constitute an imme
diate threat to international peace and security,
“MindfuZ of its responsibility under the relevant p;r++
sions of the Charter of the United Nations,

“1. Calls upon the Governments concerned forlhw;i&
as a first step, for an immediate cease-fire and far a
cessation of all military activities;

380. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.

“2. Urges the Governments concerned, in accordan%
with the principles envisaged in the United Nat&%
Charter, to intensify their efforts to bring about CL)&
tions necessary for the speedy and vohmtary repatriarina
of the millions of refugees to their homes;

381. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated fvom Russian): There has clearly been a rnip
understanding. When you spoke of the first vote, you
mentioned the two draft resolutions and had in mind the
first round of the voting on both drafts on an equal footing.
You had put one to the vote and I understood that you
would proceed immediately to a vote on the second draft
resolution. I understood that, after completion of the first
round of voting on these draft resolutions which have
already been submitted, we would then turn to the
proposal by the representative of Italy.

“3. CaZZsfor the full co-operation of all States with Kh::
Secretary-General for rendering assistanceto and reli’ePip#
the distress of those refugees.”
I should like to insert a very simple comment on opewt~re
paragraphs 2 and 3. They reflect exactly the contents of a
draft resolution that had been adopted by the Tlrir?
Committee of the General Assembly .3

382. The PRESIDENT: Unfortunately, there has been a
misunderstanding. After announcing that there were two
draft resolutions to be voted on, I called on the representative of Italy, and he indicated-before the vote-that he
wished after the first vote to present his draft resolution.
No member of this Council objected or said anything.
Under the circumstances, I took it that his request was
acceptable to the Council.

“4. Requests the Secretary-General to keep t!%
Council promptly and currently informed on the silla*
tion;
“5. Decides to follow the situation closely and to met!
again as soon as necessary.”

383. I call upon the representative of Italy to make his
statement, following which the Soviet draft resolution will
be voted on.

387. I would add that the sponsors of this draft resoluCz?
Are flexible and indeed ready to consider suggestionsacl
amendments that could in the view of members of tie
Council improve .the text land finally bring about a
consensus or at least agreement wide enough to allow &
Security (Council to adopt a final text, which, as the
representative of France pointed out in his statement, COG
show that the Security Council is making a joint effort and
taking a united position on this very crucial and important
question.

384+ Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, you very correctly
interpreted my request., and I believe that you are correct
also in saying that since no members objected to my
request I am allowed to speak and introduce a new draft
resolution. I would ask Ambassador Malik’s indulgence
while I introduce this draft resolution.
385. We certainly feel the Council should not adjourn
without making a further attempt-if possible tonight-to
take some decision in order to stop the fighting that is
going on and to take a first step towards the final political
solution of the problem confronting us. It is a most
complex problem, as has clearly emerged from our debate
this evening. In this spirit, and with this purpose in mind,
oh behalf of the delegations of Belgium, Japan and Italy I
introduce the draft resolution that has just been circulated
as document S/10417.

388. I think that if this would be too difficult to aChie%t
very speedily, we could consider postponing the vote Qn
this draft resolution, provided-and that is what I shou!d
like to suggest-that the voting on the other draft RW.
lutions which have been submitted or are going to be
submitted is also subjected to a postponement.
389. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now proceed td
vote on the draft resolution submitted by the delegation Qi
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (S/10418/ +

386. May I just read out the draft without making too
many comments because I think it is self-explanatory:

390. I call on the representative of Argentina on a Point of
order.

“The Security Cquncil,

39 1. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (irzteqre@lioil

“flotiw the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 and
4 December 1971 [S/10410 and Add.l, S/lO#lZJ,

from Spanish): Mr, President, I wish to request an exPlanl-

tion from you because you have just said that YOU Would
put to the vote the draft resolution of the USSR. On the

‘Having heard the statements of the representatives of
India and Pakistan,

3 Idem.

34

9
i
1
(
$
I

basis of the numbering of those documents the draft
resolution submitted by Belgium, Italy and Japan has
precedence, since it is numbered S/1041 7: the Soviet
proposal is numbered S/10418. I should like to know if
there is any special reason why we should abandon the
order established in our rules of procedure.
392. The PRESIDENT: According to the order of presentation and receipt, the first draft resolution received by the
President was that of the United States, the second wasthat
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the third was
the draft resolution just explained by the representative of
Italy, and the fourth was the one ‘mentioned recently by
the representative of Somalia. That is the order in which
they were received and presented. I am not responsible for
the numbering.
393. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Bearing in mind the fact that we

have three draft resolutions before us, I was ready to
SUppOti
the reasons given by the representative of Italy for
postponing a vote on them. If, there is agreement on that
point, the Soviet delegation is prepared not to press for a
vote on its own draft resolution, subject to the proviso that
votes on all three resolutions will be postponed. This will
give delegations the possibility to study these draft resolutions more carefully and, perhaps, to find some mutually
acceptable solution.
394. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, I am very grateful to you for
the information that you have just given me concerning the
order in which the documents were presented. For my part,
I have no objection whatsoever to the Council’s voting first
on the draft resolution submitted bY the Soviet Union.
Nevertheless, I think that in order to comply with the rules
and regulations we should alter the numbering and we
should assign to the USSR draft resolution the number
S/10417 and to the draft resolution submitted by Belgium
and other countries the number S/10418. Otherwise we
should be acting against the rules.

towards possible amendments and I therefore wonder
whether a further effort should not be made and whether
we should not ask YOU, Mr. President, to see whether you
can achieve a consensus so that at least an effective and
united messagecan go out from here.
397. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I do understand the feelings of
the representative of Argentina. Of course it would have
been desirable and even better if we could have come to
some positive outcome in our deliberations this evening.
But I do share the view expressed by the representative of
the United Kingdom that we are hardly likely to come to a
final decision this evening. In this connexion I should like
to express the appreciation of my delegation for the spirit
of conciliation which has been shown by the representative
of the Soviet Union in not pressing his draft resolution to
the vote. I agreewith and support the suggestion made by
the representative of the United Kingdom that we should
postpone the vote on these three draft resolutions in order
to give time to all members of the Council to consult and to
attempt to come to some decision which would command
the unanimous support of this body.
398. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
from flench]: I whole-heartedly support the proposal made
by the representative of the United Kingdom. Naturally,
like every member of the Council, we feel a sense of
urgency. We wish to put an end as quickly as possible to a
painful and bloody conflict. After all, casualties have been
occurring for months now, What really counts is effectiveness and effectiveness is unanimity; unanimity means
consultations among ourselves. It will not be possible to
reach agreement within the next few minutes. We will end
up, as we have begun, with a hash of resolutions, and this
will add nothing to the prestige of the Council.
399. That is why I support the proposal of the representative of the United Kingdom. I believe it is possible-at any
rate, an effort must be made-to obtain the agreement of
all. This will take some time, but this is better than salving
our consciences cheaply. What will be the use of a
resolution which may have a majority but which will not
have the agreement of the main parties concerned and
which will turn out to be completely ineffective and lead
nowhere? I very firmly support the proposal made by the
representative of the United Kindgom.

395. As regards the motion to postpone the vote SO as to
make it possible for further consultations to take place, I
myself, being a sponsor of a draft resolution, have no
difficulty at all in accepting that because, as waspointed
out by the representative of Somalia, I think that the
Security Council cannot afford the luxury of adjourning
without having adopted a draft resolution while the lives of
thousands of people are involved. So I would insist on a
vote this evening in any case.

400. The PRESIDENT: The proposal before us now is
that the Council should have a postponement with a view
to engaging in further consultations on the three draft
resolutions that are before us.
401. Mr, BUSH (United States of America): I should like
to ask for some clarification on what is meant bY
“postponement”. Are we talking about a matter of hours?
Are we talking about a short period of time? There is a
serious crisis. The Security Council is going to look
impotent; it is going to look weak. The world is watching
what we are doing. I should like to ask our colleagues what
they mean by “postponement”. Are we dealing with a
matter of a few hours? Are we dealing with a matter of
minutes? Are we dealing with a matter of days?

396. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): If we are going
to look at these three draft resolutions together, I might
make the point that I did mention earlier in my speech,
that I am afraid that my delegation finds itself in a Position
of great difficulty over these draft resolutions. As 1 made
clear in my statement, we attach the highest importance to
our achieving unanimity. Indeed, unless we can do so,
whatever resolution we may adopt would be wastedbreath.
It is evident from the discussion so far that none of these
draft resolutions is going to achieve unanimity or going to
avoid a veto, I also note that the Italian and Argentine
delegations in relation to their draft i%dUtioU~
are flexible

402. Our delegation feels that we should exert every bit of
energy and stay awake just as long as we possibly can to trY
35

to reach some kind of an agreement, though it might not be
total agreement. I wouId disagree with the representative of
France, because I think something has been accomplished
by the fact that we stayed here and by the fact that 11
nations did indeed feel that a draft resolution, imperfect
though it may have been, was proof that we were trying to
address ourselves to the problem of a cease-fire and of
withdrawal in that troubled subcontinent.
403. I should simply like to ask, without being argumentative about it-perhaps our Government can indeed support this motion-what the proposers of the motion have in
mind in terms of the length of postponement. This is a
most serious, urgent matter, and business cannot go on as
usual with this serious crisis in the subcontinent. Therefore,
I should like to have some clarification from the President,
or from the sponsors of the proposal for postponement,
with regard to the length of time we are talking about.
404. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I certainly share the concern
expressed by the representative of the United States. We
certainly would have liked to end our meeting with some
positive conclusion, and certainly the eyes of the whole
world are focused on what we are doing here. But I should
just like to indicate some facts. First of all, it is a quarter to
one in the morning, which, if I am not wrong, means that it
is about 11 o’clock in .the area with which we are
concerned. I am afraid that we will not be able to agree in a
few hours on some final text. That means that we certainly
would require a postponement of about 12 hours.
405. I say ‘this because I also have in mind the fact that
some delegations are not in a position to obtain instructions
or a final clearance on any text on which we might be able
to agree. I therefore appeal to Ambassador Bush. We do
need to have some time to come to some final and fruitful
conclusion.
406. I believe that we have no other choice, becauseif we
do not proceed along the lines which have been suggested
by the representative of the United Kingdom, and supported by the representative of France and by me, I am
afraid that we will come out of this chamber without any
positive conclusion. Thus, I would suggest that we postpone
the meeting for about 12 hours and resume this afternoon.
407. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): If we postpone this matter
for 12 hours, that means that we will meet at 1 o’clock this
afternoon. We would then begin our consultations, which
should carry us on into the night. If we reached some kind
of formula, delegations would say, “We wish to refer it to
our Governments”. That means to say that the following
morning we would have to take up the matter further.

suggest that the draft resolution submitted by the represep
tatives of Italy and two other States (S/10417/ and thZ
draft resolution submitted by the representatives of Argep
tina, Somalia and three other States [s/10419] can b2
reconciled. It is in this spirit of reconciliation that J think
that we should try to make our approach-not keep on
deferring the matter.
410. We have delayed the matter for nine months. When
are we going to stop? The representative of the United
Kingdom made the suggestion. Can he think of s formula
that would be acceptable to the Council? Has he been able
to detect any common thread? There is one common
thread, I think, in the situation, and that is the cease.fm. J
challenge any delegation here to say that it supports the
killing and maiming which are taking place in the regions of
India and Pakistan as a result of armed action by the armed
forces of those Governments. Are we against a cease-fire?
411. I think that we also have to be realistic. There are
two approaches to this problem. One is the first phase,
which is the preliminary phase of a cease-fire and with.
drawal to the territories from which the armed forces
originally came.
412. My delegation has taken a stand in the Middle East
problem, which started like this. The Security Council
called for a cease-fire but did not ask for a withdrawal of
troops. What is the result? After four years, we are now
trying to negotiate on the question of withdrawal. This ir
contrary to the very principles which we have tried to
establish for ourselves: that the question of a withdrawal of
enemy forces from the territory of a country should not be
subject to negotiation. It must be an immediate demand of
this Council. Here we must respect the question of
principle. We support that principIe for the Middle East. We
support this principle on the question of India and
Pakistan.
413. In the view of my delegation, it is intolerable for
Pakistan, armed forces to be on the territory of India, and
vice versa. If we have any respect for the principles which
we have tried to shape over the 25 years, surely we should
have no fear, no misapprehensions, no qualifications about
stating these principles.
414. My delegation is opposed to an adjournment of the
Council meeting at this stage.
415. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretations
from Spanish): I totally endorse what the representative of
Somalia has just said. Indeed, were there any possibility of
arriving at a common formula, I would be in favour of it.
But, as I said, I would have asked that we find that formula
here and now.

408. I think that all this is showing a compIete disregard
for the inhuman suffering which is going on in this
situation, and I believe that if we are going to tackle this
matter at all, we should try to sit down here and reach a
formula within 12 hours. We have a duty to the world, and
my delegation is prepared to stay for another 12 hours in
the hope that we can hammer out a formula acceptable to
the majority of the delegations.

416. However, on listening to Ambassador Far& and
having before me the draft resolution sponsored by
Burundi, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Argentina, J
wonder what substitute formula can be found for this
minimum which we are submitting to the Council for
consideration?

409. If, however, there are irreconcilable views, then of
course we will sit here until something freezesover. I would

417. Can it be that the Security Council will not take note
of the report of the Secretary-General? Will the CounciJ
36

deny that it has heard the statements ;f the representatives
of India and Pakistan? Is the Council not gravely concerned about the outbreak of hostilities along the borders
of India and Pakistan? Is not the Council convinced that
hostilities along the India-Pakistan border constitute an
immediate threat to international peace and security? Will
the Council not recognize the need to deal appropriately at
a subsequent stage, within the framework of the Charter,
with the issues which have given rise to hostilities? Will not
the Council further recognize the need to take preliminary
measures to bring about an immediate cessation of hostilities and effect a withdrawal of armed forces to their own
side of the India-Pakistan borders? Is the Council not
prepared to call upon the Governments of India and
Pakistan to take forthwith the necessary measures for an
immediate cease-fire and withdrawal of their armed forces
on the territory of the other to their own side of the
India-Pakistan border? Lastly, does not the Council intend
to request or ‘does it have no interest in requesting the
Secretary-General to keep the Council promptly and
currently informed of the situation?
418. Can a more acceptable minimum be found than the
one presented by three African delegations and two Latin
American delegations? What basis for consultation will
there be to arrive at a positive draft resolution within a few
hours?

420.

Mr. MALIK

422. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation
from
French): My delegation has felt some apprehension since
the debate was opened on this question. It is obvious that
unanimity among members of the Security Council would
be ideal. Nevertheless, to judge from the turn that the
discussions have taken, my delegation remains skeptical
about finding a solution to which all members would
adhere. I am not saying that it is impossible; for the time
being we are rather skeptical about reaching any unanimity
within a few hours.
423. This is why, bearing in mind the extreme gravity of
the situation and the respective positions taken, we believe
that it should be possible for the delegations that have
sponsored the draft resolution in document S/10419 to
accept ‘a suspension of the meeting, as would seem to be
required. This has been done on previous occasions.
424. We recognize that the draft resolution has certain
deficiencies and that it could therefore be subjected to
amendments through the consultations that seem indicated.

419. I support the proposal made by the representative of
Somalia. I believe that we must, tonight, unless we abdicate
our responsibilities, reach an agreement on the situation. I
would wish to believe that an agreement can be reached on
the basis stated by these five delegations, Anyone who
votes against this will assume a responsibility which is his
alone.

425. In my statement before the suspension, my delegation stressed the primary objective of this debate, namely
an immediate cease-fire. Also, in view of the nature of the
situation, for a cease-fire to be effective it must be
accompanied by withdrawal of troops by both sides. This
position is not in the least a partisan one. It is inspired by
what I have described as our unswerving attachment to the
cause of peace. We would not at this time wish to delay
matters by seeking to determine who are responsible for the
situation. Whatever the causes of and whoever is to blame
for these troubles, what we are seeking is an immediate
restoration of peace, For the attainment of that objective,
it would seem that everyone should consent to any kind of
sacrifice. Are we once again to give the impression of total
impotence on the part of the Security Council?

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I begin to have the impression
that some representatives have a desire to play at voting and
to vote at all costs. But that is not the way out of the
situation, especially with draft resolutions which bypass the
main cause and follow the same line as the previous draft
resolution submitted by the United States delegation. It is
entirely reasonabIe, therefore, that a significant number of
delegations should have expressed a desire to postpone the
vote. There is no certainty that we shall be able to do
anything at all in the hour remaining before midnight. If
the representative of Argentina has extensive powers to
take decisions here on his own and to act in one way or
another, it is apparent that not all representatives have the
same powers. I have already pointed out how convenient it
is for the United States representative only to have to pick
up his telephone to settle everything. Other reasonable
considerations have been put forward. But none the less,
certain representatives have such a desire and a wish to vote
that, apparently,
they simply like voting. A realistic
approach to the matter is called for.
(translated

the vote for a minimum of 10 hours. We suggested
postponement for 24 hours, but our position is flexible and
we are prepared to accept the proposal for a IO-hour
postponerqent. In the light of those circumstances, the
delegation of the Soviet Union considers that to be a more
reasonable course of action than to vote at all costs.

(Union

from Russian):

426, I should like to conclude by saying that, so far as we
are concerned, even a single paragraph that could be drafted
here around this table could suffice if it contained an
immediate ceaseAfire and an immediate withdrawal of
troops by both sides. Although I am not seeking to present
these considerations as a formal proposal, I would wish all
delegations to bear them in mind.
427. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): In the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security [General Assembly
resolution 2734 (XXV)], two appropriate paragraphs deal
very much with the problem with which we are seized.
Paragraph 4:

421. Since both draft resolutions on which certain of their
sponsors are insisting a vote should be taken go in the same
direction as the United States draft resolution, we cannot
consider them as acceptable. That being so, the Soviet
delegation
supports the well-founded and reasonable Proposals of those delegations which propose postponement of

“Solemnly reaffirms that States must fully respect the
sovereignty of other States and the right of peoples to
determine their own destinies, free of external intervention, coercion or constraint, especially involving the
threat or use of force, overt or covert, and refrain from
37

any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the
national unity and territorial integrity of any other State
or country.”
428. Paragraph 5, inter alia,
“Solemnly reaffirms that every State has the duty to
refrain from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity and political independence of any
other State, and that the territory of a State shall not be
the object of military occupation resulting from the use
of force in contravention of the provisions of the
Charter . . .“,

429. The Security Council must be consistent with the
principles which the Organization sets up for itself. The
draft resolution which I have submitted on behalf of
Somalia and four other States is built primarily on
principles that ye all recognize. There can be no compromise with those principles; otherwise we shall be turning
the whole Council into a farce. We are not staging a
drama-at least we should not stage a drama; we should try
to reach a decision that will end the suffering in Pakistan.
Naturally, however, since the non-permanent members
cannot amongst themselves make a decision that is binding
upon the Council, and since the permanent members have
the prerogative of saying how successful or unsuccessful a
resolution will be, it would appear, regrettably, that in view
of the statements made here by the permanent members we
s&l1 adjourn until 10 o’clock tomorrow morning, But I
would certainly hope one thing could happen before we
adjourn: that the delegations here who find difficulties with
any of the provisions of our draft resolutions could
pinpoint them now, so that when we meet tomorrow we
shall be able to take them into account in our consultations
and not have to start afresh tomorrow. It is important that
we know how near to or how far from an agreement we are,
430. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): In order to
have the real perspective of time, I would point out that
various speakers after 12 o’clock tonight have been referring to “tomorrow”; actually it is now tomorrow. Therefore, since it is tomorrow and we are continuing our
deliberations, and in answer to the question put by the
representative of Somalia, whose concern I fully share, I
would like to say the following.
431. First of all, with regard to the draft resolution
submitted by the five delegations-Argentina, Burundi,
Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and Somalia-there is something
lacking, and that is the basic problem which every one of
the speakers tonight has recognized to be a basic problemthat is, the problem of the refugees, As I said in the
explanation of my vote on the United States draft
resolution, there are three problems intertwined that
cannot be separated one from the others, and any resolution which disregards one of those three is, in our view,
incomplete. Those three are: the immediate cease-fire, the
withdrawal of the armies, and the problem of the refugees.
If we disregard the problem of the refugees, we are in fact
disregarding one basic factor in the whole situation. And we
cannot claim for ourselves that by voting on one draft
resolution today we have achieved what the Council should
achieve, because we shall still be faced with a problem
38

which to my Government and my delegation is a batit,
fundamental one, and that is the problem of the refugcrs.
432. Should consultations be engaged in, my delegatioa
will contribute its humble best towards the fornl\ilation,h
co-operation with other delegations, of a fulIy adequate,
fully comprehensive draft resolution that would take can
of those three intertwined factors.
433. Mr. KU$AGA (Poland): I had the impression, after
the last intervention of the representative of Somalia, that
there was an agreement-perhaps reluctant but an agree.
ment-to adjourn for some time, 10 or 12 hburs, in order,
mainly, to try to arrive at some new proposal which could
be submitted to the Council tomorrow and, secondly, to
clarify the attitudes of our Governments, and I must ay
that I should like to clarify the position of my Govemmi?nt
before a vote is taken on the remaining draft resoIutions. I
am in favour of this proposal and I think that, since there
seems to be agreement on those lines now, perhaps the bes!
we could do now would be to adjourn so as to leave as
much time as possible to achieve the aims we want to
achieve during those 10 or 12 hours of adjournment.
434. Mr. VINCI (Italy): From the last statements wehare
heard, I think we are coming close to some agreement,and
I should like to express the appreciation of my delegation
for the understanding shown by the representatives of
Burundi, Somalia and Syria. On behalf of the sponsorsof
our draft resolution (S/10417], I can assurethem that or?
are ready to consult in order to see whether we can arriveal
a text which will command the support of all members.
435. The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
rightly pointed to the question of refugees. As a matter of
fact we had the same concern in mind, and that is why ~‘2
introduced into our draft resolution two paragraphs which
are the same as the paragraphs of the resolution adopted by
the Third Committee, with the agreement also of the main
parties concerned in this case, that is, India and Pakistan.
So I think that, if the sponsors of the other draft resolurion
pay some attention t-o this and consider those two
paragraphs, they might also be duly taken into account
when we draft a final text.
436. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (itWpre~flf~~fl
from Spanish): I wish to explain briefly, in reply to the

concern expressed by Mr. Tomeh of the Syrian Arab
Republic, that in our draft resolution we did not intend to
forget the very grave problem of refugees, which is a mat&r
of anxiety for the five sponsoring delegations. 1 Wish to
draw his attention to the fact that these are preliminary
measures and that we also maintain that there is a necessity
at a later stage to deal with all the questions which led to
the hostilities. That is to say, we are not overlook& Or
neglecting any of the problems of this multifacetes
question. Our purpose, because of the urgemY of event&
was as a first step a cease-fire and the withdrawal of ee
armed forces to both sides of the border, without Pre@i@
to our considering the other questions later. 1 simply
wished to make this clear, because I should not wishthe
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to feel thatwt
gave no thought to the grave problem of the refugees,

437. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I wish to thank
the representative of Argentina for his clarification. I have
always admired his logic and his balanced statements.
However, apparently sometimes-and perhaps this is the
fault of human nature-when a. resolution is drafted by a
number of delegations some imbalance can occur, as is the
case here. For instance, in the draft resolution of the five
Powers [S/10419/, there are six preambular paragraphs but
actually only one or perhaps two operative paragraphs. So I
would say about this draft resolution that its operative
paragraphs do not have the balance and harmoriy they
should have with regard to the long preambular part. This
draft resolution would not lack harmony or balance if one
more operative paragraph were added to it, such as, for
instance, the following operative paragraph 2:
“Calls upon the Government of Pakistan to exert its
best efforts towards the creation of a climate conducive
to the voluntary return of refugees to East Pakistan.”

438. As I said previously, I believe every speaker in the
Councii tonight has expressed very grave concern about the
problem of refugees. If another draft resolution should
emerge from these two draft resolutions, the paragraph I
have suggested or something close to it would make the
five-Power draft resolution more balanced, in our view.
439. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation fvom
French): Following the statement of the representative of
Syria, I would like to say that it goes without saying that
the delegations that sponsored the draft resolution could
not object to an amendment of that kind, since we have
ourselves on several occasions expressed our concern for the
fate of the refugees &d since therefore the refugee
question, or the solution of the problem of the refugees,is
an _ integral part of what I myself earlier called an over-all

solution.

440. SO we are prepared to accept an amendment of that
kind concerning the refugees, because this is a fundamental
problem.
Ml.
As far as the delegation of Burundi is concerned, I
believe it can quite properly speak of that problem, because
one might compare my country to a country of asylum,
Since we had received 100,000 refugees at one time in a
population of 5 millio? in a territory which is well known
to be tiny. We therefore do not ignore the problem. We give
it priority.
442. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): I simply wish to thank the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic for his suggestion, which my
delegation is very happy to accept. We consider it very
constructive and relevant to the draft resolution which we
have sponsored with other delegations.
443.

Mr, MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I have a definite impression that
we are, as it were, reaching a general understanding about
the advisability of adjourning the meeting. At the same
time, as we sit at this table we are carrying on consultations
about what can be included and what can be excluded and
how texts can be combined. But this is no way of holding
(Danslated

from Russian):

consultations: to OCCUPYourselves at such a late hour, and
during the course of a meeting, with consultations, and
with inclusion and exclusion of points in two draft
resolutions without mentioning the third. That is not the
way out of the situation,
444. It would therefore be appropriate to find some way
of reaching a more rapid agreement on the adjournment of
the meeting.
445. MY second comment is that I think the sponsors of
all draft resolutions should consult with the parties involved
or, more correctly, with the representativds who took part
in today’s debate. They are being passed o+er in silence, and
the discussion about mutual understanding and consultations, about the exclusion of one point and the inclusion of
another, is taking place only among the sponsors. I submit
that we should not overlook those representatives who were
invited by the Council to participate in its work at today’s
meeting and that they must not be overlooked in our
consultations on the draft resolutions,
446. Some of those who spoke in defence of their
positions said that we must solve first one question, and
then all the others. Experience showsthat such a solution is
not effective. Reference was made to the Middle East, to
the Security Council resolution on the Middle East. We all
know that in certain provisions of that resolution there is a
lack of precision which is now being. exploited by the
aggressors and by those who have encouraged aggression
and are concealing its continuation; it is being exploited in
order not to implement the resolution. Hence, in view of
this sorry experience, the resolution should be clear and
precise, without taking the approach that other questions
should be postponed until later. What are these other
questions? The main, the fundamental question is that of a
political settlement in East Pakistan. There is silence-on this
point. But that is the main cause for the tense situation,
and that must be borne in mind.
447, Finally, I would urgently request the sponsors of the
two draft resolutions not to forget the third, the Soviet
draft.
448, Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Having heard the Statement
of the last speaker, may I suggest formally that we adjourn
but that we meet at least no later than 12 hours hence, and
that meanwhile-say, at half-past ten-all the sponsors of
the draft resolutions before the Council meet in COnSUltation so that we could have at least two hours to try to reach
an agreeable formula.
449. The PRESIDENT:

In accordance with the Usual

practice, may I make this short statement: we have heard

the statements of several members of the question of
adjourning,
and it seems quite clear to me, and to us all,
that an agreement has been reached for the Council to
adjourn
for about 12 hours; and according to my calculations, that would be an adjournment to 2.30 p.m. today,
5 December. If I hear no objection, the meeting will be
adjourned until then.
~;IZEmeeting rose on Sunday, 5 December 19 71, ut 1.25 a.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from
bookstores
and diatributora
or write to: United
Nations,
Salea

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et lea agences
deposit&es
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-voua
A : Nations Unies, Section des ventea, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIYYHTb

HBAAHNJE

OPl?AHN

BAI&NN

OWbE~HHEHHNX

HAIWR

Hsnanwn
Opraeusaqau
06’be~miemibrx
HannPr MOXHO xynarb
n Kmow~bIx
Mara3mmx w arenrcmax
no acex pafiowax
hmpa. Hanonnre
cnpaaxa
06 n3nanwnx
n
BanreM xmix-10~
hfaraxme
wnu n~nwre
no anpecy : Oprann3aqtin
06-ae~waeHrrhrx
Hark,
Ce~qwrr no npoflaxte
asAanuR, Hbm-HOPK
wnu Weneea.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidaa
estin
buidoraa
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Prrce: $U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casa8 distria ,W librero
o dirfjase
a: Nacionea

in other

currencies)
