TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

rd

MEETING: 20 AUGUST 1969

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1503) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . , . , . . . . . , , . , , . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . , . . , .

1

S/PV.1503

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations doLvments are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Suppbments of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of .the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

L

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 20 August 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. .I. DE PINIES (Spain).

to do otherwise would undermine the agreed basis in
international law on which the United Nations Organization
rests.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

5. In dealing with this basic issue of domestic jurisdiction I
carefully avoid any substantial reference to the letter which
you, Mr. President, have received from the Foreign Minister
of the Irish Republic. Moreover, I shall resist any temptation to be drawn into debate on anything but the principle
which is of such fundamental consequence to us all, It is
that question and nothing else which is before us now.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l503)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 17 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland addressed tlr the President of
the Security Council (S/9394).
Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
provisional agenda for today’s meeting of the Security
Council is contained in document S/Agenda/l503. Is there
any objection to the adoption of the agenda.
2. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to speak on
a matter of principle which is of the greatest consequence
to the United Nations, and indeed to every Member State.
The principle is set out in the Charter. It is a fundamental
principle, the principle-to quote the Charter-that:
“Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters which are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State . . .“,
3. The principle of domestic jurisdiction is fundamental
for us all. If it were breached, if it were eroded, the
consequences for the United Nations and for all of us
would be most serious, It needs no effort of the imagination to realize that if this necessary safeguard were no
longer accepted and respected and effective, the way would
be wide open to the encouragement of disunity and division
and disorder. No sovereign State would be free from such a
threat, We all know this very well. There is no representative in this Council, nor indeed in the United Nations,
who would be prepared to accept unwelcome interference
in the domestic national affairs of his country,

6. So much for the question of principle, No member of
the Council, I am sure, will doubt its overriding importance.
/
j
7. /*With reference to the letter from the Foreign Minister
i .of”the Irish Republic, it is only necessary to state certain
facts. Northern Ireland is and has long been an integral part +’
of the United Kingdom. The people of Northern Ireland
elect representatives td the Parliament at Westminster by
adult universal suffrage. Events in Northern Ireland are
accordingly an internal matter for the United Kingdom
Government. It is within the competence of the Govemment of the United Kingdom to restore and maintain order.
That we are doing. A United Nations force is unnecessary
and inappropriate. It is unnecessary because my Government is already taking action. It is inappropriate because
United Nations intervention against our wishes would be in
violation of Article 2 (7) of the Charter.
8 The situation in Northern Ireland is under control and
$ here is no question of that situation being in any way a
,?$Teat to international peace and security.
\
9 IThe letter from the Foreign Minister seeks to raise the
\ \ c&stion under Article 35 of the Charter, but we cannot
“accept that there are grounds or right to do so. In any
event, Article 2 (7) in clearly overriding, Neither Article 35
nor any other article can possibly be regarded as prevailing
over the specific provisions of Article 2 (7).
10. I would add that my delegation has always been
amongst those that consider that this Council should meet
to consider aI issues properly raised before it. But this issue
cannot be properly raised, In this case it is not in the
interests of the Council-indeed it would be in direct
violation of those interests-to debate a matter outside its
competence, At the same time none of us will neglect to
take into account the added danger that public debate in
this Council would inflame feelings and reopen old wounds,
and could well prejudice all the efforts now being SO
urgently directed to maintenance of order and to the

4. The principle of domestic jurisdiction is essential to all
our efforts as Member States of the United Nations. It is
surely our duty not to flout it but to support it. That we
must do by opposing the inscription of the item now
submitted to us. It is not putting it too strongIy to say that
1

equally important task of restoration of the confidence and
security of all concerned.

matter of courtesy to the visiting Foreign Minister who is
with us, I would certainly raise no objection to this
proposal and I look forward to hearing what the Foreign
Minister has to say to us.

Il. I trust that we shall at once deal with the important
issue of principle before us. I trust that we shall by our
votes uphold the principle of domestic jurisdiction.

20. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The ’
members of the Council have heard the proposal made by
the representative of Finland, which the representative of
the United Kingdom has kindly decided not to oppose, If 1
hear no objection to that proposal, I shall take it that the
Security Council, before deciding on the adoption of the
agenda, invites the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland to
make a statement to the Council in explanation of the
request in document S/9394.

12. By so doing we shall not only be acting in accordance
with the Charter. We shall also, so I am convinced, be
making a contribution to the restoration and maintenance
of order in Northern Ireland. That is a purpose which I am
sure is shared by us all, including most certainly the Foreign
Minister, who has already been in close and recent
consultation with my Government and will no doubt
continue to be so.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, P. J. Hillery
(Ireland) took a place at the Council table.

13. All of us will hope that nothing done or said here will
add to the difficulties and dangers of the situation. All of us
will hope that nothing done or said here will complicate or
confuse or inflame a situation which calls out for restraint
and patience and conciliation, All of us join, I am sure, in
hoping to see a rapid and sustained improvement in a
situation which has caused us such deep concern.

21. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I should
like to welcome His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ireland Mr. Patrick J. Hillery and invite him to
make a statement.
22. Mr. HILLERY (Ireland): May I thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council for affording me this
opportunity to be heard at this stage of the proceedings.

14. It is with this hope in mind that I appeal to all
members of the Council to confine comment to the
procedural question before us, and to decide that the
principle of domestic jurisdiction must be upheld.

23. Members of the Council will have seen the letter of 17
August which was addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the Permanent Representative of
Ireland [S/9394]. That letter set out very briefly the
considerations which led my Government to seek this
urgent meeting of the Security Council, I should like now,
with your permission, to elaborate, for the information of
the Council, the immediate and proximate causes which
have given rise to the present tragic situation in our country
and which have led my Government to request the urgent
dispatch of a United Nations peace-keeping force to the Six
Counties of Northern Ireland.

15. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): Lord Caradon has just
asked the Council to reject the provisional agenda for this
meeting on the ground that the questions raised by the
Government of Ireland are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of the United Kingdom. My delegation too has
doubts about the right of the United Nations under the
Charter to intervene in this matter.

16. We are concerned, however, about the possibility that
in the event the agenda is not adopted we shall have
disposed of the matter without hearing the representative
of the Member State which has brought this matter before
the Council. The Foreign Minister of Ireland has come ,to &4: Before doing so, I should like to comment on the
objections to consideration of the item which have been
New York for this purpose, and we believe it would be fair
raised
by the representative of the United Kingdom. Lord
and a matter of courtesy to let him have his say. To do so
Caradon has contended that the Council should not discuss
would in no way prejudge the question raised by Lord
the matter on its provisional agenda because, in his view, it
Caradon, and I believe it could be done in a manner that
falls exclusively within the domestic jurisdiction of his
would make it clear that this would not constitute a
Government. With all due respect, I do not think that the
precedent for future procedure.
Council should accept Lord Caradon’s contention.
17. With that in mind I would now propose that the
2.5. My delegation is, of course, well aware that Arti.
Security Council, before taking a decision on its agenda,
cle 2 (7) states:
invite the Minister for External Affairs of Ireland to make a
statement to the Council in explanation of the request
“Nothing contained in the presentCharter shallauthorcontained in document S/9394.
ize the United Nations to intervene in matters which are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
18. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I would like to
State . . .“.
say that I very much appreciate the spirit in which the
representative of Finland has spoken, He knows and I know
Although we in Ireland have lived for sometime with the
and we are all aware of the fact that the hearing of
reality of British control of the North of our country, we
representatives from outside the Council before the adopdo not in any way concede to them the right to exercise
tion of the agenda is unusual and I think there are few, if
jurisdiction there. What happens there can never be a
any, precedents for doing so.
matter of indifference or unconcern to people living in the
19. Nevertheless, for the reasons and on the basis which
independentpart of our national territory, particularly at a
has been proposed by the Ambassador of Finland, and as a
time when our compatriots in the North are driven to seek
2

refuge with us, as many of them are now doing. What
happens there can also vitally affect our relations with
Great Britain.
pi

Six Countiesof Northern Ireland andin Great Britain itself.
Far from being a harmlessprocessionto commemorate
events almost three hundred years old, that parade,which
took placein a predominantly Catholic and nationalistcity,
was,in the words of a British weekly, The New Statesman:
“ a deliberate provocation by Protestant extremists,
reminding the Catholic inhabitants of the province, in the
most blatant and humiliating manner, of the ascendancy
under which they have suffered for nearly 300 years.”

26. The Six Counties, after all, do not constitute a
geographically isolated area, but are an integral part of the
island of Ireland and an important part of a country which
throughout history has been universally regarded as one
unit. This historic unity of Ireland is so self-evident as not
to require argument. The claim of the Irish nation to
control the totality of Ireland has been asserted over
centuries by successive generations of Irish men and
women, and it is one which no spokesman for the Irish
nation could ever renounce. The representative of Great
Britain is certainly aware that that claim has been asserted
and sustained without interruption up to the present day,
and it has never been conceded that a unilateral action on
the part of the British Government could sunder an entity
which nature aud history have made one.

30. On 1 August-prior to that parade of 12 August-on
behalf of my Government, I had travelled to London to
expressprivately our grave fears of the consequences
of
allowing the parade to take place, I received assurances
from the British Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, Mr. Michael Stewart, that the
situation was under control and that no civil disorderwas
anticipated-the same combination of assurancesas we
heard here today. I heard also what we have just heard
here: I wastold frankly that the matter was none of mine
or my Government’sbusiness.In the event, the Counciland
the whole world have witnessedthe effects of the tragic
folly of the Six-County Government in allowingthat parade
to go on and the profound misjudgementexhibited by the
British authorities who claim ultimate responsibilityfor the
Six-County area.

27. Moreover, I wonder whether in fact Article 2 (7) has
always been applied in the clear-cut, rigid manner which the
representative of Britain implies. I would recall, for
instance, that the United Nations-in
actual fact the
General Assembly, but Article 2 (7) speaks of “the United
Nations”-is
accustomed, and rightly so in the view of my
delegation, to discuss year after year the question of
apartheid in South Africa, even though the Government of
South Africa maintains that that is not a proper subject for
discussion, by virtue of Article 2 (7).

31. The disturbances in Derry spread quickly to other
towns and cities in the Six-County area,notably to Belfast.
They have led to the deaths of eight people, widespread
destruction of property, the virtual coIlapse of the civil
machinery of law and order and, finally, the employment
of British troops. On 13 August the Head of my Government addressedthe nation. He voiced the concern of the
Government and the people of Ireland at the tragic events
that had taken place in Derry and elsewherein the North
and expressed our apprehension for the future. It was
evident, he said,that the Belfast Government wasno longer
in control of the situation and that the Royal Ulster
Constabulary wasno longer accepted asan impartial police
force, but that the employment of British troops wasnot
acceptable, nor would such troops be likely to restore
peaceful conditions. He then revealed that the Irish
Government had requested the British Government to
apply immediatery to the United Nations for the urgent
dispatch of a peace-keepingforce to the Six Counties.The
British Government rejected that request.Consequently,on
15 August, on the decisionof my Government, I travelled
to London once again to urge the British authorities to
reconsider the request for a United Nations peace-keeping
force or, if they found themselvesunableto accedeto that,
to agree to the dispatch of a joint Irish and British
peace-keepingforce to the area concerned.That suggestion
alsowasrejected by the British Government.

28. I might also point out that in a letter [S/5.543] 1 of 15
February 1964 the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom suggested that the Security Council should deal
with the tension existing between the Greek and Turkish
communities of Cyprus, although Cyprus had been for
several years a sovereign State and a full Member of the
United Nations. I recognize that, in formulating that
request on Cyprus, Sir Patrick Dean invoked the fact that
Britain was a guarantor under the Treaty of 1960.
Nevertheless, I do not see how the British delegation could
reconcile the stand taken then by it, to the effect that the
internal tensions in Cyprus were a proper matter for
discussion by the Security Council, with its rejection now
of any competence of the Security Council in the matter
before the Council today.
29. My Government has no doubt whatsoever that the
present situation in Northern Ireland is grave and could
become aggravated to a degree which would create a major
problem both in Northern Ireland and in relations between
Great Britain and Ireland, both independent Members of
the United Nations. I know that the representative of Great
Britain maintains that this situation can be handled
satisfactorily by his Government. With all respect, I beg
leave to doubt that. After all, the immediate cause of the
present disturbances in the North was a parade that took
place in the city of Derry on 12 August-eight days ago.
That parade, described as that of the Derry Apprentice
Boys-not boys but a Protestant sectarian organizationtook place against the express wishes and warnings not only
of my Government but of responsible opinion both in the

32. In those circumstances and in conformity with
Ireland’s stated policy of seekingevery legitimatemeansto
end the present crisis, I have come before the Council to
request the inscription on the Council’s agendaof an item
relating to the present situation in the Six Counties;
specifically to requestthe dispatch to Northern Ireland of a
United Nations peace-keepingforce. To explain the need
for a peace-keepingforce, and specifically an impartial
force, I must explain that the breakdown of law and order

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Nineteenth Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1964.

3

37. Obviously an impartial peace-keeping force was required. British troops have been employed to maintain
order. They have been received by the citizens of Derry and
Belfast-but, I think, as the lesser of two evils. The use of
British troops alone is unacceptable because British troops
constitute a basic factor in the perpetuation of partition.

and the plight of the minority in the area of the Six
Counties have their origins in the partition of Ireland, an
a:$ of fundamental injustice.
443.

Partition was accomplished by the British Government
as a concession to an intransigent minority within the Irish
nation. Ireland was divided as a result of an Act of the
British Parliament in 1920, an Act in favour of which not
one Irish vote, either North or South, was cast and, I might
say incidentally, an Act which explicitly contemplated the
reunion of Ireland. In pursuit of our declared policy of
seeking to bring about reunification by peaceful means, my
Government has sought national reconciliation through
economic and other forms of co-operation SO x to
eliminate the barriers of mistrust and prejudice.

38. The partition of Ireland, as I said earlier, was
accomplished by the British Government as a concession to
an intransigent minority within the Irish nation asa whole.
Once partition was accomplished, what had been a nationa
minority was transformed into a local majority in that
north-easternpart of our country which waspartitioned
off. That position could be sustainedonly throughmilitary
support from outside. The presenceof a foreign-Britishforce in Ireland and the intransigenceof the Northern
Unionists remain the two elements in the division of
Ireland. The Irish Government believesandhasneverfailed
to reiterate t.hat the only lasting settlementto the recurring
cycle of discrimination, bitterness, violence andreprisalis
the reunification of our country.

34. The Six-County rigime, however, has been reluctant
or unable to bring about the basic reforms of the social and
political structure of Northern Ireland which would give
meaning to this approach, which would bring some
improvement in the plight of the minority in the SixCounty area.

39. Our history has meant that British troops are a
hindrance, not a help, to a lasting settlementof our
differences,We have maintained that differencesbetween
Irishmen can be settled only by Irishmen without interference from our nearestneighbour. We are not alonein
that belief. It is evident that a growing body of responsible
opinion in Britain itself agreeswith us. I shouldlike to
quote from The Sunday Telegraph of London of 17
August, which stated:

35. In recent months a movement has grown up within the
Six Counties aimed at securing basic civil rights for the
minority. The civil rights movement focused attention on
the disparity between the declared constitutional equality
of all the citizens of the United Kingdom and the actual,
real predicament of the minority in the Six Counties. By
concentrating attention on the plight of the minority which
is denied basic civil rights in voting and is discriminated
against in employment and housing-in fact, is denied its
rights of equal access to the fundamentals of a dignified life
,and citizenship-the
civil rights movement aroused the
conscience and evoked the sympathy and solidarity of
people in the Six Counties and the remainder of Ireland,
and indeed secured the attention and sympathy of men of
goodwill everywheie. Movements for civil rights inevitably
bring about what has been called a revolution of rising
expectations on the part of repressed and disfranchised
minorities. Likewise such movements may exacerbate the
opposition of those elements within the entrenched
majority who would see the granting of such rights as a
threat to their economic or political hegemony. When, in
addition, the Government is lukewarm in its commitment
to reforms, or is so weak as to be open to coercion by
intransigent and reactionary forces among its own
supporters, then the expectations of the minority, however
just or modest they may be, are likely to be thwarted and
their frustration is likely to express itself in violence, All
those factors are present in the situation in the Six
Counties. And the Government of Six Counties, by
allowing the provocative parade on 12 August, further
aggravated the situation and sparked the recent conflagfation.

“The British Government, in this suddenemergency,
had no option but to sendin troops. But let therebeno
pretence that this is a token of continued responsibility,
or that they are there to stay until peaceis restored.
There is no will for sucha task in this country”-that is,
referring to Britain. “We no longer careenough.Ulsteris
a very near country which we know nothing about.Its
problemsdo not speakto our hearts”-the referenceagain
is to British hearts. “It is close at hand but light years
away in matters of emotion, If one British soldieris
killed, the cry for withdrawal here will makeAmerica’s
revulsion against the Viet-Nam fighting seemlike the
twittering of sparrows.This is the truth that mustbe
faced. It is an Irish problem not a IBritishone.Temporarily, we are undertaking a peace-keepingrole, aswe
have done in many parts of the world, But not for long;
certainly not for ever. The Protestantsand the Catholics
must maketheir own peace.”
40. I have taken advantage, Mr. Presiden,t,of the kind
invitation extended by you and the membersof the
Council, as a result of the helpful and friendly proposalof
the representativeof Finland, to set forth certainconsiderations which in the view of my delegationshouldleadthe
Council to deal with the requestconveyedin our letter. I
recognizethat the statementmadeby the representative
of
the United Kingdom may lead certain membersof the
Council to pause before they agreeto inscribethe item,
inasmuchas by doing so they might feel that they would
seemto be taking sideson a territorial issue.But that would
not, I submit, justify the Council in refusingto inscribethe
item.

36. The calling of British troops was and remains a
confession of the Six-County Government’s manifest inability to maintain control impartially. The troops were
requested by the SixCounty Government, but they are
responsible directly to Westminster. Thus, the Six-County
Government can no longer claim to be able to enforce the
law and maintain the civil order through its police forces
which are distrusted and even detested as partisan by the
minority.
4

41. I have explained how the persistent denial of their civil
J rights to a large part of the population of the Six Counties
has been the immediate cause of the demonstrations and
protests which have taken place in that area over recent
months, My delegation maintains that that aspect of the
matter alone would be sufficient to justify the Council’s
considering our request. And I think that the representative
of Britain could not maintain that such a course would be
in conflict with the Charter.

The United Kingdom authorities are encouraging the
division of the population of Northern Ireland on religious
lines. This can be seen, in particular, from the fact that the
right to form a government and establish other organs of
authority has been granted to only one religious community-the Protestants. Discrimination on other grounds is
aho fIourishing. The civil rights of the overwhelming mass
of the population have been curtailed,
46 The United Kingdom Government must take steps to
put an end to the persecution of those who are fighting to
remove the causes of inequality and discrimination in
Northern Ireland, so that the necessary conditions can be
created for the solution of problems in conformity with the
wishes of the people of Northern Ireland.

42. In the address he delivered on 14 October 1968, in the
general debate at the twenty-third session of the General
Assembly, the British Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs gave considerable place to the
importance of the strict observance of human rights and in
that section of his speech he made the following statement,
which I quote from the provisional verbatim record of the
1693rd meeting of the Assembly:

47. I waive consecutive interpretation.
48. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): First of all, I
wish to refer to the careful and restrained speech which has
been made to us this morning by the Foreign Minister of
the Irish Republic. He and others will not be surprised to
learn that there are a number of statements which he made
with which I could not possibly agree. But 01said when I
spoke before that I did not propose to be drawn into a
debate on the substance of the issue which was reported to
us in the Foreign Minister’s letter, for the very good reason
that I have maintained and still strongly maintain that this
is a matter within the jurisdiction and responsibility of my
Government.

“Article 56 of the Charter makes it clear that no
country can say that the human rights of its citizens are
an exclusively domestic matter. A country that denies its
citizens the basic human rights is by virtue of Article 56
in breach of an international obligation.“2
43. It is the urgent hope of my delegation that the
members of the Council, in taking a decision on inscription
of this item, will give due weight to the desirability. of
meeting the preoccupations of a Member State which is
sincerely anxious to find through the United Nations a
means of defusing the tensions which prevail in the North
of Ireland and obviating the risk of those tensions mounting, spreading beyond the area itself and leading to friction
between two neighbouring Member States. It was in that
spirit that my Government decided to bring the matter
before the Council. We sincerely trust that our hopes will
not be disappointed, that the Council will not close the
door to our appeal, and that, in particular, it will not
appear to have pronounced negatively-and perhaps inadvertently so-on the merits of a national issue which has
been a source of constant concern and preoccupation to the
Irish nation during the last fifty years,

49. I would however say a few words to the Council on
the main points which have been raised by the Foreign
Minister today.
50. First I shall comment on the constitutional question.
Then I should make, as he did, a special reference to human
rights because that is an essential matter in this respect.
And then I would like to refer to the role of the British
troops and to the decisions taken by my Government as
they deal with this difficult and indeed dangerous situation.
51. I am anxious, as I said before, and 1 believe that we are
all anxious that nothing should be said here which adds to
the intense feelings, adds to the suspicion, adds to the fear
and hatred which are at the core of the human problem
with which we are concerned.

44. Mr. ZAKHAROV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, the Government of Ireland has submitted a request that the Security
Council be urgently convened to consider the situation in
Northern Ireland. An explanation of this step by the Irish
Government is given in the letter dated 17 August 1969
from the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Ambassador Cremin, addressed to the
President of the Security Council A detailed statement in
explanation of that request by the Government of Ireland
has just been made to the Council by Mr. Hillery, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland, who is in New York
especially for this purpose.

52. On the question of the constitution, this is not an
international matter, It is true that the Irish Republic in its
Constitution states that the national territory consists of
the whole island of Ireland. But the Irish Republic has over
the years recognized the fact of partition and has accepted
its consequences. I could give many specific examples, but
it is sufficient to say that the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Ireland has had several meetings with the Head
of the Government of Northern Ireland to discuss such
matters, for instance, as the establishment of a joint tourist
board and co-operation over a joint electricity supply.

45. The Soviet delegation supports Ireland’s request for
the convening of the Security Council in response to its
request. Mr. President, the facts show that the policy of the
United Kingdom authorities towards Northern Ireland is
designed to maintain that country in an unequal position.
2 See Official
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of the General Assembly,
1693rd meeting,para. 109.

53. There is no justification for a contention that this is an
international question. We are dealing with a fact-the fact
of the existence of the United Kingdom which includes
Northern Ireland.

Twenty-third

5

54. I know the Foreign Minister seeks the same purposes
as we seek, the purposes of reconciliation and the reduction
of intense feeling and the restoration of order.

Londonderry and Belfast in order to restore law and
order. They emphasize again that troops will be with.
drawn when law and order has been restored.

5.5. I wonder if he takes into adequate account the dangers
of an attempt at intervention. I had better not use my own
words but in speaking about the old fears which we have to
take into account I quote from what was said in The New
York Times of this morning:

“The Northern Ireland Government have been informed
that troops have been provided on a temporary basis in
accordance with the United Kingdom’s ultimate responsibility. In the context of the commitment of these troops,
the Northern Ireland Government have reaffirmed their
intention to take into the fullest account at all times the
views of Her Majesty’s Government in the United
Kingdom, especially in relation to matters affecting the
status of citizens of that part of the United Kingdom and
their equal rights and protection under the law.

“Moves by Dublin to reopen the partition question, to
resist the use of British troops in Northern Ireland-something Ulster’s Catholics favour-and now to press for a
United Nations peace-keeping force undoubtedly are
aggravating these fears .”

“The United Kingdom Government has welcomed the
decisions of the Northern Ireland Government relating to
local government franchise, the revision of local govemment areas, the allocation of houses, the creation of a
Parliamentary Commissioner
for Administration in
Northern Ireland and machinery to consider citizens’
grievances against other public authorities which the
Prime Minister reported to the House of Commons at
Westminster following his meeting with Northern Ireland
Ministers on 21 May as demonstrating the determination
of the Northern Ireland Government that there shall be
full equality of treatment for all citizens. Both Govemments have agreed that it is vital that the momentum of
internal reform should be maintained.

56. We have watched in the last few days the arrival of
British troops in Northern Ireland. We have seen how they
have been welcomed by the people. We have seen how they
have discharged their duties with an absolute impartiality.
No peace-keeping force could have approached this problem and carried it out with greater fairness to all concerned,
as is well recognized throughout the whole population of
Northern Ireland. We talk about a peace-keeping force. A
peace-keeping force is there. No better peace-keeping force
could be there. Talk about a peace-keeping force being
introduced against the wishes of the country concerned is a
contradiction in terms. I speak about the arrival of British
troops and their reception, and I also speak about the
urgent action which my Government has taken, is taking
and will continue to take to restore and maintain the
situation.

“The two Governments at their meeting at 10 Downing
Street today have reaffirmed that in all legislation and
executive decisions of government every citizen of
Northern Ireland is entitled to the same equality of
treatment and freedom from discrimination as obtains in
the rest of the United Kingdom, irrespective of politica
views or religion. In their further meetings the two
Governments will be guided by these mutually accepted
principles.

57. I do not wish unduly to delay the Council but I think
it will be of interest to those who watch from outside to
hear the actual words of the declaration which was made by
my Government in London yesterday, These are the words
of the declaration made at No. 10 Downing Street yesterday:

“Finally, both Governments are determined to take all
possible steps to restore normality to the Northern
Ireland community so that economic development can
proceed at the faster rate which is vital for social
stability.”

“The United Kingdom Government reaffirm that
nothing which has happened in recent weeks in Northern
Ireland derogates from the clear pledges made by successive United Kingdom Governments that Northern Ireland
should not cease to be a part of the United Kingdom
without the consent of the people of Northern Ireland or
from the provision in section one of the Ireland Act,
1949 that in no event will Northern Ireland or any part
thereof cease to be part of the United Kingdom without
the consent of the parliament of Northern Ireland. The
border is not aa issue.

58. That declaration made yesterday represents the determination of my Government and the Government of
Northern Ireland to face the difficulties which now exist,
and the dangers, and to deal with them fearlessly until they
are properly resolved.
59. It is quite right that special attention should be paid to
human rights. I accept what the Foreign Minister has said ia
that matter. It is not a question of denial of human
rights-it is a determination that human rights shall he
respected, shall be established and protected.

“The United Kingdom Government again affirm that
responsibility for affairs in Northern Ireland is entirely a
matter of domestic jurisdiction. The United Kingdom
Government will take fulI responsibility for asserting this
principle in all international relationships.

60. The particular section which I read of the formal
declaration issued yesterday with regard to human $its
cannot fail to convince members of this Council that cur
determination in this matter-the determination to achieve
equality-will
be pursued relentlessly. This is the best
answer to those who seek that human rights in Northem
Ireland should be respected and protected.

“The United Kingdom Government have ultimate responsibility for the protection of those who live in
Northern Ireland when, as in the past week, a breakdown
of law and order has occurred. In this spirit, the United
Kingdom Government responded to the requests of the
Northern Ireland Government, for military assistance in
6

61. I might add that the Civil Rights Movement in the
North is directed not to the transfer of Northern Ireland
from the United Kingdom but to internal reforms. The
greater number of the demands of the Civil Rights
Movement have been accepted. The programme of reform is
under way. The principle of equality of treatment and
freedom from discrimination was publicly and solemnly
confirmed as recently as yesterday.
62. I do not wish to speak in regard to the intervention
which we heard from the representative of the Soviet Union
just now except perhaps to note that he spoke with a
restraint which is unusual in his case. I hope that we can all
approach this problem with the determination to avoid any
word which might make the situation more difficult.
63, Sir, I go back to the contention which I made
originally. We have gone out of our way and departed from
established practices in order to pay respect and courtesy to
the visiting Foreign Minister and enable him to speak to US
today. I would most earnestly again represent to the
members of this Council that to breach the principle of
domestic jurisdiction would have most serious consequences not only for the individual members of this
Council but for the United Nations itself.
64. On the suggestion of the representative of Finland we
were prepared to vary our practices in order to pay respect
to a Foreign Minister whose purposes I am sure are basically
not different from ours.
65. I have heard in the consultations which have taken
place today a suggestion that it might be the wish of this
Council that, having heard what the Foreign Minister has to
say we should adjourn our meeting. I would have thought,
Mr. President, and we had expected that we would now
proceed in a normal and straightforward manner to vote on
the adoption of the provisional agenda, I would say to YOU,
Sir, that we would not complain if the Council decided to
adjourn. But I should make it very plain that we should
accept such a decision on the clear understanding that the
wish of the Council is not to accept and proceed with the
item proposed.

66. I have already put forward the arguments which we
consider are overwhelming against doing so.
67. Mr. MUUK.4 (Zambia): My delegation has listened
with great attention to the statements made this morning
by the Minister for External Affairs of the Republic of
Ireland and the Ambassador of the United Kingdom. Those
of us who have had the advantage of watching at close
quarters what has been happening in the Six Counties of
Northern Ireland will agree that the situation existing there
at the moment is a tragic one indeed. The very fact that we
have the Minister for External Affairs of Ireland among us
is an indication that that is the c&e. Indeed, the representative of the United Kingdom has underlined that; and, if I
may say so, the very fact that the United Kingdom
Government, which is so much opposed to the idea of using
force in the solution of political questions, has seen fit to
send troops to that part of the United Kingdom more than
demonstrates the gravity of the situation,
68. The question before us is whether or not to adopt the
agenda. It is our feeling, a feeling which is shared by other
members of the Security Council, that in the light of the
statements made this morning it might be wise of the
Council to adjourn a decision on that question. Accordingly, I would formally propose that in accordance with the
rules of procedure, and in particular rule 33, paragraph 2
the meeting be adjourned.
69. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
members of the Council will have noted that the representative of Zambia has submitted a motion to adjourn the
meeting under rule 33, paragraph 2, of the rules of
procedure. Since that type of motion must be decided
without debate, I propose to put it to a vote immediately.
70. If there is no objection to the motion submitted by
the representative of Zambia, I shall declare that it has been
unanimously adopted and that it is therefore the desire of
the Council that this meeting be adjourned.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

ter
publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente
danr
les librairies
et les agences
diporitairer
du monde
entier.
Informez-vour
ouprer
de votre librairie
au odressez-vows
6:
Nations
Unies, Section der venter, New York ou Geneve.

KAK

IlOJlYYMTb

MIAAHMR

OPrAHH3Al@lM

06bE&‘lHEHHblX

HAl@lfl

Ih;ln~lllrl
Opranu:lalpm 06ar~nnc1111brsIIalruil Xoitillo KynilTa n IilIllX~llblS
>tara3uax
ill'L\IITI'TIIBS
110 nr’cs ~ItLilOllaS
JIllpI.
klO~llTC
UIpaIIlilI
06 Ir:l@lllllllS
ll IKIUIPJI lillllilillOY

II

wara:~nnc um uuuwrc 110 aApccy: Oprannaaqus O~~~~~II~I~II~~ISIIai~~ul CClilllIH

II0

l.lpO,Ql;liC

ll~l~allIlir,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

~~btO-~OpIi

PUBLICACIONES

IlJIl

&lll?lXL.

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocioner
de Ior Naciones
Unidor
estan
en todos parles
del munda.
Conrulte
a su librero
Ventas,
Nuevo York a Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

UNIDAS

en vento en librerias
y cosas distribuidoras
o dirljare
a; Naciones
Unidos,
Section

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

82200-December

1972-285~
i
