General As~emhly-First Emergency Special Session

N oting 'lvith satisfaction the first report of the Secretary-General on the plan, 5 and having in mind particularly paragraph 4 of that report,
1. Establishes a United Nations Command for an
emergency international Force to secme and supervise
the cessation of hostilities in accordance with ail the
terms of General Assembly resolution 9()7 (ES-I) of
2 November 1956;
2. Appoints, on an emergency hasis, the Chief of
Staff of the United Nations Trucc Supervision Organization, Major-General E. L. M. Burn~. as Chid of the
Cornmand;
3. Authorizes the Chief of the Command imrnediately to recruit, from the observer corps of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, a lirnite<l
number of officers who shall be nationals of countries
other than those having permanent mernbership in the
Security Council, and further authorizes him, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to unclertake the
recruitment directly, from varions Member States other
than the pennanent memhers of the Securitv Council,
of the additional number of of-ficers needed ;"
4. Invites the Secretary-Gencral to take such administrative measures as may he neces:-;ary for the prompt
execution of the actions envi.,aged in t hc prcsent resolution.
565th plenary meeting,
5 November 1956.

Resolution 1001 (ES-1)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution ~)7 ( ES-l J o( 2 N ovember
1956 concerning the cease-tirc, 11 ithdrawal of troops
and ot_her ma~ters related to the rnilitary operations in
Egyptian terntory, as well as its rcsolution 998 (ES-I)
of 4 November 1956 concerning the reque:,;t to the
?ecreta~y-Gener~l to su~mit a plan for an emergency
mternat1onal Umte<l Nations Force,
~ H aving establislied hy its rcsolution l 000 ( ES-1) of
J November 1956 a United Nations Command for an
emergency international Force, ha ving appointed the
Chief C?f S_taff of th~ United Nations Truce Supervision
Orga111zat10n as Chief of the Comman<l with authorization to him to begin the recruitment of officers for the
Comrnan<l, and having invited the Secrctary-Gencral
to take the administrative rneasurcs necessarv for the
prompt execution of that resolution.
·
N oting with ap preciation the second and final report
?f the S_ecretar};'-<:;eneral 6 ~m the plan for an emergency
111ternat10nal Umted Nattons Force as requested in
General Assembly resolution 99R (ES-Tî. and having
examined that plan,
1. E.xpres~es jts approval of the guiding principles
~or the ?rgamzat~on an;f ~unctioning of the emergency
mternat10nal Umte<l N allons Force as expounded in
paragraphs 6 to 9 of the Secretary-General's report;
2. C oncurs in the definition of the functions of the
Force as statecl i11 paragraph l.:? of the SecretaryGeneral's report;
3.. Invit~s the Secretary-General to continue discuss10ns w1th Governments of ~ ember States concerning offers of participation in the Force, towarcl the
objective of its halanced composition ;
5
Q_fficial R_ecrwds of the General Asscmbly, First Emerq,mrv
Specuil Session, Anne.res, agenda item 5, document .\/J289. ·
6 Ibid., document A/3302.

3

4. Requests the Chief of the Command, in consultation with the Secretary-General as regards size and
rnmposition, to proceed forthwith with the fui! organization of the Force;
5. Appro,_1es provisiona1lv the basic rule conccrning
the financing of the Force °Jaid down in paragraph 15
(li the Secretary-Ceneral's report;
(>. Establishes an Advisory Committee composed of
one representative from each of the following conntries: Brazil, Canada, Ceylon, C"olomhia, Tndia, Norway
and Pakistan, and requests this Cornmittce, whose
( :hairman shall be the Secrctary-Gcncral, to unclertake
the dcvelopment of those aspects of the planning for
the Force and its operation not already dealt with by
the (_;eneral Assembly and 11 hich do 1wt iall within the
area of the direct responsihility of the C:hid of the
c:ommancl:
7. Authori:::es the Secretarv-Gcneral to issue ail
regnlations and instructions \\'hich may be essential to
the effective functioning of the Force. iollowing consultation with the Committec aforementioned, and to
take ail other necessary administrative a11CI t>:::ecutive
action:
~- nctermines that, following the fullilment of the
1111mcdiate responsihilities clefined for it in opcrative
paragraphs <> arnl 7 abovc, the Advisory Committec
,hall continue to assist the Sccretarv-Ceneral in the
responsil1ilities falling to him undcr "the prescnt and
othn relevant resolntions:
() lhcides that the Advisory Comrnittee, in the perfonnance of its dnties, shall lie empm1 ercd to reqnest.
t hrongh the usual procednres, the cun vcning of the
l ;eneral .\ssembl_v ami to report to the :\sscmhly whcn('1·cr 111atters arise which. in its opinion, are of such
11rgcncv and importance as to reqnin, consideration li:,·
the ( ;eneral Assembly itself;
10. Requt'sls ail :i\Iemhcr States 1o :tff(lrd ;1~~i~t;1,1Cl'
as neccssary to the United Nations Command in the
performance of its ftmctio11.s, inclucli11g arra11:. ;-c111c1its
for pas:-age to and from the area in\·oh·ccl.
567th plenary meeting,
7 November 1956.

Resolution 1002 (ES-1)
'f'hc Gencral • lssn11bly.

N..:calfing its resolntions CJ~7 (ES-I) oi 2 l\overnber
1956, 998 (ES-T 'i and <J<J<J ( I•:S-1) of 4 .:\"ovemlll'r 19.Sr,
and 1000 (ES-I'i of 5 '\fovemlwr 1956. adopte<! ln

ovcrwhelming majorities,
N oting in partiwlar that the General ,\ss<'rnhlv. liv
its rcsolution 1000 ( ES-I), establishecl a Unitel Nations Command for an emergency international Force
to secure and sup<-rvise the cessation (lf hostilitics in
accord an ce with a 11 the tC'rms of its rcsol11tion 997
(ES-1),
1. Reaffirms the above-mentioned resol11tions;
2. Calls once aga.in upon I ~rael immediately to 1,·ithdraw ail its forces behind the armistice lines cstablishcd
hy the General Armistice .-\greement between Egypt
and Israel of 24 Fehruary 1949 ;7
J. Calls onœ agai11 11pon the United Kin°c] 1m and
France immediately to 1,ithdr:rn· al] tl1eir fo~ccs fro111
Egyptian territory, consistentlv with the ahovementioned resolutions :
·
7 Official RNnrd., of 1/,r Suuritv Co,mril. Fou,·th i·,..,r, S{'rrial Supplemmt .V n. 3.
..

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee

4

4. Urges the Secretary-General to communicate the
present resolution to the parties. concerned, and req uests him promptly to report to the General Assembly
on the compliance with this resolution.
567th plenary meeting,
7 November 1956.

Resolution 1003 (ES-1)
The General Assembly,
1. Decides to place on the provisional agenda of its
eleventh regular session, as a matter of priority, the

que~tion on the agenda of its first emergency special
session;
2. Refers to its eleventh regular session, for consideratiori, the records of the meetings and the documents of its first emergency special session;
3. Decides that, notwithstanding paragraph 1 above,
the first emergency special session may continue to
consider the question, if necessary, prior to the eleventh
regular session of the Assembly.
572nd plenary meeting,
10 November 1956.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and
distributors throughout the world. Consult your bookstore or
write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les
agences dépositaires du monde entier. Informez-vous auprès de votre librairie
ou adressez-vous à: Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Genève.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estén en venta en librerias y
casas distribuidoras en todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o
dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Yenras, Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Printed in U.S.A.
Reprinted in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.10
(or equivalent in other currencies)

31524-December 1956-3,300
September 1968-251
