General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Page

1765 ( XVII). Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
fourteenth session (20 November 1962) (item 76).. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1766 ( XVII). Question of extended participation in general multilateral treaties
concluded under the auspices of the League of Nations (20 November 1962)
(item 76) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1813 (XVII). International conference of plenipotentiaries on consular relations
(18 December 1%2) (item 74).........
.. . .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
1814 (XVII). Question of the publication of a United Nations juridical yearbook
(18 December 1962) (item 73) .......................................
1815 ( XVII). Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations (18 December 1962) (item 75).....................
1816 (XVII). Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study, dissemination
and wider appreciation of international law ( 18 December 1962) ( item 7 5) . .

65
65
66
66

66

67

(a) Continue the work of codification and progressive development of the law of treaties, taking into
account the views expressed at the seventeenth session
of the General Assembly and the comments which may
be submitted by Governments, in order that the law
of treaties may be placed upon the widest and most
secure foundations ;
( b) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the views expressed at the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly and the report of the
Sub-Committee on State Responsibility and giving due
consideration to the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations;
( c) Continue its work on the succession of States
and Governments, taking into account the views expressed at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly and the report of the Sub-Committee on the
Succession of States and Governments, with appropriate reference to the views of States which have
achieved independence since the Second World War ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International L,w Commission the records of the
discussions at the seventeenth session of the General
Assembly on the report of the Commission ;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide
the Commission with the necessary technical services
referred to in paragraphs 84 and 85 of its report.
1171st plenary meeting,
20 November 1962.

1765 (XVII). Report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fourteenth
session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission covering the work of its fourteenth
session, 1
Recalling resolution 1686 (XVI) of 18 December
1961 by which the General Assembly recommended
that the Commission should consider its future programme of work and report its conclusions to the
Assembly,
Emphasizing the need for the further codification and
progressive development of international law with a
view to making it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1
and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that, as regards State responsibility and the
succession of States and Governments, the International
Law Commission, in order to expedite its work, has
established two sub-committees, which are to meet at
Geneva in January 1963 and report to the Commission
at its fifteenth session,
Bearing in mind that the sub-committees are to study
the scope of, and approach to, these topics, and that
the work of the Sub-Committee on State Responsibility
is to be devoted primarily to the general aspects of
that topic,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its fourteenth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for
the work accomplished at its fourteenth session, especially with regard to the law of treaties;
3. Recommends that the Commission should:

1766 (XVII). Question of extended participation
in general multilateral treaties concluded
under the auspices of the League of Nations

The General Assembly,
Taking note of paragraph 10 of the commentary to
articles 8 and 9 of the draft articles on the law of

1 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Se1Jenteenth
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/5209 and Corr.l).

65

66

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

treaties contained in the report of the International
Law Commission covering the work of its fourteenth
session, 1
Desiring to give further consideration to this question,
1. Requests the International L,w Commission to
study further the question of extended participation
in general multilateral treaties concluded under the
auspices of the League of Nations, giving due consideration to the views expressed during the discussions
at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly,
and to include the results of the study in the report
of the Commission covering the work of its fifteenth
session;
2. Decides to place on the provisional agenda of its
eighteenth session an item entitled "Question of extended participation in general multilateral treaties
concluded under the auspices of the League of Nations".
1171st plenary meeting,
20 November 1962.
1813 (XVII). International conference of
plenipotentiaries on consular relations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by its resolution 1685 (XVI) of
18 December 1961 it decided to convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries at Vienna at the
beginning of March 1963 to consider the question of
consular relations, and referred to that conference
chapter II of the report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its thirteenth session,2
together with the records of the relevant debates in
the General Assembly, as the basis for its consideration
of the question,
Having considered the item entitled "Consular relations" at its seventeenth session,
Having heard the further expressions of opinion and
exchanges of views on the draft articles on consular
relations prepared by the International Law Commission, 3
Considering that the work of the conference would
be facilitated if States which intended to participate
were to submit in advance of the conference amendments which they might wish to propose to the draft
articles prepared by the International Law Commission,
and that their action in so doing would be without
prejudice to their right to propose amendments in the
course of the conference,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the international conference of plenipotentiaries on consular relations the summary records and documentation
relating to the consideration of this item at the seventeenth session ;
2. Invites States which intend to participate in the
conference to submit to the Secretary-General as soon
as possible, and in any event not later than 10 February 1963, for circulation to Governments, any amendments which they may wish to propose in advance of
the conference to the draft articles prepared by the
International Law Commission.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.
Si.-rteenth Session, Su.pplemcnt No. 9 (A/4843).
s Ibid., para. 37.
2 Ibid.,

1814 (XVII). Question of the publication of a
United Nations juridical yearbook

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1451 (XIV) of 7 December
1959 by which it decided that a United Nations juridical yearbook which would include documentary materials of a legal character relating to the United
Nations should be published,
Ha-i•ing re-examined the question at its seventeenth
session,
1. Decides that the United Nations Juridical Yearbook shall contain the documentary materials, concerning the United Nations and the inter-governmental
organizations in relationship with it, which are listed
in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the
publication of the Yearbook in the three working
languages of the General Assembly, and to publish
early in 1964 the first volume, which should include
materials relating to the year 1963 and should not
exceed 256 pages in length.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.
ANNEX
OUTLINE OF THE UNITED NATIONS JURIDICAL YEARBOOK

Part I. Legal activities of the United Nations and the specialized agencies:'
(a) Documents concerning the status of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies ;
(b) Comprehensive index to, and where necessary the text
of, decisions, recommendations, discussions or reports of a
legal character by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies (judgements and advisory opinions of the International
Court of Justice and reports of the International Law Commission will only be indexed) ;
(c) Text of treaties concerning international law concluded
in the United Nations, the specialized agencies and international
conferences convened under the auspices of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies;
(d) Index with brief description of decisions of administrative tribunals of the United Xations and the specialized
agencies;
(e) Text of selected legal opinions of the Secretariat of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies.
Part II. Index with brief description of decisions of international a.nd national tribunals on questions relating to the
United Nations and the specialized agencies.
Part III. Bibliography of works and articles of a legal character relating to the United Nations and the speciali::ed
agencies.

1815 (XVII). Consideration of principles of inter•
national law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter records the determination
of the peoples of the United Nations to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as
good neighbours,
Convinced of the paramount importance of the
Charter in the progressive development of international law and in the promotion of the rule of law
among nations,
