39/2 of 28 September 1984, which declared the socalled "new constitution" contrary to the principles
of the Charter of the United N:;itions,
Relifftrming the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, particularly article 21, paragraphs 1 and 3, which recognize, inter alia. the right
of everyone to take part in the Government of his
country, directly or through freely chosen representatives, and the will of the people as the basis of the
authority of Government,

5. Urges all Governments and organizations not
to accord recognition to the results of the so-called
"elections" and to take appropriate action, in cooperation with the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and in accordance with the
present resolution, to assist the oppressed people of
South Africa in their legitimate struggle for a nonracial, democratic society;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution;
7. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Alarmed by the aggravation of the situation in South
Africa, in particular the wanton killing and the maiming
of defenceless demonstrators and workers on strike
as well as the imposition of virtual martial-law conditions intended to facilitate the brutal repression of the
black population,

Adopted at the 2551st meeting
hv /3 l'oles to none, with
i ahstentions (United Kingdom <~f" Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
United
States of America).

Gravely concerned at the continuing arbitrary arrests
and detentions without trial of leaders and activists of
mass organizations inside the country as well as the
closure of several schools and universities,
Commending the massive united resistance of the
oppressed people of South Africa, including the strike
by hundreds of thousands of black students, to the
imposition of the so-called "new constitution",

Decisions

At its 2560th meeting, on 23 October 1984, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Ethiopia
and South Africa to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The question of South
Africa: letter dated 17 October 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/16786)" . 10

Commending also the Asian and coloured communities in South Africa for their large-scale boycott
of the recent '"elections" which constituted a clear
rejection of the so-called "new constitution".
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa for the full exercise
of the right to self-determination and the establishment
of a non-racial democratic society in an unfragmented
South Africa,

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid.

Coni·inced that racist South Africa's defiance of
world public opinion and the imposition of the rejected
so-called "new constitution" will inevitably lead to
further escalation of the explosive situation and will
have far-reaching consequences for southern Africa
and the world,

At the same meeting, the Council further decided,
at the request of the representatives of Burkina Faso,
Egypt and Zimbabwe, 11 to extend an invitation to
Bishop Desmond Tutu under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

1. Reiterates its condemnation of the apartheid
policy of the South African regime and South Africa· s
continued defiance of the resolutions of the United
Nations and designs further to entrench apartheid, a
system characterized as a crime against humanity:
2. Further condemns the continued massacres of
the oppressed people, as well as the arbitrary arrest
and detention of leaders and activists of mass organi-zations;

Resolution 556 (1984)

3. Demands the immediate cessation of the massacres and the prompt and unconditional release of all
political prisoners and detainees;

of 23 October 1984

The Security Council,
Recalling its. resolution 554 (1984) and General
Assembly resolutions 38/11 of 15 November 1983 and

4. Reaffirms that only the total eradication of
apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial.
democratic society based on majority rule, through
the full and free exercise of adult suffrage by all the
people in a united and unfragmented South Africa.
can lead to a just, equitable and lasting solution of the
situation in South Africa;

10
See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-ninth
Year. Supplement for Octoher, Nm·emher and December /984.
11
Document S/16794, incorporated in the record of the
2560th meeting.

4

Resolution 558 (1984)

5. Urges all Governments and organizations to
take appropriate action, in co-operation with the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
and in accordance with the present resolution, to assist
the oppressed people of South Africa in their legitimate struggle for the full exercise of the right to selfdetermination;

of 13 December 1984

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 418 (1977), in which it
decided upon a mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa,
Recalling its resolution 421 (1977), by which it
entrusted a Committee consisting of all its members
with the task of, among other things, studying ways
and means by which the mandatory arms embargo
could be made more effective against South Africa
and to make recommendations to the Council,
Taking note of the Committee's report to the Security Council contained in document S/14179 of 19 September 1980,
Recognizing that South Africa's intensified efforts
to build up its capacity to manufacture armaments
undermines the effectiveness of the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa,
Considering that no State should contribute to
South Africa's arms-production capability by purchasing arms manufactured in South Africa,
I. Reaffirms its resolution 418 (1977) and stresses
the continuing need for the strict application of all its
provisions;
2. Requests all States to refrain from importing
arms, ammunition of all types and military vehicles
produced in South Africa;
3. Requests all States, including States not Members of the United Nations, to act strictly in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council Committee established by resolution
421 (1977) concerning the question of South Africa
on the progress of the implementation of the present
resolution before 31 December 1985.

6. Demands the immediate eradication of apartheid as the necessary step towards the full exercise of
the right to self-determination in an unfragmented
South Africa, and to this end demands:
(a) The dismantling of the bantustan structures as
well as the cessation of uprooting, relocation and
denationalization of the indigenous African people;

(b) The abrogation of the bans and restrictions on
political organizations, parties, individuals and news
media opposed to apartheid;
(c) The unimpeded return of all the exiles;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution;
8.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted at the 2560th meeting
hy 14 votes to none, with
I ahstention (United States of
America).

Decision

At its 2564th meeting, on 13 December 1984, the
Council decided to invite the representative of South
Africa to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled "The question of South Africa:
letter dated 13 December 1984 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of South
Africa (S/16860)" . 10

Adopted unanimously at th,,
2564th meetini:.

LETTER DATED 3 FEBRUARY 1984 FROM THE CHARGE D'AFFAIRES A.I.
OF THE PERMANENT MISSION OF NICARAGUA TO THE UNITED
NA TI ONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY
COUNCIL
Decision

At its 2513th meeting, on 3 February 1984, the Council decided to invite the
representative of Honduras to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled "Letter dated 3 February 1984 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16306)''. 12
12
See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-ninth Year, Supplement Jin· January,
Fehruary and March /984.

5
