A /77/PV.76*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

76th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 7 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 31
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and
development
Report of the Secretary- General (A/77/870)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.73)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.73.
Mr. Bakradze (Georgia): I have the honour to
address the Assembly on behalf of hundreds of thousands
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
forcibly displaced from Georgia’s occupied regions of
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia and seek to
solicit members’ support for draft resolution A/77/L.73,
entitled “Status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.
The main purpose of the draft resolution is to
address the humanitarian plight of those IDPs and
refugees who were forced to flee from their homes as
a result of multiple waves of ethnic cleansing starting
in the 1990s and culminating in the full-scale military
aggression against Georgia in August 2008.
We have been adopting the resolution before the
Assembly for the past 15 years, with an increasing
number of votes in favour and encouraging dynamics of

support. That comes down to time-tested adherence to
the universally recognized principles enshrined in the
text, such as the right to return, property rights and the
calls for a peaceful resolution of the conflict, providing
assurances to Member States that the resolution is
human centred and aims to uphold lasting and durable
peace in the region.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, the
very document on which the draft resolution before
the Assembly is based. Today, when the number of
forcibly displaced has exceeded 100 million globally
and when their enormous suffering echoes in Africa,
Asia, the Americas and Europe, with the latest example
of Ukraine, where millions of innocent civilians have
been forced to flee from their homes as a result of
Russia’s war of aggression, we all need to lend a helping
hand to those furthest behind.
The draft resolution before the Assembly is of a
purely humanitarian character. The text is based on
the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and
represents a country-specific application of the General
Assembly biannual consensual resolution, entitled
“Protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons” (resolution 76/167).
The draft resolution is aimed at reaffirming the
right of return in safety and with dignity of hundreds
of thousands of innocent civilians, women, children
and elderly who were forced to abruptly leave their
homes to seek refuge elsewhere; reconfirming their
property rights; reaffirming the unacceptability of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16166 (E)

*2316166*
*Reissued for technical reasons 16 August 2024

A/77/PV.76

forced demographic changes and ensuring access
for international humanitarian organizations to the
populations in need.
Beyond that, the draft resolution reaffirms and
supports the key role of the Geneva international
discussions, the only international peace negotiations
format on the matter, and calls on all participants,
including my own country, Georgia, to engage in
negotiations in good faith to find a peaceful and
lasting solution.
Finally, it calls for the elaboration of a concrete
timetable for the return of IDPs and refugees and for
the reporting instrument to be maintained in order to
keep the international community informed about the
implementation of the draft resolution through the
annual reports of the Secretary-General, the latest
of which repeats one and the same sentence from the
previous 12 reports,
“No major changes were observed during the
reporting period with regard to internally displaced
persons and refugees exercising their right to
return” (A/77/870/, para. 16).
Furthermore, the people living in the occupied
regions endure continuous deprivation in terms of their
basic human rights, isolation and discrimination. Those
facts have been systematically reflected in the annual
reports of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, based on Human Rights Council
resolution 52/40, entitled “Cooperation with Georgia”,
the most recent of which speaks about the various forms
of discrimination ethnic Georgians continue to endure in
both occupied regions, including violations of the right
to life, the deprivation of liberty, arbitrary detention,
the infringement of the right to property, violations of
the right to health and restrictions on education in one’s
native language. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights reiterates his recommendations to
“promptly and thoroughly investigate all allegations of the violation of the right to life, torture and
ill-treatment, and intensify efforts to establish accountability”, as well as to “end the practice of arbitrary deprivation of liberty and conduct a thorough
review and prompt resolution of the pertinent individual cases, consistent with international human
rights law”.
Notwithstanding that grim background, the
Government of Georgia continues the effective
implementation of its fully human-centric reconciliation
2/8

07/06/2023

and engagement policy, which is based on a depoliticized
approach and efficient instruments to reach the goals
of peacebuilding and confidence-building among wartorn communities and to ensure a decent living for the
conflict-affected people before undertaking a peaceful
conflict resolution. The Government is proceeding with
the active implementation of the peace initiative A Step
to a Better Future. Over the years, we have been inspired
to see the ever-growing interest of people in the occupied
regions in the opportunities and State services available
and designed for them, which is a major deliverable on
the way to achieving our strategic goals of reconciliation
and re-engagement.
Furthermore, pending a final resolution to the
conflict, the Government of Georgia continues its efforts
to promote socioeconomic integration and improve the
living conditions of IDPs. Significant efforts have been
made in order to provide IDPs with decent, durable
housing and financial assistance based on the United
Nations Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and
the Guiding Principles on Durable Housing Solutions.
As stated earlier, the draft resolution emphasizes
the importance of the Geneva International Discussions,
the only format of negotiations between Georgia and
the Russian Federation, in addressing the return of IDPs
and refugees to their homes. However, we are witnessing Russia’s ongoing and deliberate policy to obstruct
meaningful discussions on this purely humanitarian
issue, thereby precluding any progress in that regard.
Up to 100 resolutions, presidential statements and
communiqués have unanimously reaffirmed “the commitment of all Member States to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders”. Council resolutions
from 1993 until 2009, on a continuous basis, stressed the
necessity “to address seriously the need for a dignified
return of internally displaced persons and refugees, including their security and human rights concerns”.
Let me make it perfectly clear — the primary
focus on the humanitarian aspect of the issue at hand
is a deliberate decision of my delegation to avoid any
political speculation when the fundamental rights of
displaced persons are at stake. The draft resolution is not
against any party, and neither does it aim to point fingers
at those responsible for forced displacement. Every year
when this resolution is introduced, we leave politics aside
and focus exclusively on the humanitarian dimension of
the problem. The text of the annual resolution remains
unchanged because its provisions remain unfulfilled. We
23-16166

07/06/2023

therefore ask the Assembly to continue being principled
and unwavering in its resolve and to stand up for the
universally recognized rights until the provisions of this
resolution are fully implemented.
The draft resolution before the Assembly
(A/77/L.73), entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and
the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”, under
agenda item 31, “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM
area and their implications for international peace,
security and development”, is sponsored by more than
60 United Nations Member States, including Albania,
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta,
the Marshall Islands, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United States
of America and Vanuatu.
The hardships that the displaced citizens of Georgia
endure are the same ones that those from different parts
of the world face and feel. By supporting their cause,
we are also supporting the cause of all displaced persons
around the world, as a matter of principle.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I am pleased to deliver
a statement on behalf of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand (CANZ) about Georgia’s draft resolution on the
status of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia.
CANZ is pleased to cosponsor this draft resolution.
We state unequivocally that we support Georgia’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. Globally,
CANZ recognizes the right of displaced people to a
safe, voluntary, dignified and unhindered return to
their homes, in accordance with international law. This
draft resolution is important as it addresses a global
humanitarian and human rights challenge. We encourage
widespread support for this draft resolution.

A/77/PV.76

In Georgia itself, CANZ considers that forced
demographic changes are unacceptable. We support
the rights of those people displaced from Abkhazia and
the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia to return to their
homes. The General Assembly must address the forced
demographic changes from the conflicts at the end
of the Soviet Union and the war with Russia in 2008.
Despite the passage of time, the property rights of all
internally displaced persons and refugees in Georgia
must be respected.
CANZ is concerned that international human rights
organizations are denied access to Abkhazia and South
Ossetia. We call on all parties to ensure entry for those
organizations and their access to people in need.
CANZ is also concerned about the deterioration
of human rights in those two regions, including the
mistreatment of prisoners, impunity for past abuses and
the right to freedom of expression.
CANZ calls on all participants to accelerate efforts
to achieve a sustainable peace. We are disappointed
that the ceasefire agreement that ended the 2008
Russia-Georgia war has not been implemented. And
we are concerned that the so-called authorities in
South Ossetia continue, by increments, to push out the
administrative boundaries of the region.
Finally, CANZ calls out Russia for its role in creating
instability in Georgia. This is part of a trend of Russia’s
repeated aggression against its neighbours, including
its illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine, which
CANZ categorically condemns. We are committed to
a world in which no country dominates and no country
is dominated.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Baltic and the Nordic States:
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Lithuania. The following
States — Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Luxembourg, Republic of Moldova, Montenegro, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Ukraine — align themselves
with this statement.
First, we avail ourselves of this opportunity to
reiterate our unwavering support for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. The territorial
integrity of Georgia has been continuously violated by
the Russian Federation since 2008, with thousands of
people displaced and the humanitarian situation of the

23-161663/8

A/77/PV.76

07/06/2023

country affected. Russia’s responsibility for the grave
human rights violations committed while in effective
control of illegally occupied Georgian territory has been
confirmed by the European Court of Human Rights in
its landmark judgment of 2021 and reaffirmed in its
most recent judgment dated 7 March 2023.

In conclusion, given the lack of progress on the
ground and the need for continuous engagement by the
United Nations, as in previous years, our countries will
vote in favour of draft resolution A/77/L.73, and we
call on all States Members of the United Nations to do
the same.

The perpetrators of these violations must be held
accountable. In this regard, we welcome the application
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
dated 10 March 2022 for the issuance of arrest warrants
for suspects bearing individual criminal responsibility
for the war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed during Russia’s war against Georgia in 2008.

Mrs. Shino (Japan): First and foremost, I would
like to reiterate Japan’s unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the GUAM
countries. People in Georgia continue to suffer from
long-term forced displacement. Japan has proudly
co-sponsored the draft General Assembly resolution on
the status of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Georgia, expected to be adopted soon (A/77/L.73).

We remain concerned with the human rights
situation on the ground. Regrettably, no international
human rights monitoring mechanisms have been
granted unrestricted access to assess the situation
in these regions. We reiterate our call for immediate
access for the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other international and regional
human rights mechanisms. We reiterate our support
for the process of the Geneva International Discussions
and regret that there has been a constant lack of
engagement from the Russian side or from participants
from Tskhinvali and Sukhumi. In this context, we
also commend the continued efforts of the Georgian
Government, working in close cooperation with
international organizations, to provide internally
displaced persons with alternative solutions in terms of
housing and improved socioeconomic conditions.
The number of displaced persons and refugees
around the world has reached unprecedented levels
and continues to grow. Russia’s full-scale military
aggression against Ukraine has only resulted in a
degree of displacement unseen in Europe since the
Second World War, with more than 13 million displaced
persons. We are pleased to see a growing awareness of
the international community with regard to the need
to address forced displacement, including the pressing
humanitarian issues in the Abkhazia and South Ossetia
regions of Georgia.
Draft resolution A/77/L.73, which we are adopting
today, reconfirms the need to continue working for the
protection of and assistance to those who have been
forcibly displaced and have not been able to exercise
their fundamental right to a safe and dignified return to
their homes for more than a decade.
4/8

As the overwhelming majority of the General
Assembly has repeatedly stated, Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine is a grave violation of the United
Nations Charter. In Ukraine, millions of civilians
are displaced and continue to be deprived of freedom
from fear, freedom from want and freedom to live in
dignity. The protection of internally displaced persons
is an urgent issue as civilians are the most affected by
instability all over the world.
To address the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and its
neighbouring countries that have generously accepted a
great number of Ukrainian people, including Moldova,
Japan has exerted every effort to provide assistance.
To date, Japan has pledged and transferred a total of
approximately $7.6 million in humanitarian, financial,
food and recovery and reconstruction assistance to
Ukraine, its neighbours and other countries. Japan is
also committed to supporting the GUAM countries
and their efforts aimed at tackling various challenges
caused by ongoing and protracted conflicts, including
by providing assistance for internally displaced persons
and refugees.
We, the States Members of the United Nations, are
at a critical juncture, as we face serious challenges to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
as well as the rule of law. Draft resolution A/77/L.73
embodies important values set forth in the Charter and
reflects our collective commitment to upholding the
rule of law. This is why Japan unequivocally support
the draft resolution.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): Nearly 15 years
since the Russian invasion of Georgia, the United
Kingdom remains deeply concerned over the continued
illegal Russian presence in parts of the country. We
23-16166

07/06/2023

A/77/PV.76

fully support Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders,
and we underline the need for a peaceful resolution of the
conflict based on the full respect of the United Nations
Charter, the Helsinki Final Act and international law.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to co-sponsor and support the
important draft resolution (A/77/L.73) before us today
and urges the members of the General Assembly to
support it as well.

Georgia has been under continuous hybrid attack
from Russia since the 2008 war, which saw 20 per cent of
Georgian territory effectively annexed. Russian troops
and border guards remain stationed in the breakaway
regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Some are as
close as 35 minutes from the Georgian capital. And the
human rights situation in these breakaway regions is of
serious concern.

We remain greatly concerned about the plight of
internally displaced persons and refugees displaced
from the Georgian territories of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia, and all others whose lives have been upended by
Russia’s unlawful invasions of its sovereign neighbours.
Fifteen years ago, Russia’s aggression upended the lives
and livelihoods of millions of Georgian civilians. Many
of them remain unable to return to the lives and homes
they had before the conflict. Many remain unable to
enjoy peace and security.

We welcome Georgia’s ongoing compliance with
the European Union-mediated 12 August 2008 ceasefire
agreement. We call upon the Russian Federation to
immediately fulfil its clear obligation under the ceasefire
agreement to withdraw its forces to pre-conflict positions,
live up to its commitments to allowing unfettered
access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
and not impede the creation of international security
arrangements on the ground. We also call upon Russia
to reverse its recognition of the so-called independence
of Georgia’s Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions and
end all practices aimed at creeping annexation of these
territories into the Russian Federation. We welcome
initiatives by the Government of Georgia to promote
reconciliation among the populations separated by the
administrative boundary lines, and we urge Russia not
to obstruct these valuable peacebuilding and people-topeople contacts.
The United Kingdom has been a long-standing
supporter of this annual resolution in solidarity with
the Georgian people and all internally displaced people
worldwide. It is all the more pertinent as Russia continues
its illegal and unjustified invasion of Ukraine. The draft
resolution highlights the inalienable rights of the forcibly
displaced populations to a safe and dignified return to
their homes. It acknowledges their property rights,
reaffirms the unacceptability of forced demographic
changes, and creates a vital mechanism for enabling
the Secretary-General to report on developments on
this important issue. These are all matters that are
vital to our universally shared interest in human rights,
reconciliation and peace. We therefore urge all Member
States to vote in favour of this draft resolution, which
aims to protect society’s most vulnerable and underlines
the unacceptability of using internally displaced persons
as political pawns in conflicts.

The United States fully supports Georgia’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. Russia’s
military presence in the Georgian regions of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia is the result of its unlawful invasion.
Russia continues to violate Georgia’s territorial
integrity and undermine its sovereignty, threatening
not just Georgia but also the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. We call on Russia to
cease its recognition of the so-called independence of
the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia,
which are integral parts of Georgia’s territory. We also
call on Russia to fulfil its obligations under the 2008
ceasefire agreement to withdraw its forces to pre-conflict
positions and allow and facilitate unhindered access for
humanitarian organizations. Russia and the de facto
authorities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia should take
immediate steps to respect human rights in Abkhazia
and South Ossetia, cease the construction of barriers
along the administrative boundary lines and create
security conditions that are conducive to the voluntary,
safe, dignified and unhindered return and reintegration
of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Across the globe, the United States promotes
respect for the human rights, dignity and humanitarian
needs of internally displaced persons and refugees.
We are alarmed by the increasing number of ongoing
and urgent conflict-driven crises involving human
rights violations and abuses, as well as limits on
humanitarian access. With forced displacement and
humanitarian needs reaching unprecedented levels year
after year, there is no time to waste. We encourage the
United Nations to strengthen its vision for improving
protection and assistance for internally displaced

23-161665/8

A/77/PV.76

07/06/2023

persons and to create incentives for development and
peacebuilding actors and the States affected to increase
their efforts to meet the needs of internally displaced
persons and refugees.

Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as Andorra, Monaco and San Marino, align
themselves with this statement.

Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Lithuania on behalf of the Nordic and
Baltic States and the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the European Union.

The EU reaffirms its firm support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia,
within its internationally recognized borders. The
EU remains committed to supporting peacebuilding
and conflict resolution in Georgia, including through
its co-chairmanship of the Geneva International
Discussions and the EU Monitoring Mission in Georgia.
We express our concern about human rights violations
in the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia and the persistent humanitarian
challenges faced by their conflict-affected populations.
The EU calls for ensuring full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to support those populations, in
particular in Tskhinvali/South Ossetia.

It has already been 15 years since the Russian
Federation launched its full-scale military aggression
against Georgia and occupied Georgia and the regions
of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, Georgia.
That unprovoked brutal aggression, in violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia, caused
the large-scale displacement of thousands of people and
affected the humanitarian situation in the region. As
the cause of the problem, the Russian Federation still
refuses to abide by international law and withdraw its
military and security forces from sovereign Georgian
territories. Moreover, the occupier has continued its
illegal military presence and activities on Georgian
soil. We must make every effort to provide protection
and assistance to Georgians who have been forcibly
displaced as a result of the Russian military aggression.
Draft resolution A/77/L.73, which will be adopted
today, addresses the issue of protracted displacement,
with hundreds of thousands of men, women and
children being deprived of their right to return to their
homes. It is an opportunity for the States Members of
the United Nations to reiterate their commitment to the
fundamental right of all internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees to a safe and dignified return home.
As a sponsor, Ukraine will therefore vote in favour of
the draft resolution. As the occupier, Russia must not
go unpunished. The international community must put
an end to Russia’s imperialistic attempts to conquer and
occupy its neighbours. All Russian-occupied territories,
including those in Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova, must
and will be liberated, and that in turn will enable IDPs
and refugees to safely return home and will bring just
and lasting peace and security back to the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Türkiye, North
6/8

In that respect, the EU would like to remind the
Assembly that humanitarian access is stipulated in the
12 August 2008 six-point ceasefire agreement. The EU
underlines the importance of the right of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) to choose a durable
solution, including voluntary, safe and dignified return,
as well as the ability to exercise property rights. We
regret that so far no progress has been achieved on
those issues and recall that addressing the issues
of refugees and IDPs is a core task of the Geneva
International Discussions.
The EU therefore calls on the participants in the
Geneva International Discussions to engage in a
genuine dialogue on the various displacements that
have taken place over the past three decades, as well
as on partial returns, with a view to enhancing the
protection of displaced persons and seeking pragmatic
approaches and durable solutions, including further
returns. The EU welcomes the efforts of the Georgian
Government to find durable housing solutions for
IDPs and promote their socioeconomic integration. We
encourage the Government to continue IDP inclusion
and prioritization in the national development plan
and to make further efforts to improve their living
conditions and livelihoods.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/77/L.73.
23-16166

07/06/2023

I give the
the Secretariat.

A/77/PV.76

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/77/L.73 — the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Malawi, Mexico, New Zealand, Palau, Samoa, Trinidad
and Tobago and Vanuatu.
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its strong
determination to preserve, promote and defend the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as its unwavering
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
supports all diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving that
end. In that regard, we reiterate our concern about the
growing tendency to attempt to exploit the General
Assembly in order to attack its members and, even
more egregiously, to use it as a platform for adopting
draft resolutions that lack consensus, which, far from
fostering an environment conducive to dialogue and
negotiation, only deepens tensions and divisions
and has the potential to further complicate regional
situations and dynamics.
In adhering to the tenets of its Bolivarian
diplomacy of peace, Venezuela therefore calls on
the sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.73 to refrain
from politicized approaches and instead promote both
confidence-building measures and a constructive
approach to the issue, including within the framework
of the Geneva International Discussions on security and
stability in the South Caucasus, using political dialogue,
diplomatic negotiation and cooperation, in order to find
concerted solutions to the common challenges of the
region, including in the humanitarian arena.
We hope that, in the interest of peace and the
well-being of all our peoples, sooner rather than
later, the General Assembly will correct course
and return to the practice of promoting consensusbased decision-making through transparent and
inclusive processes in which all views, concerns and

contributions are truly taken into account in order to
reach consensual solutions to issues of common interest
to the entire international community.
Mr. Kuzmenkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For yet another year in a row, this draft resolution
(A/77/L.73) has been introduced before the General
Assembly. Its sponsors have consistently said that they are
driven by their concern for the needs of those who have
lost their livelihoods and have been displaced by armed
hostilities. It must be said, however, that its current text,
like that of its predecessors, is a purely politicized product.
This is an attempt to speculate on the fate of
thousands of Georgians, Abkhazians, Ossetians and
other nationalities who have suffered as a result of
the Georgian authorities’ policy of aggression, which
culminated in an armed attack on Tskhinval in South
Ossetia in August 2008. It is naive to think that the
draft resolution is devoted exclusively to concerns about
refugees and displaced persons. Its goal is to prevent
the normalization of the situation in the region and the
establishment of good-neighbourly relations among
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Georgia.
We regret that Georgian diplomacy and an established
group of supporting countries have introduced the text
before us year after year at the expense of taking practical
steps to resolve the current humanitarian problems in
the region. The initiative has a seriously negative impact
on the Geneva International Discussions. It complicates
the already-complicated relations among our close
neighbours — the representatives of various nationalities
living in Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We must
today talk about peaceful coexistence in the region and
take into account the current geopolitical realities. It is
high time for Georgia to opt for constructive discussion
on humanitarian issues instead of baseless and pointless
attacks on Sukhumi and Tskhinval in international forums.
The delegation of the Russian Federation requests
that draft resolution A/77/L.73 be put to the vote and will
vote against it. We urge other delegations that oppose the
politicization of the work of the General Assembly not to
support the draft resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.73, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia,
and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.
A recorded vote has been requested.

23-161667/8

A/77/PV.76

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Andorra,
Antigua
and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Myanmar, Netherlands (Kingdom of the), New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chad, China, Congo, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,

8/8

07/06/2023

Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen
Draft resolution A/77/L.73 was adopted by 100
votes to 9, with 59 abstentions (resolution 76/293).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Barreto Da Rocha Paranhos (Brazil):
Brazil understands that the General Assembly should
abstain in influencing sensitive issues that are under
consideration in the Geneva International Discussions.
Brazil abides by the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia and does not recognize the independence of
breakaway provinces. We hope that the situation can be
resolved in a peaceful manner in the short term.
We express our solidarity with the victims of forced
displacement and the refugees in Georgia. We encourage
all actors to create favourable political conditions for
the safe return of internally displaced persons and seek
durable solutions to avoid the further escalation of
tensions, thereby avoiding actions that could aggravate
the already-difficult situation in the region. Brazil calls
on all parties concerned, in particular Georgia and the
Russian Federation, to pursue dialogue and cooperation
and adopt confidence-building measures, including
within the framework of the Geneva process.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of General Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 31.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

23-16166
