IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

4. Requests the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the_ Near Ea~t to act
as recipient and trustee for such special_ allocation~ ~nd
scholarships and to award them to qualified Palest1man
refugee candidates;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

32/91.

Report of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3240 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
3525 B (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/106 B
of 16 December 1976,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the
obligations arising from the Charter of the United Nations and other instruments and rules of international
law is among the basic purposes and principles of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,20
Noting that Israel and those Arab States whose territories have been occupied by Israel since June 1967
are parties to that Convention,
Taking into account that States parties to that Convention undertake, in accordance with article 1 thereof,
not only to respect but also to ensure respect for the
Convention in all circumstances,
1. Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, is applicable to all the Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
2. Strongly deplores the failure of Israel to acknowledge the applicability of that Convention to the
territories it has occupied since 1967;
3. Calls again upon Israel to acknowledge and to
comply with the provisions of that Convention in all
the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
4. Urges once more all States parties to that Convention to exert all efforts in order to ensure respect
for and compliance with the provisions thereof in all
the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including Jerusalem.
IOI st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3240 C (XXIX) of 29 November 1974, 3525 C (XXX) of 15 December 1975
and 31/106 D of 16 December 1976,
20 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

69

Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 21 in particular annex II thereof, entitled "Report
on damage at Quneitra", a report on the nature, extent
and value of damage, submitted by a Swiss expert engaged by the Special Committee,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the thoroughness
and impartiality with which the expert engaged by the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories discharged the tasks entrusted to
him;
2. Condemns the massive, deliberate destruction of
Quneitra perpetrated during the Israeli occupation and
prior to the withdrawal of Israeli forces from that city
in 1974;
3. Reaffirms that the Syrian Arab Republic is entitled to full and adequate compensation, under international law and in equity, for the massive damage and
deliberate destruction perpetrated in Quneitra while it
was under Israeli occupation, and to all other legal
remedies in accordance with applicable international
law and practice;
4. Takes note of the statements made by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic before the
Special Political Committee at the thirty-first22 and
thirty-second23 sessions of the General Assembly to
the effect that his Government reserves all rights to full
compensation in regard to all damages resulting from
Israel's deliberate destruction of Quneitra, including
those not covered by the expert's above-mentioned report or not falling within the scope of his assignment;
5. Requests the Special Committee to complete
its survey on all the aspects referred to in paragraph 4
of the present resolution and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the facilities required for
the completion of the tasks referred to in the previous
paragraphs.
IOI st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
C

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as the principles and provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 24 as well as of
other relevant conventions and regulations,
Recalling its resolutions on the subject, as well as
those adopted by the Security Council, the Commission
on Human Rights and other United Nations bodies
concerned and by the specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
A/32/284.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Special Political Committee, 30th meeting, para. 12.
2 :1 Ibid .. 34th meeting, paras. 7-10.
2 1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
21

22

70

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Territories, 25 which contains, inter alia, public statements made by leaders of the Government of Israel.
l. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts
in performing the tasks assigned to it by the General
Assembly;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow
the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
3. Calls again upon Israel to allow the Special
Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation
by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, and other applicable international
instruments, and condemns in particular those violations which that Convention designates as "grave
breaches" thereof;
5. Condemns the following Israeli policies and
practices:
(a) The annexation of parts of the occupied territories;
( b)
The establishment of Israeli settlements therein
and the transfer of an alien population thereto;
( c) The evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories, and the denial of their right to return;
(d)
The confiscation and expropriation of Arab
property in the occupied territories and all other transactions for the acquisition of land involving the Israeli
authorities, institutions or nationals on the one hand,
and the inhabitants or institutions of the occupied territories on the other;
( e)
The destruction and demolition of Arah
houses;
(f) Mass arrests, administrative detention and illtreatment of the Arab population;
(g) The ill-treatment and torture of persons under
detention;
(h)
The pillaging of archaeological and cultur.il
property;
(i) The interference with religious freedoms and
practices as well as with family rights and customs;
(i) The illegal exploitation of the natural wealth,
resources and population of the occupied territories;
6. Reaffirms that all measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the occupied
territories, or any part thereof, including Jerusalem,
are null and void, and that Israel's policy of settling
parts of its population and new immigrants in the occupied territories constitutes a flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and of the relevant United
Nations resolutions;
7. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the
policies and practices referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6
of the present resolution;
8. Reiterates its call upon all States, in particular
those States parties to the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
25 A/32/284.

in accordance with article I of that Convention, and
upon international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize any changes carried out by Israel
in the occupied territories and to avoid actions, including those in the field of aid, which might be used by
Israel in its pursuit of the policies of annexation and
colonization or any of the other policies and practices
referred to in the present resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue
to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since I 967, to consult,
as appropriate. with the International Committee of
the Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of
the welfare and human rights of the population of the
occupied terri lories, and to report to the SecretaryGeneral as soon as possible and whenever the need
arises thereafter;
I 0. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to investigate the treatment of civilians in detention
in the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967
and to submit to the Secretary-General a special report
on that subject as soon as possible and whenever the
need arises thereafter;

Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) . To render all necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to the
occupied territories, with a view to investigating the
Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
( b) To continue to make available additional staff
'.ls may be necessary to assist the Special Committee
m the performance of its tasks;
( c)
To ensure the widest circulation of the reports
'.)f t~e Special Committee, and of information regardmg its activities and findings, by all means available
through the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat and, where necessary, to reprint those reports
of the Special Committee which are no longer available;
. (d) '!'o report to the General Assembly at its thirtytlurd se,;;;1on on the tasks entrusted to him in the present
paragraph;
11.

12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-third session the item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of th~
Occupied Territories''.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

~t2/106.

Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in
all their ai.peet!i!

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965, 205 3 A ( XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249
(S-V) of 23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967. 2451 (XXlII) of 19 December 1968, 2670
(XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972,
3~91 (XXVlll) of 7 December 1973, 3239 (XXIX)
of 29 November 1974, 3457 (XXX) of 10 December 1975 and 31/105 of 15 December 1976,
