2. Notes, moreover, that the number of treaties
registered during the past twelve months has
considerably increased ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary measures to bring about the earliest
possible publication of all registered agreements
and treaties.
262nd plenary meeting,
1 December 1949.

B
The General Assembly
Approves the addition of the following subparagraph ( c) to paragraph 1 of article 4 of the
regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the
Charter of the United Nations adopted by the
General Assembly on 14 December 1946 (resolution 97 (I)B):
"(c) Where the United Nations is the depositary of a multilateral treaty or agreement".
262nd plenary meeting,
1 December 1949.

365 (IV). Reparation for injuries incurred in the service of the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
Considering its request to the International
Court of Justice for an advisory opinion, formulated in resolution 258 (III) 9 of 3 December 1948
concerning reparation for injuries incurred in
the service of the United Nations,
Having regard to the advisory opinion 10 rendered by the International Court of Justice on
11 April 1949,
Considering that it is highly desirable that
reparation be secured for injuries incurred in the
service of the United Nations,
Considering that the Secretary-General has submitted in his report11 of 23 August 1949 a number of proposals relating to the aforementioned
advisory opinion,
Consequently
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in accordance with his propo:;als, to bring an international claim against the Government of a State,
Member or non-member of the United Nations,
alleged to be responsible, with a view to obtaining
the reparation due in respect of the damage
caused to the United Nations and in respect of
the damage caused to the victim or to persons
entitled through him and, if necessary, to submit
to arbitration, under appropriate procedures, such
claims as cannot be settled by negotiation ;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to take the
steps and to negotiate in each particular case tbe
agreements necessary to reconcile action by the
United Nations with such rights as may be
possessed by the State of which the victim is
a national;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an
annual report to subsequent sessions of the Gens See Resolutiotts adopted by tht Gttttf'al Assembly
during the second part of the its first session, page 189.
• See Official Reco,.ds of the thi,-d sessiott of the Gtttual Assembly, Pa,-1 I, Resolutions, page 172.
10
See Official Reco,-ds of the fou,-th sessiott of the
Getteral Assembly, Anttex to the Sixth Committu, docu-

era! Assembly on the status of claims for injuries
incurred in the service of the United Nations,
and proceedings in connexion with them.
262nd plenary meeting,
1 December 1949.

•

366 (IV). Rules for the calfing of Ill•
ternationru" conferences of States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 173 (II) 12 of 17 November 1947 inviting the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with the Economic and
Social Council, draft rules for the calling of international conferences,
Having considered the draft rules for the calling
of international conferences prepared by the
Secretary-General and approved by the Economic
and Social Council on 2 March 1949 (resolution
220 (VIII) 13 ),
Approves the following rules for the calling
of international cci1ferences of States:
RULE 1
The Economic and Social Council may at any
time decide to call an international conference
of States on any matter within its competence,
provided that, after consultation with the Secretary-General and the appropriate specialized
agencies, it is satisfied that the work to be done
by the conference cannot be done satisfactorily by
any organ of the United Nat ions or by any specialized agency.
RULE

2

When the Council has decided to call an international conference, it shall prescribe the terms
of reference and prepare t)1e provisional agenda
of the conference.
RULE 3
The Council shall decide what States shall be
invited to the conference.
The Secretary-General shall send out as soon
as possible the invitations, accompanied by copies
of the provisional agenda, and shall give notice,
accompanied by copies of the provisional agenda,
to every Member of the United Nations not in
vited. Such Member may send observers to the
conference.
Non-member States whose interests are directly affected by the matters to be considered at
the conference may be invited to it and shall have
full rights as members thereof.
RULE 4

With the approval of the responsible State,
the Council may decide to invite to a conference
of States a territory which is self-governing in
the fields covered by the terms of reference of the
conference imt which is not responsible for the
conduct of its foreign relations. The Council shall
decide the extent of the participation in the conference of any territory so invited.
RULE

s

The Council shall, after consultation with the
Secretary-General, fix the date and place of the
conference or request the Secretary-General
to do so.
13
See Official Records of the second session of th,
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 104.
13
See Official Reco,-ds of the eig.,,th sessiott of tht
Economic and Social Council, Resolutions, page 41.

ment A/955.
11 Ibid.

64

RuLE 6

The Council shall make arrangements for
financing the conference, except that any arrangements involving the expenditure of iunds of the
United Nations shall he subject to the applicable
regulations, rules ancl resolutions of the General
Assembly.
RuLE 7
The Council:
(a) Shall prepare, or request the SecretaryGeneral to prepare, provisional rules of procedure for the conference;
( b) May establish a preparatory committee to
carry out such functions in preparation for the
conference as the Council shall indicate;
( c) l\fay request the Secretary-General to perform such functions in preparation for the conference as the Council shall indicate.

Considering that it is desirable to send invitations to those non-member States which, by their
participation in activities related to the United
Nations, have expressed a desire to advance international co-operation,

1. Decides to request the Secretary-General to
dispatch the invitations above-mentioned to each
nun-member State which is or hereafter heco·mes
an active member of one or more of the specialized
agencies of the United .\"ations, or which is or
hereafter becomes a Partv to the Statute of the
1nlernational Court of Ju;tice;
2. Ne mains co117•i11ccd of the necessitv of im·it ·
ing .\!embers of thc L:nited Nations \,~hich hav('
nut yet clone so to sign or ratify the Convention
on the Pn-ventinn and l'nnishment of thl' Criml'
(,f t;e11ocidr as soon as pussilile.
lo<ith ple11ary meeting,
3 ncrem/,rr 1949.

RULE 8

The Council may invite specialized agencies in
relationship with the United Nations and nongovernmental organizations having consultative
status with the Council to take part in conferences called under these rules. The representatives
of such agencies or organizations shall be entitled
to the 5ame rights an<! privileges as at sessions
of the Council itself, unless the Council decides
otherwise.
RULE 9

Subject to any decisions and directions of the
Council, the Secretary-General shall appoint an
executive secretary for the conference, provide
the secretariat and services required and make
such other administrative arrangements as may
be necessary.
266th plenary mcetin_q,
3 Decembl'r 1949.

367 (IV). Draft rule!-! for the calling
of non-governmental conference~
The General Assembly
Requests the Secretary ( ;eneral to prepare,
after consulting the Economic and Social Council.
draft rules for the calling of non-governmental
conferences, with a view to their study hy th<'
General Assemhly.
216th plenary meeting,
3 December 1949.

368 (IV). Invitations to be addressed
to non-member States to become
parties to the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of tht:
Crime of Genocide
'fhc rrcncral .•! SS(tnh(\',
C~onsidcrinu tt1~l! artictc -"~ t. (/ the Co:avcntio1;

on the l'rcvcntior, a,i,: ! ·11r:;,;hn1,:nt r,f the Cnmeof

.-;e11oc1:-1e 1

1

l

ll\.

\

irner:d

,,-\ssetnhl\:

resolutiDc: 2(,lj r l I i :\ '' ·oi ~.l Dc,·0mher 1<14;::,
provirh·s. 1·;uc1 c/in, 1}i;~t. ~be CrH1 ~'l.T-1Lin:1 :1f1ar l)e
aper: tr1 sig11::l!urc ;~:1-l ra~Jii..~atlt1n or to ac~(~,sion
on bchal'. nf a1 1
1n-vita1inn ha~
f\ssem b1\'.

State to v.·hich an
;1,::dn':-.:spc: "t)\· thf': Genera:

J1;,i1-•11e111liC'.r

369. (IV). Draft Convention on the
Declaration of Death of Missing
Persons
Fhc (;cnera/ Assembly,
CoHsidcriny resolution 249 (lX) I& of 9 At:gu~L
1949 appron·d by the Fnmomic and Social
l ·u1111cil,

( ·u11sidcrilly that the Economic and Social
Council was not able to examine the draft Convention on the Declaration of Death oi l\I issing
l'n,011s 1''" prepared by the ,Id lioc Cunm1itlt'l'
t"~taLlished to prepare the draft,
( ·,1/lsidcriny that the Cerwral Assembly should
undertake a detailed study of conventions prepared hy small groups only if one of its main
Co111111ittccs disposes of the necessary time; th;1t,
when the contrary is the case, it can call a conference of plenipotentiaries for the purposes of
stud ving and drafting the convention,
R.-coy11i:::iny the importanc(' and urgency of the
que~tion,
Hrcoy11i:::i11_q also the leg·al difficulties arising, in
particular because oi differences of legislation in
the matter,
I. nccid,·s that au international confrrencr: of
( ;m•1·rnrncnt representati'. l'S he convened not later
than ! A.pri! I ()50 with a view to concluding ;i
multilateral convention on the subject:
2. I 11s/ruds the Secretary-( ;eneral :
( a To i~sue invitation~ to the Covernments
,./ :\iem\1cr States to such a conference, asking

:di c;, ,\·ernrnents intereste:i to inform him as soon
ui their acceptance;

:L., p, 0 .siblc

', i
To ;akc all other measure, necessan- fo,
d1l' c1)!1\"s'lling o: tl:e coni,.-rence;
·

3. R,·f,n al,u the draft Convcntior; on the
i h•,·i:1Lttiun ll:° i kat h of .\ t issing I '<·rsons to M c111.
:--:1atc:-: t,) (_'i1ahl-:::· t~11:n; !~·1 cxan1i11c i!. a11d
('Ui~"'1d(·:· !h(· pu:--i:--ilii111:1 o'. :hlup!ing, if nt'Ccs~ar>··
,•:.t~,:,;-~t1v~ ri:ct:;qre< 011 ;he icgai status of per., 11~,
1111,,ml; a, :i rc,,il: o: ('\"<'!lb of war o,·
th.":· di:-.:ur1l:int...-c:-- of p(•ac~ durinP' thr posi-\\-~i:
\'C:if., 1111~d t.hc nP"~.c:11L tl1-,1e.
.,

, 1

R1 r ·)r:l.~
{Jf0!1"/.',

14

Sec 0.fTiriai Rru,rd:: ,r iiu· 11ird .1-r::s1m1 ,,f tht
,ral AsJcn1?,,J_y. f'a~t :·, 1,-. <..(\]1,.t1r1r1~. pcigf' 17~.

.1;._:,, 1)!

Yea~.
