United Nations

S/PV.6686

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6686th meeting
Wednesday, 14 December 2011, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Laher
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-63690 (E)

*1163690*

S/PV.6686

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Her Excellency Mrs. U. Joy Ogwu, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1518 (2003) and of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations; His Excellency Mr. Nawaf
Salam, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003),
concerning Liberia; Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004),
concerning Côte d’Ivoire; His Excellency Mr. Alfred
Moungara Moussotsi, who will speak on behalf of Mr.
Nelson Messone, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636
(2005); and His Excellency Mr. Ivan Barbalić, Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Ogwu.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on my reflections as Chair of both
the Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003),
concerning Iraq and Kuwait.
In the realization of its mandate contained in
document S/PRST/2001/3, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations held several meetings to
consider mission-specific and cross-cutting challenges
faced by United Nations peacekeeping missions.
First, the programme of work for the year focused
on challenges specific to various United Nations
peacekeeping missions and, of course, to cross-cutting
issues such as transition and exit strategies, inter-

2

mission cooperation and capacity gaps and
development.
The
mission-specific
discussions
highlighted some of the core issues that continue to
encumber the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates, such as the transfer of personnel and
equipment at the end of a mandate, operational
coordination, the protection of civilians and the
shortage of military helicopters.
The discussions on thematic issues were also very
instructive. On transition and exit strategies, the point
was cogently made that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding were both integral parts of the same
process. It was understood that transition strategies
referred not to the shift from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, but rather from peacekeeping to other
configurations of the United Nations presence. To
ensure that transition strategies are sensitive to the
nuances encountered in the field, the need to avoid
setting excessively rigid benchmarks for deployment or
drawdown was also highlighted.
In reviewing the concept of inter-mission
cooperation, it was emphasized that such cooperation
was not the panacea needed to fill in capacity gaps.
Contemporary peacekeeping missions that share
geographic proximity stand to benefit from interaction.
Greater political buy-in, adequate equipment and
resources, and strict adherence to the principles of
democratic policing were identified as critical to
bridging capacity gaps and surmounting capacity
development challenges.
At its final substantive meeting, the Working
Group appraised the triangular relationship between
the Secretariat, the Security Council, and the troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs). While the TCCs acknowledged an
improvement in the triangular relationship, they noted
that Security Council resolution 1353 (2001)
envisioned more than information sharing. In that
regard, they urged that the views of TCCs should be
sought before an assessment mission was carried out,
during strategic redeployments and at the start-up,
transition and drawdown of a mission.
I believe that it has been 10 years since the
Council established the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. Perhaps the value added by
the Working Group is the platform that it has provided
for enhanced informal interactive dialogue among the
various stakeholders on generic and specific

11-63690

S/PV.6686

peacekeeping issues. By maintaining a flexible
programme of work over the reporting period, the
Working Group successfully accommodated the views
and concerns of TCCs as they arose. The Working
Group benefited immensely by drawing substantially
from the issues that were of specific importance during
our negotiations at the last regular session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly (C-34), held in March.
I also believe that the discussions of the Working
Group can enrich the debates of this Council during the
crucial phases of a mission’s life cycle, especially the
mandate renewal, mission planning and technical
assessment stages. In that regard, the Working Group
should continue to work in partnership with the
Secretariat and the TCCs in incorporating case studies
into its thematic discussions.
We strongly recommend that such case studies be
drawn
from
peacekeeping
missions
whose
authorizations are set to expire in the months ahead, as
well as missions in which strategic actions that can
have an impact on the mandate are contemplated.
The Working Group witnessed not only an
improvement in the substantive participation of the
TCCs at its meetings, but also their significant
contribution to the framework of its agenda. Our
obligation is to reciprocate that support by ensuring
that the outcomes of our meetings are indeed translated
into action by both the Council and the Secretariat.
Regular reporting on the activities of the Working
Group to the Council will be the first vital step in the
right direction towards achieving that objective.
Keeping the format of our meetings informal and
further adapting it to a solution-oriented platform are
indeed imperative.
Bearing in mind that the concerns of the TCCs
and PCCs are sometime as diverse as the solutions they
proffer to existing challenges, the Working Group
should also become a consensus-building platform. I
believe that the Working Group will benefit immensely
from proposals made by both the TCCs and the
Secretariat. It is indeed my expectation that the final
report of the Working Group will incorporate all of
those proposals.
The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations has continued to grow in
strength and relevance. In order to sustain its unique
role in United Nations peacekeeping, we must make

11-63690

certain that no gains are lost by consolidating the
progress achieved thus far. As we draw the curtains on
an eventful year in global peacekeeping operations, we
must relentlessly strive to ensure not only that United
Nations peacekeeping is described as a global
partnership, but also that it is objectively seen to be so.
I have had the special privilege of chairing not only the
Special Committee, but also this Working Group in the
Security Council. It has allowed me to connect the
dots.
Allow me to say a few words in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003), which deals with
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. The Committee
was established by Security Council resolution 1518
(2003) to continue to identify, in accordance with
paragraphs 19 and 23 of resolution 1483 (2003),
individuals and entities whose funds, other financial
assets and economic resources should be frozen and
transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq. While
the Committee has not held any meetings this year, it
has continued to consider the relevant issues brought to
its attention.
In particular, the Committee received a letter
dated 27 February from the focal point regarding a
delisting request for two persons included on the
Committee’s list of individuals. A separate delisting
request from a Member State had previously been
submitted to the Committee for the same two
individuals. On 3 June, the Committee agreed to
remove from the list the names of the two individuals
who had applied for delisting through the focal point.
In a related development, a delisting request for a
third individual, which had been submitted in 2007 by
a Member State and had remained pending before the
Committee, was also resolved. The holds that had
previously been placed by the individual Committee
members were lifted, and the individual concerned was
removed from the Committee’s list of individuals on
6 December. I am pleased to report that the delisting of
those three individuals has brought to a conclusion one
of two separate matters that had been pending before
the Committee since 2007. I remain hopeful that the
second long-pending issue may also be resolved before
the end of this year.
The Committee received two communications
dated 23 June from the Permanent Mission of Iraq
proposing the addition of eight names to the list of

3

S/PV.6686

individuals established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003) and an amendment to the
entries for two names already inscribed on that list.
That request remains pending before the Committee.
The Committee also received a letter, dated 22 June,
from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
informing the Committee of Kuwait’s decision to
transfer frozen Iraqi assets deposited in Kuwaiti banks
since 1990 to the Development Fund for Iraq, in
accordance with paragraph 23 of resolution 1483
(2003).
The Committee received a letter, dated 5 May,
from the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations regarding the implementation of the
arms embargo concerning Iraq. In its reply to the
Permanent Representative of Australia, the Committee
noted that its mandate did not authorize it to provide
guidance on questions pertaining to the implementation
of the arms embargo. In that connection, I would again
wish to recall that the Security Council decided, in
resolution 1518 (2003), that the mandate of the
Committee would be kept under review and that the
Council would consider authorizing the Committee to
undertake the additional task of observing Member
States’ fulfilment of their obligations in connection
with the arms embargo on Iraq, as reaffirmed in
paragraph 10 of resolution 1483 (2003).
To date, the Committee has not been authorized
to undertake any additional tasks in that regard. The
remaining prohibitions on the supply of arms to Iraq,
which exclude arms and related materiel required by
the Government of Iraq, are therefore not currently
accompanied by a Security Council mechanism, such
as a committee or a monitoring mechanism with a
mandate to oversee the implementation of those
particular measures. I would like to conclude by
recalling that the Security Council, in its resolution
1546 (2004), stressed the importance for all States to
abide strictly by the remaining measures, and called
upon the Government of Iraq to ensure that appropriate
implementation procedures were in place.
I would like thank the members of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and the 1518
Committee for their constructive contributions and for
the quality of their cooperation. I would also like to
thank the delegation of India for having effectively
fulfilled the function of Vice-Chair of the 1518
Committee. Let me also extend my thanks to the
Secretariat for its tireless and diligent support. On

4

behalf of the Nigerian delegation, I wish every success
to the incoming Chairs of the Working Group and the
Committee.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mrs. Ogwu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salam.
Mr.
Salam
(Lebanon):
I
thank
you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Council today in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1521 (2003) concerning Liberia. In that connection, I
intend to provide a brief overview of the work of the
Committee during the current year.
Over the course of 2011, the Committee held
three formal consultations. At its first meeting, on
15 June, the Committee considered the findings and
recommendations contained in the midterm report of
the Panel of Experts. In that report the Panel of Experts
recommended, among other things, that the Committee
update the travel-ban and assets-freeze lists and
explore, with the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL), the preparation of
INTERPOL-United Nations special notices for the
individuals whose names are contained in the travelban list. Pursuant to the Panel’s recommendations, the
Committee reached an agreement on a comprehensive
update of the travel-ban and assets-freeze lists on
4 August.
At its second meeting, on 19 August, the
Committee also agreed on procedures on cooperation
with INTERPOL in the creation of INTERPOL-United
Nations special notices. The agreement was marked —
the first occasion since 2005 — by the issuance of the
first special notices for individuals on the consolidated
list of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) to the effect that now the sanctions
Committees will utilize the special notices mechanism.
At its third meeting, on 30 November, the
Committee
considered
the
findings
and
recommendations contained in the Panel of Experts’
final report. Among its findings, the Panel of Experts
reviewed the activities of Liberian combatants during
the 2011 Ivorian conflict, to better assess the future
disposition of those groups, currently residing in
Liberia. The Panel observed that Liberian mercenary
command structures in the Ivorian conflict were fluid
and relied on an alliance of generals who often

11-63690

S/PV.6686

activated their own recruits, mainly drawn from
unemployed Liberian ex-combatants. The Panel also
obtained testimony concerning the substantive overlap
between the military operations of Liberian
mercenaries and Ivorian militias, whose forces were
residing in Liberia and intermingling with Ivorian
refugees. While those groups likely did not pose any
immediate threat to Liberian or Ivorian national
security, they could nevertheless attempt to destabilize
areas along the Liberian-Ivorian border.
This morning, with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2025 (2011) on Liberia, the Security Council
noted with serious concern the lack of progress with
regard to the implementation of the assets freeze and
demanded that the Government of Liberia make all
necessary efforts to fulfil its obligations. But, in the
same resolution, the Council also renewed the arms
embargo on all non-governmental entities and
individuals operating in the territory of Liberia, as well
as the travel ban for a period of 12 months. It also
extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts on
Liberia for the same period and requested the Panel to
report on the implementation and present an evaluation
of the measures on arms as amended by resolution
1903 (2009). The Council also decided to review the
measures of the sanctions regime by the end of 2012,
with a view to possibly modifying or lifting part of the
sanctions in the light of progress achieved in
stabilization throughout Liberia.
The Committee has been committed to
successfully discharging its mandate in close
cooperation with the Panel of Experts, with a view to
playing its part in making sustainable the
peacebuilding process in Liberia, which still faces
considerable challenges.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Salam for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Viotti.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to share my views on the work of
the two subsidiary bodies that I had the honour to chair
in the past two years, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004), concerning Côte d’Ivoire.
Let me express at the outset my gratitude for the
cooperation that the wider membership has extended to

11-63690

the activities of both Committees. We had an enhanced
dialogue with all the concerned stakeholders, which
contributed to the effectiveness of the Committees’
work.
The sanctions Committee concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has made important
strides in recent years. Over all, the cooperation
between the Group of Experts and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
positive. It has led to a fruitful exchange of views
regarding the main aspects of the sanctions regime.
The same goes for other countries in the region and
relevant regional organizations. The Committee has
strongly encouraged the strengthening of such channels
of dialogue. I also hope that Member States, especially
those in the region, will continue to inform the
Committee about measures taken at the national level
to implement the sanctions regime.
I am glad to underscore that the sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has also made its contribution to the fight against child
recruitment and sexual violence. We heard briefings
from Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
on those issues. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy briefed the
Committee in May 2010 on the recruitment of children
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Margot
Wallström addressed the Committee on 6 December,
presenting information on sexual violence in the
country. That was the first time that both of them
appeared before a sanctions committee. I believe that
their briefings provided important information for our
work and I strongly encourage the continuation of such
interaction in the future.
The Committee has also strived to keep the
sanctions list up to date. Building on information
provided by the Group of Experts, Member States and
the United Nations system, new listings were approved
and information and narrative summaries regarding
names already on the list were updated. We must also
reflect on ways to make the sanctions regime more
effective and consider alternative tools to better target
individuals or entities that might not travel or hold
bank accounts. It is also important to encourage the use
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
means of mass communication, such as radio, to help

5

S/PV.6686

prevent criminal activities and disseminate information
about individuals and entities that are sanctioned.
The implementation of the due diligence
guidelines will be a focus of the Committee’s work in
the future. I hope that compliance with those guidelines
will increasingly contribute to averting the risk of
directly or indirectly financing illegal armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Committee
should continue to interact with Member States and
regional organizations, such as the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, in order to
exchange views on this subject and discuss ways to
raise awareness of the importance of following good
practices in the area of natural resources.
Another aspect that may merit the Committee’s
continued attention in the future is the flow of weapons
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As the
Group of Experts highlighted in its most recent report
(see S/2011/345), it is essential that the international
community support efforts to enhance local capabilities
to mark and control the circulation of weapons in the
country with a view to cutting off sources of arms for
illegal groups.
I now turn to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire. In
the past two years, the Committee has continued to
undertake tasks related to the arms embargo,
restrictions on travel, the freezing of assets and the
embargo on diamonds. In fulfilling its mandate, the
Committee
relied
on
the
information
and
recommendations of the Group of Experts and on the
reports of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire. The activities of the Committee were greatly
affected by the post-electoral crisis in Côte d’Ivoire,
which, according to reports of the Group of Experts,
led both the Government and the opposition to actively
seek additional weapons and related materiel. New
elements, including foreign mercenary forces, were
drawn into the conflict, in violation of the sanctions
regime.
During the post-electoral crisis, the Committee
followed the situation on the ground closely, with the
assistance of the Group of Experts and the relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
matter. In this regard, the Committee sought, within its
mandate, to adapt its measures to the Security
Council’s evolving decisions — for example, by taking
appropriate measures to update the list of targeted

6

individuals after the adoption of resolution 1975 (2011)
added five persons to the financial and travel sanctions
list, and by modifying, in line with resolution 1980
(2011), the exemption procedure concerning arms and
related material, vehicles and technical training.
Looking ahead, it is important to be aware that
many challenges remain to full compliance with the
sanctions regime. Sanctions-related issues that are still
unresolved include the redeployment of State
administration over the entire territory, the continued
de facto presence of command zones in the north, slow
progress in disarmament and reintegration, as well as
the widespread availability of small arms and
ammunition and the presence of elements from the
former regime in neighbouring States. On this point, it
is key that the Committee and the Council guard
against backsliding in the progress made in Côte
d’Ivoire.
At the same time, there are positive signs, such as
renewed cooperation between the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire and the Group of Experts, as well as increased
recourse on the part of the Ivorian Government to the
aforementioned exemption procedures set out in
resolution 1980 (2011). In this context, I also trust that
the Committee will continue to stand ready to grant
travel-ban exemptions for those listed individuals who
are indicted by the International Criminal Court, as was
the case on 29 November with the transfer of former
President Laurent Gbagbo to The Hague.
In spite of a challenging situation, I am confident
that the 1572 Committee will remain in close
cooperation with the Group of Experts, a key actor in
promoting compliance with Security Council measures
and therefore in contributing to sustainable peace and
stability in Côte d’Ivoire.
In closing, let me thank all the members of the
Committees for all the support they have extended to
Brazil and for their active and meaningful participation
during the past two years. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the members of the Secretariat,
especially Mr. David Biggs, for their hard work and
readiness to help. I am certain that both Committees
will continue to strengthen their relationship with all
Member States and relevant stakeholders, allowing for
the increasingly effective implementation of their
respective mandates.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Viotti for her briefing.

11-63690

S/PV.6686

I now give the floor to Mr. Moungara Moussotsi.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Nelson
Messone, Permanent Representative of Gabon to the
United Nations, I have the honour of reading out the
report of the Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005) concerning
Lebanon.
“In accordance with its mandate, the 1636
Committee is tasked with registering as subject to
the travel ban and assets freeze imposed under
paragraph 3(a) of the resolution individuals
designated by the International Independent
Investigation Commission or the Government of
Lebanon as suspected of involvement in the
14 February 2005 terrorist bombing in Beirut that
killed former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq
Hariri and 22 others. Also in resolution 1636
(2005), the Council decided that the Committee
should approve exceptions to the travel ban and
assets freeze on a case-by-case basis, register the
removal of individuals from the scope of the
travel ban and assets freeze measures in
accordance with the resolution, and inform all
Member States as to which individuals are
subject to those measures.
“On 1 January 2010, when Gabon took over
as Chair of the Committee, no individuals had
been registered. Similarly, during Gabon’s
chairmanship the Committee held no meetings
and listed no individuals as subject to the
measures imposed under paragraph 3(a) of
resolution 1636 (2005). We believe that the
administration of justice in the Hariri affair will
be an important element of peacebuilding in
Lebanon, which is why we are of the view that
with the successful transfer of confidential
information on this subject between the
International
Independent
Investigation
Commission and the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, the 1636 Committee will undoubtedly
be called on to play a more prominent role in the
future, particularly given the developments in the
investigation and judicial proceedings relating to
the 14 February 2005 terrorist attack.”
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Moungara Moussotsi for his briefing.

11-63690

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivan
Barbalić.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): As
outgoing Chair, I am pleased to brief the members of
the Council on the activities of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued the
efforts of previous Chairs to further promote the
transparency and efficiency of the Council’s work,
including the implementation of presidential note
S/2006/507.
This year, the Informal Working Group held five
meetings in which the members considered issues such
as streamlining summary statements, redistributing
items on the Security Council’s yearly programme, and
ways of enhancing interaction between the Informal
Working Group and the wider membership. At the
beginning and in the later part of the year, the Informal
Working Group considered the issue of streamlining
summary statements of matters of which the Council is
seized. In that context, we examined possible means
for reducing the items on the list under the Council’s
active consideration. This is not an easy task, since it
has to be carried out with extreme care vis-à-vis the
countries concerned. This ongoing process will be
addressed in January 2012.
In addition, the Informal Working Group focused
on redistribution of reporting and mandate cycles in
order to create a more even distribution of the
Council’s annual workload. It is clearly apparent, for
example, that June, July and December are more
densely scheduled than other months. We are of the
view that this exercise will be an important
contribution to improving the Council’s working
methods. The Informal Working Group was briefed by
the Council’s secretariat branch and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the administrative,
financial and political implications of redistributing the
mandate cycles of peacekeeping missions.
Taking note of the views expressed, we believe
that the exercise will take 18 months to implement,
with close coordination among Security Council
members, Member States and the Secretariat. As the
outgoing Chair, we warmly invite the incoming Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions to build upon the work
initiated in that regard.

7

S/PV.6686

With a view to improving and, in a way,
demystifying some practices of the Security Council,
we organized what we called a “special meeting” of the
Informal Working Group, at which the Security
Council Secretariat Branch briefed members on the
unknown or misunderstood working methods of the
Security Council. We also had a presentation by the
Security Council Practices and Charter Research
Branch on the Security Council repertoire website. The
repertoire is a record of the proceedings of the Security
Council that serves as an institutional memory of the
evolving practice of the Council on constitutional and
procedural matters.
As I mentioned previously, one of the principal
issues that the Informal Working Group has been
engaged in is the issue of further increasing the
transparency of the Council’s work. Thus, together
with Japan, the preceding Informal Working Group
Chair, we organized a workshop on working methods
for the general United Nations membership, where we
introduced the new 507 President’s note (S/2010/507),
comparing it to the old 507 note (S/2006/507). Also, as
Chair of the Informal Working Group, I participated in
the meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly, at which we
shared the Council’s experience and good practices in
the domain of documentation, working methods and
organization of work, with a focus on summary
statement streamlining.
Based on the past year’s experience, I would like
to conclude by highlighting two recommendations for
the future activities of the Working Group. Bosnia and

Herzegovina believes that, in the future, the primary
focus should be on the following areas.
First, taking note of the increased number of calls
for interaction between the Informal Working Group
and the wider membership, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has suggested that the Group hold regular briefings on
Security Council working methods for non-members of
the Council. With pleasure, I can confirm the members’
dedication to more transparent relations with the wider
membership. Therefore, we intend to organize the first
such briefing in a week’s time. We are convinced that
such interaction is to the common benefit.
Secondly, it is of vital importance that the
redistribution of reporting and mandate cycles initiated
by Bosnia and Herzegovina remain a priority on the
agenda of the Working Group next year.
Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to all
members of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions for
their constructive approach and cooperative spirit.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Barbalić for his briefing.
On behalf of the Security Council, I should take
this opportunity to thank the outgoing Chairs for the
manner in which they have discharged their important
responsibilities on behalf of the Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

8

11-63690
