S/2016/152

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 February 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 17 February 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The present letter is submitted pursuant to paragraph 15 of Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report within 60 days
on the implementation of the resolution. The information contained herein is based
on information available to United Nations bodies and agencies from the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and from open sources.
Negotiations on a political transition process
In paragraph 1 of resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council reconfirmed its
endorsement of the final communiqué of the Action Group for Syria (Geneva
communiqué) of 30 June 2012, endorsed the two Vienna statements of 30 October
and 14 November 2015 in pursuit of the full implementation of the communiqué, as
the basis for a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political transition in order to end the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, and stressed that the Syrian people would
decide the future of the Syrian Arab Republic. In that context, in paragraph 2 of the
resolution, the Council requested me, through my Special Envoy for Syria, to
convene representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
opposition to engage in formal negotiations on a political transition process. In
paragraph 4, the Council expressed its support for a Syrian-led political process
facilitated by the United Nations that would, within a target of six months, establish
credible, inclusive and non-sectarian governance and set a schedule and process for
drafting a new constitution.
Following the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) on 18 December 2015, my
Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, carried out intensive consultations throughout
January 2016 with members of the International Syria Support Group and with
representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition.
From 5 to 9 January, he visited Riyadh, Ankara, Damascus and Tehran to that effect.
On 26 January, my Special Envoy sent invitations to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the High Negotiations Commission (the opposition),
requesting both to form 15-member delegations to participate in United Nations facilitated negotiations on a political transition process in order to resolve the
conflict and lay the foundations for a lasting settlement. Ten representatives of the
meetings held in Moscow and Cairo were invited individually to join the Special
Envoy in Geneva as he began the process of negotiations.

16-02245 (E)

180216

*1602245*

S/2016/152

The Syrian participants were invited to engage initially in a proximity format
and on the basis of the agenda put forward in resolution 2254 (2015). In his letter to
all participants, my Special Envoy stated that, as the mediator, he would determine
the modalities and workplan to implement the agenda, in consultation with the
participants.
On 29 January, with the arrival in Geneva of the government delegation, my
Special Envoy launched the talks. The first official meeting with the delegation of
the High Negotiations Commission was held on 1 February. A second meeting with
the government delegation was held on 2 February. Separate informal meetings
were also held with the two delegations on 3 February.
In its meetings with my Special Envoy, the government delegation made it
clear that the Government wished to see the comprehensive implementation of the
Security Council resolution, not selective implementation such as beginning with
humanitarian issues. It also sought clarifications on procedural matters regarding the
conduct of and participation in the proximity talks in Geneva, especially in relation
to the composition of the opposition delegation. While repeating that it had come to
Geneva to discuss any matter relating to the implementation of the resolution, the
government delegation insisted, more than once and forcefully, on first receiving
those clarifications; until then it considered the negotiations to be in a preparatory
phase.
The delegation of the High Negotiations Commission, in its first meeting with
my Special Envoy, voiced demands relating to lifting sieges, ceasing aerial
bombardment, ensuring humanitarian access and releasing detainees. Those
demands, it insisted, were obligations outlined in paragraphs 12 and 13 of resolution
2254 (2015) and should be implemented by the relevant parties without delay before
engaging in any political discussion.
On 5 February, my Special Envoy formally met the group of opposition figures
associated with the meetings held in Moscow and Cairo. On the same day, and as
part of his efforts to ensure the adequate participation of women in the negotiations
in line with relevant Security Council resolutions, he met the women’s advisory board
nominated by Syrian women’s organizations for the talks and 17 representatives of
Syrian civil society organizations.
In the light of the positions articulated by the parties and the lack of progress
in implementing possible humanitarian initiatives aimed at positively affecting the
lives of the Syrian people, my Special Envoy announced a recess in the talks on
5 February. The environment for negotiations was also affected by increased aerial
bombings and military activities on the ground.
Against that backdrop, the International Syria Support Group met in Munich,
Germany, on 11 and 12 February and reaffirmed the importance of all sides engaging
in negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations as soon as possible in order
to advance a political transition in strict compliance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Nationwide ceasefire
In paragraph 5 of resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
support for a nationwide ceasefire to come into effect as soon as the representatives
of the Government and the opposition had begun initial steps towards a political
transition under the auspices of the United Nations. In paragraph 6, it requested the

2/11

16-02245

S/2016/152

United Nations to lead the effort to determine the modalities and requirements for a
ceasefire and urged Member States to support and accelerate all efforts to achieve a
ceasefire. In paragraph 7, it requested me to report on options for a ceasefire
monitoring, verification and reporting mechanism and encouraged Member States to
provide assistance to support such a mechanism.
As indicated in the resolution, there is also a close link between a ceasefire
and a parallel political process. Confidence in the political process would increase
the prospects for a ceasefire; in turn, a reduction in violence would help to provide a
more conducive environment for negotiations. Interim de -escalation measures could
also contribute to creating such an environment in the lead-up to a ceasefire. In that
context, the International Syria Support Group agreed in Munich that a nationwide
cessation of hostilities must be urgently implemented. The Support Group stated
that the cessation should apply to any party currently engaged in military or
paramilitary hostilities against any parties other than Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), the Nusrah Front or other groups designated as terrorist organizations
by the Security Council. It also established a ceasefire task force under the auspices
of the United Nations, co-chaired by the Russian Federation and the United States
of America, to develop, within one week, modalities for a nationwide cessation of
hostilities. It further agreed that the cessation of hostilities would begin in one
week, after confirmation by the Government and the opposition and following
consultations in the Syrian Arab Republic.
At the time of writing, the task force was just beginning to develop the
modalities for the cessation of hostilities, including structures for reporting and
assessing non-compliance. At the same time, pursuant to paragraph 7 of the resolution ,
my Special Envoy had previously reported to the Security Council on 18 January on
possible modalities for a ceasefire and options for its monitoring, verification and
reporting. Those modalities and options are described below, but should not be seen
as prejudging the work of the task force.
Once in place, ceasefire monitoring and verification are likely to require at
least two levels of in-country structures: physical monitoring and verification at the
local level and an oversight body covering the entire country. There could also be an
intermediate provincial level.
All the levels should include a dispute resolution function to address and
de-escalate breaches of the ceasefire or any precursor de-escalation arrangements,
proactively reduce tensions and build confidence. On the ground, monitoring could
be complemented by independent information resources, such as satellite imagery
and other data sources.
The operating environment in the Syrian Arab Republic is likely to remain
highly fragmented, volatile and militarized for the foreseeable future. As such, a
flexible approach to international oversight of ceasefire arrangements is envisaged.
In particular, it would be extremely difficult under the current conditions to
envisage any deployment of United Nations monitors to conduct physical
monitoring and observation tasks on the ground. Achiev ing any form of verification
of actions taken by the parties would also be almost impossible in the current
context. Options for enabling an effective international contribution to credible
ceasefire monitoring, verification and reporting are, however, something towards
which we must all work.

16-02245

3/11

S/2016/152

Bearing in mind those constraints, the spectrum of monitoring options can be
broadly categorized as monitoring by local Syrian parties (the Government, non -State
armed opposition groups and civil society), physical monitoring by local parties
with indirect or remote international support and assistance, direct physical monitoring
by international parties (the International Syria Support Group or other States) and
direct physical monitoring by the United Nations. It is likely that multiple options
could be implemented simultaneously, depending on the security environment and
the nature of the conflict in the various parts of the country. As the ceasefire
evolves, there could also be a transition between options.
Security conditions and political acceptance will determine the presence and
nature of any monitoring by international actors, ranging from indirect or remote
support to a direct role in physical monitoring at the local level. Given the operating
environment on the ground, the Security Council will need to understand and accept
the risks involved in mandating any international monitoring to be undertaken at the
local level.
Determining terrorist groups
In paragraph 8 of resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council reiterated its
call in resolution 2249 (2015) for Member States to prevent and suppress terrorist
acts by ISIL, the Nusrah Front and all other entities associated therewith and to
eradicate the safe haven that they had established in significant p arts of the Syrian
Arab Republic. In paragraph 9, the Council welcomed the efforts of the Government
of Jordan to develop a common understanding within the International Syria
Support Group of individuals and groups for possible determination as terrorists and
stated that it would expeditiously consider the recommendation of the Support
Group for the purpose of determining terrorist groups.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), Member States are to
introduce a set of legislative and institutional counter-terrorism measures to prevent
terrorists from committing crimes or to bring them to justice. The measures may be
used by any group of Member States to counter activities that they jointly consider
to be of a terrorist nature. They must be taken in compliance with international law,
including human rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law.
If the International Syria Support Group were to agree on a list of groups and
individuals to be potentially designated as terrorists, that list would need to be
processed in accordance with international norms and standards and in compliance
with international law in order to help to unite global counter -terrorism efforts and
enhance cooperation among all Member States in combating terrorism in the Syri an
Arab Republic.
Confidence-building measures
In paragraph 10 of resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council emphasized
the need for all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic to take confidence -building
measures to contribute to the viability of a po litical process and a lasting ceasefire
and called upon all States to use their influence to advance them. In paragraph 11,
the Council requested me to report on options for further confidence-building
measures.

4/11

16-02245

S/2016/152

It should be noted that, in the resolution, the Security Council demanded that
the parties to the Syrian conflict should allow humanitarian access, in particular to
besieged areas; release arbitrarily detained persons, in particular women and children;
cease attacks against civilians and civilian objects as such, including attacks against
medical facilities and personnel, and any indiscriminate use of weapons, including
through shelling and aerial bombardment; and comply with their obligations under
international law.
Many of the steps are pre-existing obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The negotiation of their immediate implementation
could, however, help to advance the political process and a ceasefire. Their
inclusion as potential confidence-building measures does not negate or detract from
their legal character. In that light, the term “further confidence-building measures”
is taken to mean those measures that are not listed in the resolution and that could
contribute to the viability of the political process and a lasting ceasefire.
As the political negotiations begin, my Special Envoy will aim to introduce
confidence-building measures as one of the streams of the talks. Potential measures
that the parties to the negotiations could agree to take in the short term include:
(a) Publicly undertaking to respect the political status of the participants in
the talks, including committing themselves to not issuing or to revoking arrest
warrants for them and their immediate families;
(b) Committing themselves to further enabling access to and freedom of
movement for civilians in areas besieged by their forces and undertaking to ensure
humanitarian access to those areas, including lifting all restrictions on the presence
of medical and surgical supplies in humanitarian convoys;
(c) Conducting prisoner exchanges and addressing the issue of missing
persons and, as a first step, releasing information on detainees and missing persons;
(d) Reciprocally agreeing to end the use of indiscriminate weapons and the
indiscriminate use of weapons such as barrel bombs, cluster munitions, hell cannons
and land mines in and around civilian areas;
(e) Committing themselves to halting attacks on civilian objects and
infrastructure, including medical and education facilities and water and electricity
networks, and generally taking adequate precautions so as not to damage or destroy
civilian objects;
(f) Agreeing to provide access, in the territory that they control, to the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, or the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, the Organization for the Prohibition of C hemical Weapons Fact-Finding
Mission, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons -United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism and the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic in order to demonstrate their wi ll to see the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 2118 (2013), 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014), 2235 (2015) and 2253 (2015) and Human Rights Council resolution S -17/1.
In the light of the agreement reached by the International Syria Support Group
in Munich on 11 February on humanitarian access and a cessation of hostilities,
some of the confidence-building measures need to be implemented before the
resumption of negotiations.

16-02245

5/11

S/2016/152

Humanitarian and human rights obligations
In paragraph 12 of resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council called upon
the Syrian parties to immediately allow humanitarian agencies access throughout
the Syrian Arab Republic and to release any arbitrarily detained persons, called
upon States members of the International Syria Support Group to use their influence
immediately to those ends and demanded the full implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and any other applicable resolutions.
The United Nations and partners are continuing to deliver assistan ce to
millions of people in need from within the Syrian Arab Republic and across borders,
pursuant to resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015). For
example, in 2015, the United Nations and partners delivered, on average and per month,
food assistance for 6 million people, safe drinking water for more than 8 million
people, non-food items for in excess of 4.8 million people and health interventions
for some 14 million people. Non-governmental organizations, including pro-opposition
organizations, and the Government continued to provide basic services in various
parts of the country.
Since the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the 13.5 million people in need in the Syrian Arab Republic has
remained extremely challenging in many areas as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines and deliberate restrictions by the parties.
Access to the 4.6 million people in besieged or hard -to-reach areas remains of
critical concern. The situation is particularly grave for the 486,700 people in
besieged areas, of whom some 274,200 are besieged by the Government, 200,000 by
ISIL and 12,500 by non-State armed groups and the Nusrah Front. In 2015, the
United Nations was able to deliver humanitarian assistance to only around 1 per
cent of people in besieged areas and to fewer than 10 per cent of people in hard -toreach areas.
Since the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), intensified conflict in several
governorates has further hindered the effective d elivery of assistance and access to
essential services. For example, humanitarian operations have been severely
disrupted in Aleppo governorate since early February 2016 as a result of the recent
intensification of ground fighting and air strikes by the Go vernment and the Russian
Federation in the northern part of the governorate. Elsewhere, heavy fighting
between the Syrian parties and continued air strikes by the Government and its
allies in Rif Dimashq, Homs, Hama, Ladhiqiyah and Dar‘a governorates have
disrupted humanitarian activities and affected the delivery of life -saving assistance.
The demands of the Security Council notwithstanding, at the time of writing
all parties to the conflict were continuing to restrict humanitarian access to people
in need. In particular, the current administrative procedures put in place by the
Government continue to severely constrain and delay the delivery of assistance by
United Nations agencies and its partners across conflict lines. While figures for
2016 are not yet available, in 2015 just in excess of 10 per cent of the 113 requests
for inter-agency convoys to cross-line locations resulted in the delivery of lifesaving assistance. Almost 75 per cent of the requests were not answered by the
Government. The cumulative impact on the ground of the restrictions is tangible: in
2013, the United Nations reached some 2.9 million people through the inter -agency
convoy mechanism, but only 620,000 in 2015.

6/11

16-02245

S/2016/152

In 2016, the United Nations and partners have to date conducted inter -agency
convoys to the besieged areas of Madayah, Zabadani, Fu‘ah and Kafraya, as well as
to Wa‘r in Homs. While requests to send convoys to several other locations have
been granted, the vast majority are pending the approval of the Syrian authorities.
Reports also continue to be received that non-State armed opposition groups and
listed terrorist groups, especially ISIL, are continuing to restrict or impede the
efficient delivery of assistance in areas under their control.
Access to basic medicines and medical care continues to be limited by
insecurity and restrictions imposed by parties to the conflict. At the time of writing,
the World Health Organization had submitted some 15 requests to the Government
to send medicines and medical supplies for 2.5 million people in besieged and hardto-reach locations in nine governorates that were pending approval. Furthermore,
the Government continues to remove medical items from United Nations convoys.
For example, the security forces removed medical kits from an int er-agency convoy
that delivered assistance to some 40,000 people in Wa‘r on 4 February. Meanwhile,
humanitarian access for health sector actors in ISIL-controlled areas remains
restricted.
In a welcome development, the International Syria Support Group ag reed in
Munich that sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance should begin within days
of 11 February to Dayr al-Zawr, Fu‘ah and Kafraya and the besieged areas of
Rif Dimashq, Madayah, Mu‘addamiyah and Kafr Batna by air and land for as long
as humanitarian needs persisted. This is intended as a first step towards sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, based on
a plan to be submitted by the United Nations following consultations with the Support
Group humanitarian task force. The task force began its work on 12 February with
the participation of all Support Group members and the United Nations. It was
agreed that the United Nations would resubmit requests for access to six besieged
areas, referring to the statement adopted by the Support Group in Munich, for an
intended delivery date of 17 February, and that the task force would meet the
following week to assess progress.
With regard to detainees, the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic reported on 3 February that hundreds of eyewitness
accounts and documentary evidence strongly suggested that tens of thousands of
people were being detained by the Government at any one time (the Government has
denied the Commission and other international human rights monitoring organizations
direct access to the country). It also found a countrywide pattern since March 2011
in which civilians, mainly males above 15 years of age, were being arbitrarily
arrested and detained by the security and armed forces or by pro-Government
militias and subjected to massive and systematized violence, torture and death in
captivity. On 26 January, the United Nations received another periodic note verbale
from the Government in which it was indicated that 305 detainees who had signed
written pledges not to take up arms had been released. The United Nations is not in
a position to confirm the information.
The Commission also found that, while incidents of killing, torture and related
violations against detainees had occurred in areas controlled by non-State armed
opposition groups and the Nusrah Front, it was difficult to document an
institutionalized pattern of mass arrests and arbitrary detention, torture and killing
of detained civilians in areas controlled by most of those groups.

16-02245

7/11

S/2016/152

The Commission further found that ISIL was continuing to illegally hold a
large, unknown number of detainees for extended periods, subjecting many to torture
and routinely conducting summary executions. Journalists and activists, as well as
civilians deemed to violate regulations or decrees imposed by ISIL, were found to
have been subjected to unlawful deprivation of liberty, torture and ill treatment.
In paragraph 13 of resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council demanded that
all parties to the conflict should immediately cease any attacks against civilians and
civilian objects and any indiscriminate use of weapons, welcomed the commitment
by the International Syria Support Group to press the parties in that regard and
demanded that all parties should immediately comply with their obligations under
international law.
Since the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including schools, hospitals, markets and essential services, have
continued with total impunity, depriving civilians of basic and essential services and
further increasing humanitarian needs throughout the country. The attacks included
indiscriminate and disproportionate aerial bombings and ground attacks by
government forces, supported by allies, and indiscriminate shelling by non -State
armed opposition groups and designated terrorist groups that continued to kill,
injure and displace civilians.
Attacks on schools have continued unabated. According to the United Nations
Children’s Fund, some 35 schools in the Syrian Arab Republic were attacked in
2015, with 1 in 4 closed, damaged or destroyed, and attacks have continued into
2016. The frequency of attacks on hospitals and medical facilities is also continuing
to increase. According to Physicians for Human Rights, 2015 was the worst year on
record for attacks on medical facilities — with at least 112 attacks — and the deaths
of 107 medical personnel. From March 2011 to November 2015, Physicians for
Human Rights documented 336 attacks on medical facilities, 305 of which were
conducted by the Government or allied forces. In addition, the United Nations and
health partners have received reports, which are being verified, of 13 attacks on
medical facilities in January 2016.
The parties to the conflict also continue to target and disrupt water, electricity
and other essential networks. Water and electricity to the cities of Aleppo and
Damascus were cut off by non-State armed opposition groups and listed terrorist
groups over the course of 2015, affecting millions of people. Most recently, on
17 January 2016, ISIL cut off the water supply to Aleppo governorate from the
Khafsah water pumping station on the Euphrates River, which used to supply water
to 3.5 million people per day. Throughout the country, public spaces such as markets
also continue to be targeted by air strikes, causing large -scale civilian casualties and
disrupting access to food and other basic items. For example, on 20 December, just
two days after the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), six air strikes reportedly hit
locations in the city of Idlib, including the local courthouse, a residential
neighbourhood and a market, reportedly leaving 95 civilians dead and at least
170 injured.
Safe and voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons
In paragraph 14 of resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council underscored
the critical need to build conditions for the safe and voluntary return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their home areas, in accordance with international

8/11

16-02245

S/2016/152

law. This was reaffirmed by the International Syria Support Group in its statement
adopted in Munich.
Currently, the situation is not conducive to the active facilitation or promotion
of returns owing to the prevailing security situation and limited humanitarian access
to many areas of origin. An unknown number of Syrian internally displaced persons
and refugees have returned spontaneously, at their own initiative, especially over the
past year. Spontaneous returns are often not prompted by measurable security
improvements in areas of origin, instead being caused by other factors, such as
shortfalls in assistance or protection needs, impediments to being reunited with
family members owing to admission restrictions put in place by host countries or a
lack of access to livelihoods in host countries.
Similarly, returns take place in difficult conditions, often as a result of
inability on the part of internally displaced persons to sustain themselves and their
families in the locations to which they have been displaced. Sporadic returns have
been reported, especially in areas in which the previously contested security
situation has stabilized or where there are local agreements or other arrangements.
Humanitarian agencies seek to assist those who have returned to their areas of
origin, but significant challenges remain. Humanitarian access remains severely
impaired by a wide range of factors, including insecurity and shifting conflict lines,
the targeting of humanitarian workers and facilities, the closure of key access
routes, burdensome administrative procedures, a complex regulatory environment
for cross-border activities, the forced relocation of civilians and restrictions on
freedom of movement.
The conference held in London on 4 February to support the Syrian Arab
Republic and the region was a genuine and significant success and marks a change
in the humanitarian response of the international community to the crisis. It
succeeded in raising an unprecedented $11.3 billion for those affected between 2016
and 2020. Without a political solution to the conflict, however, increased humanitarian
assistance and policy measures to provide longer-term support for refugees and host
countries will not of themselves create conditions conducive to voluntary return in
conditions of safety and dignity.
Conclusion
In the present letter, I have reported on the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015), including the tasks assigned to the United Nations therein. Clear tasks were
also given, however, to the Syrian parties, the International Syria Support Group, all
Member States and the Security Council itself.
In particular, the Security Council called upon the Syrian parties to take
confidence-building measures to advance the political process and ceasefire and
also demanded that they should meet their fundamental humanitarian and human
rights obligations. Moreover, it called upon all States to use their influence with the
parties and specifically upon members of the International Syria Support Gr oup to
immediately press the parties towards those ends.
In his briefing to the Security Council on 18 January, my Special Envoy
specifically identified sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to all besieged
areas as essential to creating a credible foundation for the intra-Syrian talks that he
was about to convene. Without that in place and in the light of the offensive in

16-02245

9/11

S/2016/152

Aleppo and continued aerial bombardment, it was extremely difficult for him to
continue with the preparatory phase of the talks in Geneva beyond 5 February.
The agreement reached by the International Syria Support Group on 11 February
represents a precious opportunity for the early resumption of the talks on a more
credible basis. With Support Group task forces established on a ces sation of
hostilities and humanitarian access, the resumed talks should concentrate on
advancing a political transition pursuant to the Geneva communiqué by negotiating
the establishment of credible, inclusive and non -sectarian governance and setting a
schedule and process for drafting a new constitution within six months. I also take
note, in particular, that Support Group members pledged to do all that they could to
facilitate rapid progress in the negotiations.
The statement adopted by the International Syria Support Group in Munich at
long last goes beyond mere calls for humanitarian access. There is now an agreed
set of actions and an immediate timeline to achieve the life -or-death goal of
humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-reach areas and ultimately throughout
the country. Until we can attain that goal and make a difference in their daily lives
on the ground, Syrians will rightly continue to be sceptical about the international
community and the credibility of negotiations to end the devastati ng conflict. The
United Nations will do its part to ensure that the international community
collectively meets this test through the humanitarian access task force, which began
its work on 12 February. The Organization has also already begun preparations f or
humanitarian deliveries to the locations identified in the statement.
The nationwide cessation of hostilities agreed to in Munich is a further
welcome development and has the potential to produce progress on two other key
obligations under resolution 2254 (2015): the immediate cessation of attacks against
civilians and civilian objects and any indiscriminate use of weapons. Those
principles should become core elements of the nationwide cessation of hostilities.
The United Nations also stands ready to convene the ceasefire task force with its
Co-Chairs, the Russian Federation and the United States. At the same time, and as
we make progress on those issues, we must also not lose sight of the fact that in
resolution 2254 (2015) the Security Council called for the release of any arbitrarily
detained persons, including in particular women and children.
In addition to political, humanitarian and ceasefire aspects, resolution 2254
(2015) contains calls upon Member States to combat ISIL, the Nusrah Front and
other terrorist groups designated by the Security Council. The proposed cessation of
hostilities will not apply to those groups. I hope that progress in defining the
modalities for implementing a reduction in violence in the coming days will also
enable greater military cooperation in combating the terrorist organizations listed by
the Council.
I call upon members of the Security Council and the International Syria
Support Group to faithfully and comprehensively implement resolution 2254 (2015)
and follow through on the commitments that they made in the statements adopted in
Vienna and Munich to use their influence over the Syrian parties in that respect.
The recent surge in military activity in Aleppo governorate further underscores
the need for the members of the International Syria Support Group to live up to their
commitment made in Munich to exercise influence for an immediate and significant
reduction in violence leading to a cessation of the hostilities. The latest shelling and

10/11

16-02245

S/2016/152

bombardments have destroyed many more Syrian lives, in addition to schools and
hospitals, and have created large numbers of internally displaced persons, many of
whom will become refugees. The escalated military activity by several parties and
the threats to resort to the further use of force risk derailing efforts to find a
sustainable political solution and the ability of my Special Envoy to credibly
reconvene the talks.
Rarely are the international community and the Security Council presented
with as stark a choice as the one that they now have before them. On the one hand,
the Council can proceed to implement its own resolution 2254 (2015) and associated
agreements on humanitarian access to the most vulnerable of Syrians, de -escalate
the violence, combat terrorism and resume negotiations on the political roots of the
Syrian conflict. On the other, the Syrian parties and their supporters can continue to
pursue the bankrupt logic of a military victory, which has already led to the deaths
of more than 250,000 Syrians, the greatest humanitarian crisis of our time and the
creation of safe havens for terrorist organizations such as ISIL and the Nusrah Front .
I repeat my call upon the Security Council to refer the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic to the International Criminal Court. Those responsible must be held
accountable for the appalling crimes that continue to be committed.
The United Nations will do all it can to further the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015), but will require genuine, committed and sustained back ing
from the Security Council and the States members of the International Syria Support
Group to be successful. It must not be forgotten that it is, first and foremost, the
responsibility of the Syrian parties to end the conflict in line with the principle s laid
out in resolution 2254 (2015), the statements adopted by the International Syria
Support Group and the Geneva communiqué.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-02245

11/11
