S/2018/610

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2018
Original: English

Progress towards a settlement in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2398 (2018), in which it renewed the
mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, requested that the
Secretary-General submit a report by 15 June 2018 on progress towards a settlement.
The Council also urged the sides and all participants involved to renew their political
will and commitment to a settlement under United Nations auspices. The Council
further expressed its full support for my good office s to remain available to assist the
sides should they jointly decide to re-engage in negotiations with the necessary
political will.
2.
The present report on my mission of good offices in Cyprus is focused on
developments from 12 August 2017 to 21 May 2018. It also provides an update on
the activities carried out by the mission under the leadership of my Deputy Special
Adviser on Cyprus, Elizabeth Spehar.

II. Status of the process
3.
The previous report on my mission of good offices in Cyprus ( S/2017/814)
contained a review of the course and outcome of settlement negotiations during the
period from 15 May 2015 to 11 August 2017. Since then, there has been only minimal
official contact between the two sides. Only one informal meeting was held between
Mr. Akıncı and Mr. Anastasiades during the reporting period, and there have been no
official meetings at the level of negotiators, negotiating teams or expert -level working
groups.
4.
When I met both leaders bilaterally in New York in September 2017, I reiterated
the commitment of the United Nations to Cyprus, including the availability of my
good offices for the sides to resume talks as soon as they demonstrated their readiness
to re-engage. During the reporting period, I was also in contact with senior-level
representatives of the guarantor Powers.
5.
To both the leaders in Cyprus and the guarantors, I continually expressed the
willingness of the United Nations to support the process if and when they were ready
to resume meaningful talks with the requisite political will.

18-09042 (E)

200618

*1809042*

S/2018/610

6.
During the reporting period, my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus continued
to meet the two leaders separately. Mr. Anastasiades repeatedly confirmed his
publicly stated position that he was ready to negotiate on the basis of the framework
that I had put forward at the reconvened Conference on Cyprus in Crans -Montana,
Switzerland, subject to good preparations for a possible reconvening of the
Conference, including through shuttle diplomacy. He clarified, however, that no
negotiations could be held while “Turkish provocations” continued in the exclusive
economic zone of Cyprus.
7.
For his part, Mr. Akıncı also confirmed his commitment to the six -point
framework that I had introduced in Crans-Montana on 30 June 2017 to resolve the
core outstanding issues in a strategic package. He indicated, however, that he would
not take part in “open-ended” negotiations; he stood ready to engage in “time-bound,
well-structured and results-oriented” talks.
8.
With respect to the guarantor Powers, in its public statements since July 2017,
Turkey has expressed doubts as to the possibility of reaching a settlement based on
the established parameters, given the outcome of the conference in Crans -Montana
and past failures. Turkey has nonetheless reiterated its support for a “sustainable
settlement” of the Cyprus issue. Greece, for its part, has reiterated its commitment to
finding a just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the framework that I had set out in Crans -Montana.
Lastly, the United Kingdom has emphasized its strong support for a comprehensive
settlement and its readiness to do its part to achieve that goal.
9.
On 7 January 2018, “parliamentary” elections were held in the north of the
island. Subsequently, the Republic of Cyprus held two rounds of presidential
elections, on 28 January and 4 February, in which the incumbent, Mr. Anastasiades,
secured a second term. There was some hope on both sides that, once the elections
concluded, the parties might engage in discussions regarding a possible resumption
of talks.
10. Tensions over hydrocarbon activities, however, began to escalate early in 2018.
Most significantly, on 9 February, an Italian energy company was prevented by
Turkish military ships from gaining access to a planned drilling area in the exclusive
economic zone of Cyprus. In mid-March, the company’s drillship departed the eastern
Mediterranean without having been able to conduct its intended exploratory drilling.
11. On 16 April, the two leaders held an informal meeting in the United Nations
Protected Area under the auspices of my Deputy Special Adviser. Both leaders
underscored that the meeting did not constitute a resumption of nego tiations but did
provide an opportunity to ascertain “where they stood” currently on the Cyprus issue.
12. At the end of the informal meeting, the leaders confirmed that they remained at
an impasse. It was nonetheless acknowledged that the meeting had bee n important
and necessary after more than nine months without direct contact between the leaders.
As noted in a statement issued by the Deputy Special Adviser after the meeting, the
leaders had a frank and open exchange of views during a two -hour tête-à-tête
discussion.
13. Two weeks after that informal meeting, on 30 April, Mr. Akıncı made a public
statement in which he said: “If the Greek Cypriot side is ready to accept the Guterres
framework as it was presented without diluting, let’s declare it as a strategic package
agreement.” He added that, through such an announcement, the negotiations would
be meaningful, as they would be held with the aim of filling the gaps under the
strategic agreement. In response, Mr. Anastasiades issued a written statement on
2 May in which he replied that, if Mr. Akıncı accepted the proposed framework “as it
was presented to the sides on 4 July 2017, this is a positive development ”. He called
2/6

18-09042

S/2018/610

upon Mr. Akıncı and “primarily Turkey” to “clarify whether they accept” specific
provisions of the framework relating to security and guarantees and foreign troops.
Those statements led to a further public exchange between the sides that suggested
that the leaders had diverging interpretations of certain aspects of the framework. The
consultations that I intend to launch, through a senior United Nations official, in the
coming weeks will provide an opportunity for the sides to formally clarify where they
stand on the issue.
Other features
14. Since the closing of the Conference on Cyprus, there has been scant effort to
prepare citizens for a renewed round of talks. Interest in the Cyprus problem has
noticeably waned, as citizens’ belief in a possible settlement in the near future seems
to have sharply diminished on both sides. Notwithstanding repeated encouragement
from the international community, the leaders have not taken new trust -building or
confidence-building measures, even though a number of such initiatives could be
implemented jointly or unilaterally.
15. At the same time, the two leaders have reiterated on various occasions their
interest in continuing the valuable work of the technical committees on
intercommunal activities aimed at improving the daily lives of Cypriots. Both leaders
have held periodic bilateral discussions with their respective coordinators for the
technical committees in order to receive updates on their work. Further attention from
the leaders to the work of the committees would be welcome. Since July 2017, there
has been no discernible change in the operation of the committees. Those which have
historically operated well have continued to do so, while others remain less effective
or do not meet at all. This situation has resulted from various factors, including a lack
of material and organizational support, as well as limited institutional support for their
work. The leaders’ recent focus on accelerating the work at two additional crossing
points, as announced in 2015 and taken up by the Technical Committee on Crossings,
with the intention of opening them in the coming few months has been a positive
development.
16. The Security Council has consistently highlighted a general lack of outreach by
the sides to their communities and a lack of integration of civil society into the
settlement negotiations themselves. There has been a strong perception among both
Cypriots and independent observers that negotiations, and the peace process more
broadly, have been far removed from the public.
17. Nevertheless, a growing number of civil society actors became increasingly
vocal and visible in the public debate, in particular during the crucial latter phases of
the most recent round of negotiations. While not great i n number, those voices strove
to broaden the public debate and engage their respective political leaders. Also of note
were various initiatives that attempted to bridge the gap between the negotiations and
the public by bringing together particular sectors or actors from both sides for
dialogue. Such initiatives include the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace Process,
under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden; an ongoing political parties dialogue
facilitated by the Embassy of Slovakia; and a business com munity round table
comprising Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot private sector representatives
convened by the Embassy of Germany.

III. Activities of the good offices mission
18. Over the past months, my Deputy Special Adviser and my good offices miss ion
have met continually with political party leaders, civil society organizations,
women’s groups, religious leaders, members of the diplomatic community,
18-09042

3/6

S/2018/610

representatives of European bodies and other key actors. All interlocutors have
expressed concern about the lack of direct and regular contact between the leaders
and about the deteriorating mood on the island with regard to the peace process. In
both communities, public expectations regarding a possible resumption of talks are
noticeably low.
19. My Deputy Special Adviser and my good offices mission have also continued
their communication and coordination with partner institutions, including the
European Central Bank, the European Commission, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank. Although some institutions have reduced or reoriented their presence in Cyprus
as a direct consequence of the lack of talks, all partners have nonetheless signalled
their willingness to continue to think creatively about preparing for and implementing
any potential future settlement.
20. The Office of the Special Adviser has also used the recent period of reflection
for self-examination and learning. Under the direction of my Deputy Special Adviser,
my good offices mission has completed extensive record-keeping, internal analysis
and lessons-learned exercises to reflect on the past three years of negotiations, to
analyse the convergences reached to date and to identify potential improvements to
the process should the sides jointly decide to restart negotiations.

IV. Observations
21. Ten months after the closing of the reconvened Conference on Cyprus in
Crans-Montana, there has been no further progress towards a settlement. The current
stalemate has further lowered expectations on the island, despite the unprecedented
advances witnessed during the most recent round of talks. As a consequence, trust
between the leaders and between their respective communities, and among the parties
overall, has suffered.
22. In the most recent round of negotiations, the two leaders had reached a number
of critical milestones — and had agreed on many of the key aspects of a settlement —
before even arriving in Crans-Montana. The leaders had elaborated a shared vision o f
Cyprus as a bizonal, bicommunal federation with political equality and effective
decision-making, anchored firmly within the European Union, and they had made
progress on property and territory issues. At the Conference on Cyprus held in Geneva
in January 2017, the parties had underscored the need for mutually acceptable
solutions regarding security and guarantees that addressed the concerns of both
communities, in line with the overarching principle that the security of one
community could not come at the expense of the security of the other.
23. The leaders and their negotiating teams had also paid close attention to the
economic aspects of the settlement. A number of independent experts have
underscored that the greater opportunities and benefits stemming from a
comprehensive settlement would generate faster and more sustainable economic
growth in both communities. In the event of a settlement, higher growth rates would
translate into higher average incomes, thus improving standards of living and leading
to a convergence of incomes between the two communities and with higher-income
European Union countries.
24. The underlying logic of a solution within the parameters of the United Nations
and building on the existing body of work remains compelling. I am still convinced
that a comprehensive settlement would bring substantial benefits and opportunities to
both communities, as well as contributing to overall peace and stability in the region.
At the strategic and political levels, a settlement would help to repair decades of

4/6

18-09042

S/2018/610

division and mistrust, ease tensions that could escalate into conflict, and assist in
cultivating neighbourly relations between traditionally adversarial countries in the
eastern Mediterranean.
25. As I noted in my previous report, it is my firm belief that, in order for a proces s
of such complexity and political sensitivity to be successful, it is necessary to follow
a balanced and comprehensive package approach comprising specific key issues.
Should the sides jointly decide to resume talks, the six-point framework that I
introduced in Crans-Montana could form the basis for negotiations aimed at reaching
a strategic agreement and paving the way for a comprehensive settlement. The
framework contained elements relating to territory, political equality, property,
equivalent treatment, and security and guarantees. I proposed it in an attempt to help
the parties to resolve the remaining core outstanding issues interdependently and
overcome the challenge of negotiating across chapters.
26. The year 2018 marks the 10-year anniversary of the formation of the
bicommunal technical committees responsible for working on confidence -building
measures aimed at improving the everyday lives of Cypriots and facilitating greater
interaction among them. I encourage the leaders to redouble their effort s to support
the technical committees established under their auspices and to continue their efforts
to implement the confidence-building measures that they jointly agreed upon in 2015.
In particular, I urge both sides to follow through on the commitment o f the leaders to
accelerate the work on the crossing points, as agreed upon in 2015, and to open them
without further delay. I also encourage the leaders to pursue the implementation of
unilateral confidence-building measures that could have a positive impact on the
overall atmosphere on the island and could contribute to the restoration of mutual
trust, both at the negotiating table and between the communities.
27. One long-standing feature of the Cyprus settlement negotiations has been the
confidentiality of the process. That practice was established in order to provide space
for the leaders to strike difficult bargains at the negotiating table. At the same time, it
has hampered their ability to provide information on progress made and to prepare
the two communities for a deal. I therefore urge the leaders to think of mechanisms
by which, in possible resumed negotiations, they could preserve the confidentiality
of the negotiations while also engaging in public outreach and providing information,
through which both sides could prepare their communities in a timely manner.
28. Another issue raised in relation to the negotiations during past rounds has been
the question of including civil society and other actors in the settlement process.
While the leaders and negotiators communicate with their constituents independently,
the settlement process has not historically featured formal channels or initiatives
seeking input from or consultation with the public, such as those employed in other
peace processes. I believe that if negotiations are resumed, the involvement and
contribution of civil society, especially women’s groups and young people, would
need to be strengthened to ensure that their voices are heard and that they become
instrumental in gathering and mobilizing greater support for the peace process in
society at large. In this regard, in relation to existing bicommunal dialogues among
sectors of society and groups, I urge the leaders to consider supporting those
initiatives to help to garner and mobilize public support for and involvement in the
peace process.
29. During the most recent round of negotiations, women, including my Deputy
Special Adviser and the staff of my good offices mission, were generally well
represented in both negotiating teams and contributed substantively to the talks. That
inclusivity is commendable, and it should be further strengthened in a possible
resumed process. However, the participation of women at the negotiating table is only
one aspect of the women and peace and security agenda promoted by the Security
18-09042

5/6

S/2018/610

Council and is necessary for inclusive, just and sustainable peace outcomes. The
process should also be designed to incorporate contributions from women in civil
society, and the substance of the agreement must be gender-sensitive to ensure that
the concerns and needs of all members of society, including women, are reflected.
Evidence from peace processes from around the globe has confirmed that the
meaningful participation of women deepens peacebuilding effo rts measurably and
leads to more sustainable peace. I encourage the leaders to revitalize th e Technical
Committee on Gender Equality. In this context, a gender-sensitive socioeconomic
impact assessment could be a useful area for future research.
30. With respect to the disputes over hydrocarbons off the coast of Cyprus, I
continue to monitor developments closely and with concern. I wish to reiterate that
the natural resources found in and around Cyprus should benefit both communities
and should provide a strong incentive to find a durable solution to the Cyprus
problem. I recall that the Greek Cypriot leader and the Turkish Cypriot leader
previously agreed in their negotiations that natural resources in a unified Cyprus
would lie within the competence of the future federal Government. With new rounds
of exploratory drilling expected before the end of the year, I urge restraint and
reiterate my call for a peaceful resolution of differences and for serious efforts to
avoid any further escalation and to defuse tensions.
31. After significant hope and expectations were raised during the 2015–2017 phase
of the negotiations, the continued absence of dialogue nearly one year after
Crans-Montana and the uncertain prospects for the future are a serious cause for
concern for many Cypriots and the international community alike.
32. I believe that there is still scope for the sides to act responsibly and decisively
in order to chart a common way forward for the island. In the near future, I intend to
send a senior United Nations official to conduct in-depth consultations with the
parties. Those consultations will provide a more formal, structured and detailed
channel for the parties to convey to the United Nations the outcomes of their reflection
since Crans-Montana and to help to determine whether conditions have matured at
this stage for a meaningful process. I encourage the parties to recognize the
importance of the exercise and to seize the opportunity accordingly.
33. The future of the island is the responsibility of all Cypriots, but the leaders bear
the primary responsibility for the negotiations. Should they jointly agree to resume
talks with the intent of coming to a comprehensive settlement, they will need to
demonstrate the strongest political commitment, courage and determination. They
will also need to recapture their sense of urgency, address the erosion of trust and
deliver strong and unambiguous signals of political will. To be a ble to conclude a
mutually beneficial deal, they will need to engage their communities and explain the
benefits of the solution and the importance of compromise on both sides.
34. The guarantor Powers will also, without doubt, need to do their part and en gage
in the process determinedly and constructively. Furthermore, the Security Council —
and, indeed, all friends of Cyprus, in particular the European Union — will need to
increase their support for and encouragement of the leaders and all parti es concerned.
They will need to continue to speak clearly and with one voice about the opportunities
and benefits of a comprehensive settlement, but at the same time unequivocally about
the risks and costs of maintaining the status quo or backsliding from the gains already
made.
35. In closing, I wish to thank my Deputy Special Adviser and the personnel serving
in my good offices mission in Cyprus for the dedication and commitment with which
they have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them by th e Security Council.

6/6

18-09042
