A/RES/71/256*

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 20



Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2016
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/71/L.23)]

71/256. New Urban Agenda
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/216 of 21 December 2012, in which it decided to
convene the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III), as well as its resolutions 68/239 of 27 December 2013,
69/226 of 19 December 2014 and 70/210 of 22 December 2015,
1.
Expresses its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of
Ecuador for hosting the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III) from 17 to 20 October 2016 and for providing all
the necessary support;
2.
Endorses the New Urban Agenda adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), which is
contained in the annex to the present resolution.
68th plenary meeting
23 December 2016

Annex
New Urban Agenda
Quito Declaration on Sustainable Cities and Human
Settlements for All
1.
We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and High Representatives,
have gathered at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III) from 17 to 20 October 2016 in Quito, with the
participation of subnational and local governments, parliamentarians, civil society,
indigenous peoples and local communities, the private sector, professionals and
practitioners, the scientific and academic community, and other relevant
stakeholders, to adopt a New Urban Agenda.
_______________


Reissued for technical reasons on 7 April 2017.

16-23021* (E)

*1623021*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

2.
By 2050, the world’s urban population is expected to nearly double, making
urbanization one of the twenty-first century’s most transformative trends. Populations,
economic activities, social and cultural interactions, as well as environmental and
humanitarian impacts, are increasingly concentrated in cities, and this poses massive
sustainability challenges in terms of housing, infrastructure, basic services, food
security, health, education, decent jobs, safety and natural resources, among others.
3.
Since the United Nations Conferences on Human Settlements in Vancouver,
Canada, in 1976 and in Istanbul, Turkey, in 1996, and the adoption of the
Millennium Development Goals in 2000, we have seen improvements in the quality
of life of millions of urban inhabitants, including slum and informal -settlement
dwellers. However, the persistence of multiple forms of poverty, growing
inequalities and environmental degradation remain among the major obstacles to
sustainable development worldwide, with social and economic exclusion and spatial
segregation often an irrefutable reality in cities and human settlements.
4.
We are still far from adequately addressing these and other existing and
emerging challenges, and there is a need to take advantage of the opportunities
presented by urbanization as an engine of sustained and inclusive economic growth,
social and cultural development, and environmental protection, and of its potential
contributions to the achievement of transformative and sustainable development.
5.
By readdressing the way cities and human settlements are planned, designed,
financed, developed, governed and managed, the New Urban Agenda will help to
end poverty and hunger in all its forms and dimensions; reduce inequalities ;
promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth; achieve gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls in order to fully harness their
vital contribution to sustainable development; improve human health and well being; foster resilience; and protect the environment.
6.
We take full account of the milestone achievements of the year 2015, in
particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 1 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, 2 the Paris Agreement adopted under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 3 the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 4 the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024, 5 the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway 6 and the Istanbul Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011 –2020. 7 We also
take account of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 8 the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, the World Summit for Social Development,
the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
_______________
1

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
3
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
4
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
5
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
6
Resolution 69/15, annex.
7
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
8
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2

2/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

Development, 9 the Beijing Platform for Action, 10 the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development and the follow-up to these conferences.
7.
While recognizing that it did not have an intergovernmental agreed outcome,
we take note of the World Humanitarian Summit held in May 2016 in Istanbul.
8.
We acknowledge the contributions of national Governments, as well as the
contributions of subnational and local governments, in the definition of the New
Urban Agenda, and take note of the second World Assembly of Local and Regional
Governments.
9.
The New Urban Agenda reaffirms our global commitment to sustainable urban
development as a critical step for realizing sustainable development in an integrated
and coordinated manner at the global, regional, national, subnational and local
levels, with the participation of all relevant actors. The implementation of the New
Urban Agenda contributes to the implementation and localization of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in an integrated manner, and to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, including Goal 11
of making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable.
10. The New Urban Agenda acknowledges that culture and cultural diversity are
sources of enrichment for humankind and provide an importa nt contribution to the
sustainable development of cities, human settlements and citizens, empowering
them to play an active and unique role in development initiatives. The New Urban
Agenda further recognizes that culture should be taken into account in the
promotion and implementation of new sustainable consumption and production
patterns that contribute to the responsible use of resources and address the adverse
impact of climate change.
Our shared vision
11. We share a vision of cities for all, referring to the equal use and enjoyment of
cities and human settlements, seeking to promote inclusivity and ensure that all
inhabitants, of present and future generations, without discrimination of any kind,
are able to inhabit and produce just, safe, healthy, accessible, affordable, resilient
and sustainable cities and human settlements to foster prosperity and quality of life
for all. We note the efforts of some national and local governments to enshrine this
vision, referred to as “right to the city”, in their legislation, political declarations
and charters.
12. We aim to achieve cities and human settlements where all persons are able to
enjoy equal rights and opportunities, as well as their fundamental freedoms, gu ided
by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including full
respect for international law. In this regard, the New Urban Agenda is grounded in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 11 international human rights treaties,

_______________
9

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
10
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
11
Resolution 217 A (III).

3/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

the Millennium Declaration 12 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome. 13 It is informed
by other instruments such as the Declaration on the Right to Development. 14
13.

We envisage cities and human settlements that:

(a) Fulfil their social function, including the social and ecological function
of land, with a view to progressively achieving the full realization of the right to
adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living,
without discrimination, universal access to safe and affordable drinking water and
sanitation, as well as equal access for all to public goods and quality services in
areas such as food security and nutrition, health, education, infrastructure, mobility
and transportation, energy, air quality and livelihoods;
(b) Are participatory, promote civic engagement, engender a sense of
belonging and ownership among all their inhabitants, prioritize safe, inclusive,
accessible, green and quality public spaces that are friendly for families, enhance
social and intergenerational interactions, cultural expressions and political
participation, as appropriate, and foster social cohesion, inclusion and safety in
peaceful and pluralistic societies, where the needs of all inhabitants are met,
recognizing the specific needs of those in vulnerable situations;
(c) Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls by ensuring
women’s full and effective participation and equal rights in all fields and in
leadership at all levels of decision-making, by ensuring decent work and equal pay
for equal work, or work of equal value, for all women and by preventing and
eliminating all forms of discrimination, violence and harassment against women and
girls in private and public spaces;
(d) Meet the challenges and opportunities of present and future sustained,
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, leveraging urbanization for structural
transformation, high productivity, value-added activities and resource efficiency,
harnessing local economies and taking note of the contribution of the in formal
economy while supporting a sustainable transition to the formal economy;
(e) Fulfil their territorial functions across administrative boundaries and act
as hubs and drivers for balanced, sustainable and integrated urban and territorial
development at all levels;
(f) Promote age- and gender-responsive planning and investment for
sustainable, safe and accessible urban mobility for all and resource -efficient transport
systems for passengers and freight, effectively linking people, places, goods,
services and economic opportunities;
(g) Adopt and implement disaster risk reduction and management, reduce
vulnerability, build resilience and responsiveness to natural and human -made hazards
and foster mitigation of and adaptation to climate change;
(h) Protect, conserve, restore and promote their ecosystems, water, natural
habitats and biodiversity, minimize their environmental impact and change to
sustainable consumption and production patterns.

_______________
12

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
14
Resolution 41/128, annex.
13

4/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

Our principles and commitments
14. To achieve our vision, we resolve to adopt a New Urban Agenda guided by the
following interlinked principles:
(a) Leave no one behind, by ending poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including the eradication of extreme poverty, by ensuring equal righ ts and
opportunities, socioeconomic and cultural diversity, and integration in the urban
space, by enhancing liveability, education, food security and nutrition, health and
well-being, including by ending the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria,
by promoting safety and eliminating discrimination and all forms of violence, by
ensuring public participation — providing safe and equal access for all, and by
providing equal access for all to physical and social infrastructure and basic
services, as well as adequate and affordable housing;
(b) Ensure sustainable and inclusive urban economies by leveraging the
agglomeration benefits of well-planned urbanization, including high productivity,
competitiveness and innovation, by promoting full and productive e mployment and
decent work for all, by ensuring the creation of decent jobs and equal access for all
to economic and productive resources and opportunities and by preventing land
speculation, promoting secure land tenure and managing urban shrinking, where
appropriate;
(c) Ensure environmental sustainability by promoting clean energy and
sustainable use of land and resources in urban development, by protecting
ecosystems and biodiversity, including adopting healthy lifestyles in harmony with
nature, by promoting sustainable consumption and production patterns, by building
urban resilience, by reducing disaster risks and by mitigating and adapting to
climate change.
15. We commit ourselves to working towards an urban paradigm shift for a New
Urban Agenda that will:
(a) Readdress the way we plan, finance, develop, govern and manage cities
and human settlements, recognizing sustainable urban and territorial development as
essential to the achievement of sustainable development and prosperity for all;
(b) Recognize the leading role of national Governments, as appropriate, in
the definition and implementation of inclusive and effective urban policies and
legislation for sustainable urban development, and the equally important
contributions of subnational and local governments, as well as civil society and
other relevant stakeholders, in a transparent and accountable manner;
(c) Adopt sustainable, people-centred, age- and gender-responsive and
integrated approaches to urban and territorial development by implementing policies,
strategies, capacity development and actions at all levels, based on fundamental
drivers of change, including:
(i) Developing and implementing urban policies at the appropriate level,
including in local-national and multi-stakeholder partnerships, building
integrated systems of cities and human settlements and promoting cooperation
among all levels of government to enable the achievement of sustainable
integrated urban development;
(ii) Strengthening urban governance, with sound institutions and mechanisms
that empower and include urban stakeholders, as well as appropriate checks
and balances, providing predictability and coherence in urban development

5/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

plans to enable social inclusion, sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic
growth and environmental protection;
(iii) Reinvigorating long-term and integrated urban and territorial planning
and design in order to optimize the spatial dimension of the urban form and
deliver the positive outcomes of urbanization;
(iv) Supporting effective, innovative and sustainable financing frameworks
and instruments enabling strengthened municipal finance and local fiscal
systems in order to create, sustain and share the value generated by sustainable
urban development in an inclusive manner.
Call for action
16. While the specific circumstances of cities of all sizes, towns and villages vary,
we affirm that the New Urban Agenda is universal in scope, participatory and
people-centred, protects the planet and has a long-term vision, setting out priorities
and actions at the global, regional, national, subnational and local levels that
Governments and other relevant stakeholders in every country can adopt based on
their needs.
17. We will work to implement the New Urban Agenda in our own countries and
at the regional and global levels, taking into account different national realities,
capacities and levels of development, and respecting national legislation and
practices, as well as policies and priorities.
18. We reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, including, inter alia, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, as set out in principle 7.
19. We acknowledge that in implementing the New Urban Agenda parti cular
attention should be given to addressing the unique and emerging urban development
challenges facing all countries, in particular developing countries, including African
countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing middle -income
countries. Special attention should also be given to countries in situations of
conflict, as well as countries and territories under foreign occupation, post -conflict
countries and countries affected by natural and human-made disasters.
20. We recognize the need to give particular attention to addressing multiple forms
of discrimination faced by, inter alia, women and girls, children and youth, persons
with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples
and local communities, slum and informal-settlement dwellers, homeless people,
workers, smallholder farmers and fishers, refugees, returnees, internally displaced
persons and migrants, regardless of their migration status.
21. We urge all national, subnational and local governments, as well as all relevant
stakeholders, in line with national policies and legislation, to revitalize, strengthen
and create partnerships, enhancing coordination and cooperation to effectively
implement the New Urban Agenda and realize our shared vision.
22. We adopt this New Urban Agenda as a collective vision and political
commitment to promote and realize sustainable urban development, and as a historic
opportunity to leverage the key role of cities and human settlements as drivers of
sustainable development in an increasingly urbanized world.

6/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

Quito implementation plan for the New Urban Agenda
23. We resolve to implement the New Urban Agenda as a key instrument for
enabling national, subnational and local governments and all relevant stakeholders
to achieve sustainable urban development.
Transformative commitments for sustainable urban development
24. To fully harness the potential of sustainable urban development, we make the
following transformative commitments through an urban paradigm shift grounded in
the integrated and indivisible dimensions of sustainable development: social,
economic and environmental.
Sustainable urban development for social inclusion and ending poverty
25. We recognize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable
requirement for sustainable development. We also recognize that growing inequality
and the persistence of multiple dimensions of poverty, including the rising number
of slum and informal-settlement dwellers, are affecting both developed and
developing countries, and that the spatial organization, accessibility and design of
urban space, as well as the infrastructure and basic services provision, together with
development policies, can promote or hinder social cohesion, equality and inclusion.
26. We commit ourselves to urban and rural development that is people-centred,
protects the planet, and is age- and gender-responsive and to the realization of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, facilitating living together, ending all
forms of discrimination and violence, and empowering all individuals and
communities while enabling their full and meaningful participation. We further
commit ourselves to promoting culture and respect for diversity and equality as key
elements in the humanization of our cities and human settleme nts.
27. We reaffirm our pledge that no one will be left behind and commit ourselves to
promoting equally the shared opportunities and benefits that urbanization can offer
and that enable all inhabitants, whether living in formal or informal settlements, to
lead decent, dignified and rewarding lives and to achieve their full human potential.
28. We commit ourselves to ensuring full respect for the human rights of refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants, regardless of their migration status, and
support their host cities in the spirit of international cooperation, taking into account
national circumstances and recognizing that, although the movement of large
populations into towns and cities poses a variety of challenges, it can also bring
significant social, economic and cultural contributions to urban life. We further
commit ourselves to strengthening synergies between international migration and
development at the global, regional, national, subnational and local levels by
ensuring safe, orderly and regular migration through planned and well-managed
migration policies, and to supporting local authorities in establishing frameworks
that enable the positive contribution of migrants to cities and strengthened urban rural linkages.
29. We commit ourselves to strengthening the coordination role of national,
subnational and local governments, as appropriate, and their collaboration with
other public entities and non-governmental organizations in the provision of social
and basic services for all, including generating investments in communities that are
most vulnerable to disasters and those affected by recurrent and protracted
humanitarian crises. We further commit ourselves to promoting adequate services,
7/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

accommodation and opportunities for decent and productive work for crisis-affected
persons in urban settings and to working with local communities and local
governments to identify opportunities for engaging and developing local, durable
and dignified solutions while ensuring that aid also flows to affected persons and
host communities to prevent regression of their development.
30. We acknowledge the need for Governments and civil society to further support
resilient urban services during armed conflicts. We also acknowledge the need to
reaffirm full respect for international humanitarian law.
31. We commit ourselves to promoting national, subnational and local housing
policies that support the progressive realization of the right to adequate housing for
all as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, that address all
forms of discrimination and violence and prevent arbitrary forced evictions and that
focus on the needs of the homeless, persons in vulnerable situations, low -income
groups and persons with disabilities, while enabling the participation and
engagement of communities and relevant stakeholders in the planning and
implementation of these policies, including supporting the social production of
habitat, according to national legislation and standards.
32. We commit ourselves to promoting the development of integrated and age- and
gender-responsive housing policies and approaches across all sectors, in particular
the employment, education, health-care and social integration sectors, and at all
levels of government — policies and approaches that incorporate the provision of
adequate, affordable, accessible, resource-efficient, safe, resilient, well-connected
and well-located housing, with special attention to the proximity factor and the
strengthening of the spatial relationship with the rest of the urban fabric and the
surrounding functional areas.
33. We commit ourselves to stimulating the supply of a variety of adequate
housing options that are safe, affordable and accessible for members of different
income groups of society, taking into consideration the socioeconomic and cultural
integration of marginalized communities, homeless persons and those in vulnerable
situations and preventing segregation. We will take positive measures to improve the
living conditions of homeless people, with a view to facilitating their full
participation in society, and to prevent and eliminate homelessness, as well as to
combat and eliminate its criminalization.
34. We commit ourselves to promoting equitable and affordable access to
sustainable basic physical and social infrastructure for all, without discrimination,
including affordable serviced land, housing, modern and renewable energy, safe
drinking water and sanitation, safe, nutritious and adequate food, waste disposal,
sustainable mobility, health care and family planning, education, culture, and
information and communications technologies. We further commit ourselves to
ensuring that these services are responsive to the rights and needs of women,
children and youth, older persons and persons with disabilities, migrants, indigenous
peoples and local communities, as appropriate, and to those of others in vulnerable
situations. In this regard, we encourage the elimination of legal, institutional,
socioeconomic and physical barriers.
35. We commit ourselves to promoting, at the appropriate level of government,
including subnational and local government, increased security of tenure for all,
recognizing the plurality of tenure types, and to developing fit -for-purpose and age-,
gender- and environment-responsive solutions within the continuum of land and
property rights, with particular attention to security of land tenure for women as key
to their empowerment, including through effective administrative systems.
8/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

36. We commit ourselves to promoting appropriate measures in cities and human
settlements that facilitate access for persons with disabilities, on an equal basis with
others, to the physical environment of cities, in particular to public spaces, public
transport, housing, education and health facilities, public information and
communication (including information and communications technologies and
systems) and other facilities and services open or provided to the public, in both
urban and rural areas.
37. We commit ourselves to promoting safe, inclusive, accessible, green and
quality public spaces, including streets, sidewalks and cycling lanes, squares,
waterfront areas, gardens and parks, that are multifunctional areas for social
interaction and inclusion, human health and well-being, economic exchange and
cultural expression and dialogue among a wide diversity of people and cultures, and
that are designed and managed to ensure human development and build peaceful,
inclusive and participatory societies, as well as to promote living togeth er,
connectivity and social inclusion.
38. We commit ourselves to the sustainable leveraging of natural and cultural
heritage, both tangible and intangible, in cities and human settlements, as appropriate,
through integrated urban and territorial policies and adequate investments at the
national, subnational and local levels, to safeguard and promote cultural
infrastructures and sites, museums, indigenous cultures and languages, as well as
traditional knowledge and the arts, highlighting the role that thes e play in
rehabilitating and revitalizing urban areas and in strengthening social participation
and the exercise of citizenship.
39. We commit ourselves to promoting a safe, healthy, inclusive and secure
environment in cities and human settlements enabling all to live, work and
participate in urban life without fear of violence and intimidation, taking into
consideration that women and girls, children and youth, and persons in vulnerable
situations are often particularly affected. We will also work towards the elimination
of harmful practices against women and girls, including child, early and forced
marriage and female genital mutilation.
40. We commit ourselves to embracing diversity in cities and human settlements,
to strengthening social cohesion, intercultural dialogue and understanding, tolerance,
mutual respect, gender equality, innovation, entrepreneurship, inclusion, identity
and safety, and the dignity of all people, as well as to fostering liveability and a
vibrant urban economy. We also commit ourselves to taking steps to ensure that our
local institutions promote pluralism and peaceful coexistence within increasingly
heterogeneous and multicultural societies.
41. We commit ourselves to promoting institutional, political, legal and financial
mechanisms in cities and human settlements to broaden inclusive platforms, in line
with national policies, that allow meaningful participation in decision -making,
planning and follow-up processes for all, as well as enhanced civil engagement and
co-provision and co-production.
42. We support subnational and local governments, as appropriate, in fulfilling
their key role in strengthening the interface among all relevant stakeholders,
offering opportunities for dialogue, including through age - and gender-responsive
approaches, and with particular attention to potential contributions from all
segments of society, including men and women, children and youth, older persons
and persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants, regardless of their migration status,
without discrimination based on race, religion, ethnicity or socioeconomic status.
9/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

Sustainable and inclusive urban prosperity and opportunities for all
43. We recognize that sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, with
full and productive employment and decent work for all, is a key element of
sustainable urban and territorial development and that cities and human settlements
should be places of equal opportunities, allowing people to live healthy, productive,
prosperous and fulfilling lives.
44. We recognize that urban form, infrastructure and building design are among
the greatest drivers of cost and resource efficiencies, through the benefits of
economy of scale and agglomeration and by fostering energy efficiency, renewable
energy, resilience, productivity, environmental protection and sustainable growth in
the urban economy.
45. We commit ourselves to developing vibrant, sustainable and inclusive urban
economies, building on endogenous potential, competitive advantages, cultural
heritage and local resources, as well as resource-efficient and resilient infrastructure,
promoting sustainable and inclusive industrial development and sustainable
consumption and production patterns and fostering an enabling environment for
businesses and innovation, as well as livelihoods.
46. We commit ourselves to promoting the role of affordable and sustainable
housing and housing finance, including social habitat production, in economic
development, and the contribution of the sector to stimulating productivity in other
economic sectors, recognizing that housing enhances capital formation, income,
employment generation and savings and can contribute to driving sustainable and
inclusive economic transformation at the national, subnational and local levels.
47. We commit ourselves to taking appropriate steps to strengthen national,
subnational and local institutions to support local economic development, fostering
integration, cooperation, coordination and dialogue across levels of government and
functional areas and relevant stakeholders.
48. We encourage effective participation and collaboration among all relevant
stakeholders, including local governments, the private sector and civil society,
women, organizations representing youth, as well as those representing persons with
disabilities, indigenous peoples, professionals, academic institutions, trade unions,
employers’ organizations, migrant associations and cultural associations, in order to
identify opportunities for urban economic development and identify and address
existing and emerging challenges.
49. We commit ourselves to supporting territorial systems that integrate urban and
rural functions into the national and subnational spatial frameworks and the systems
of cities and human settlements, thus promoting sustainable management and use of
natural resources and land, ensuring reliable supply and value chains that connect
urban and rural supply and demand to foster equitable regional development across
the urban-rural continuum and fill social, economic and territorial gaps.
50. We commit ourselves to encouraging urban-rural interactions and connectivity
by strengthening sustainable transport and mobility, and technology and
communications networks and infrastructure, underpinned by planning instruments
based on an integrated urban and territorial approach, in order to maximize the
potential of these sectors for enhanced productivity, social, economic and territorial
cohesion, as well as safety and environmental sustainability. This should include
connectivity between cities and their surroundings, peri-urban and rural areas, as
well as greater land-sea connections, where appropriate.

10/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

51. We commit ourselves to promoting the development of urban spatial
frameworks, including urban planning and design instruments that support
sustainable management and use of natural resources and land, appropriate
compactness and density, polycentrism and mixed uses, through infill or planned
urban extension strategies, as applicable, to trigger economies of scale and
agglomeration, strengthen food system planning and enhance resource efficiency,
urban resilience and environmental sustainability.
52. We encourage spatial development strategies that take into account, as
appropriate, the need to guide urban extension, prioritizing urban renewal by planni ng
for the provision of accessible and well-connected infrastructure and services,
sustainable population densities and compact design and integration of new
neighbourhoods into the urban fabric, preventing urban sprawl and marginalization.
53. We commit ourselves to promoting safe, inclusive, accessible, green and quality
public spaces as drivers of social and economic development, in order to sustainably
leverage their potential to generate increased social and economic value, including
property value, and to facilitate business and public and private investments and
livelihood opportunities for all.
54. We commit ourselves to the generation and use of renewable and affordable
energy and sustainable and efficient transport infrastructure and services, wh ere
possible, achieving the benefits of connectivity and reducing the financial,
environmental and public health costs of inefficient mobility, congestion, air
pollution, urban heat island effects and noise. We also commit ourselves to giving
particular attention to the energy and transport needs of all people, particularly the
poor and those living in informal settlements. We also note that reductions in
renewable energy costs give cities and human settlements an effective tool to lower
energy supply costs.
55. We commit ourselves to fostering healthy societies by promoting access to
adequate, inclusive and quality public services, a clean environment, taking into
consideration air quality guidelines, including those elaborated by the World Health
Organization, and social infrastructure and facilities, such as health-care services,
including universal access to sexual and reproductive health -care services to reduce
newborn child and maternal mortality.
56. We commit ourselves to increasing economic productivity, as appropriate, by
providing the labour force with access to income -earning opportunities, knowledge,
skills and educational facilities that contribute to an innovative and competitive
urban economy. We also commit ourselves to increasing economic pr oductivity
through the promotion of full and productive employment and decent work and
livelihood opportunities in cities and human settlements.
57. We commit ourselves to promoting, as appropriate, full and productive
employment, decent work for all and livelihood opportunities in cities and human
settlements, with special attention to the needs and potential of women, youth,
persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, refugees, and
internally displaced persons and migrants, particularly the poorest and those in
vulnerable situations, and to promote non-discriminatory access to legal incomeearning opportunities.
58. We commit ourselves to promoting an enabling, fair and responsible business
environment based on the principles of environmental sustainability and inclusive
prosperity, promoting investments, innovations and entrepreneurship. We also commit
ourselves to addressing the challenges faced by local business communities by
11/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

supporting micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises and cooperatives throughout
the value chain, in particular businesses and enterprises in the social and solidarity
economy, operating in both the formal and informal economies.
59. We commit ourselves to recognizing the contribution of the working poor in
the informal economy, particularly women, including unpaid, domestic and migrant
workers, to the urban economies, taking into account national circumstances. Their
livelihoods, working conditions and income security, legal and social protection,
access to skills, assets and other support services, and voice and representation
should be enhanced. A progressive transition of workers and economic units to the
formal economy will be developed by adopting a balanced approach, combining
incentives and compliance measures, while promoting preservation and
improvement of existing livelihoods. We will take into account specific national
circumstances, legislation, policies, practices and priorities for the transition to the
formal economy.
60. We commit ourselves to sustaining and supporting urban economies to
transition progressively to higher productivity through high -value-added sectors, by
promoting diversification, technological upgrading, research and innovation,
including the creation of quality, decent and productive jobs, including through the
promotion of cultural and creative industries, sustainable tourism, performing arts
and heritage conservation activities, among others.
61. We commit ourselves to harnessing the urban demographic dividend, where
applicable, and to promoting access for youth to education, skills development and
employment to achieve increased productivity and shared prosperity in cities and
human settlements. Girls and boys, young women and young men are key agents of
change in creating a better future and when empowered they have great potential to
advocate on behalf of themselves and their communities. Ensuring more and better
opportunities for their meaningful participation will be essential for the
implementation of the New Urban Agenda.
62. We commit ourselves to addressing the social, economic and spatial
implications of ageing populations, where applicable, and harnessing the ageing
factor as an opportunity for new decent jobs and sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, while improving the quality of life of the urban population.
Environmentally sustainable and resilient urban development
63. We recognize that cities and human settlements face unprecedented threats
from unsustainable consumption and production patterns, loss of biodiversity,
pressure on ecosystems, pollution, natural and human -made disasters, and climate
change and its related risks, undermining the efforts to end poverty in all its forms
and dimensions and to achieve sustainable development. Give n cities’ demographic
trends and their central role in the global economy, in the mitigation and adaptation
efforts related to climate change, and in the use of resources and ecosystems, the
way they are planned, financed, developed, built, governed and ma naged has a
direct impact on sustainability and resilience well beyond urban boundaries.
64. We also recognize that urban centres worldwide, especially in developing
countries, often have characteristics that make them and their inhabitants especially
vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and other natural and human made hazards, including earthquakes, extreme weather events, flooding, subsidence,
storms, including dust and sand storms, heatwaves, water scarcity, droughts, water
and air pollution, vector-borne diseases and sea level rise, which particularly affect
coastal areas, delta regions and small island developing States, among others.
12/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

65. We commit ourselves to facilitating the sustainable management of natural
resources in cities and human settlements in a manner that protects and improves the
urban ecosystem and environmental services, reduces greenhouse gas emissions and
air pollution and promotes disaster risk reduction and management, by supporting
the development of disaster risk reduction strategies and periodical assessments of
disaster risk caused by natural and human-made hazards, including standards for
risk levels, while fostering sustainable economic development and protecting the
well-being and quality of life of all persons through environmentally sound urban
and territorial planning, infrastructure and basic services.
66. We commit ourselves to adopting a smart-city approach that makes use of
opportunities from digitalization, clean energy and technologies, as well as
innovative transport technologies, thus providing options for inhabitants to make
more environmentally friendly choices and boost sustainable economic growth and
enabling cities to improve their service delivery.
67. We commit ourselves to promoting the creation and maintenance of wellconnected and well-distributed networks of open, multipurpose, safe, inclusive,
accessible, green and quality public spaces, to improving the resilience of cities to
disasters and climate change, including floods, drought risks and heatwaves, to
improving food security and nutrition, physical and mental health, and household
and ambient air quality, to reducing noise and promoting attractive and liveable
cities, human settlements and urban landscapes and to prioritizing the cons ervation
of endemic species.
68. We commit ourselves to giving particular consideration to urban deltas, coastal
areas and other environmentally sensitive areas, highlighting their importance as
ecosystems’ providers of significant resources for transport, food security, economic
prosperity, ecosystem services and resilience. We commit ourselves to integrating
appropriate measures into sustainable urban and territorial planning and
development.
69. We commit ourselves to preserving and promoting the ecolo gical and social
function of land, including coastal areas that support cities and human settlements,
and to fostering ecosystem-based solutions to ensure sustainable consumption and
production patterns, so that the ecosystem’s regenerative capacity is not exceeded.
We also commit ourselves to promoting sustainable land use, combining urban
extensions with adequate densities and compactness to prevent and contain urban
sprawl, as well as preventing unnecessary land-use change and the loss of
productive land and fragile and important ecosystems.
70. We commit ourselves to supporting local provision of goods and basic services
and leveraging the proximity of resources, recognizing that heavy reliance on distant
sources of energy, water, food and materials can pose sustainability challenges,
including vulnerability to service supply disruptions, and that local provision can
facilitate inhabitants’ access to resources.
71. We commit ourselves to strengthening the sustainable management of resources,
including land, water (oceans, seas and fresh water), energy, materials, forests and
food, with particular attention to the environmentally sound management and
minimization of all waste, hazardous chemicals, including air and short -lived
climate pollutants, greenhouse gases and noise, and in a way that consid ers urbanrural linkages, functional supply and value chains vis-à-vis environmental impact
and sustainability and that strives to transition to a circular economy while
facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and resilience in the
face of new and emerging challenges.
13/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

72. We commit ourselves to long-term urban and territorial planning processes and
spatial development practices that incorporate integrated water resources planning
and management, considering the urban-rural continuum on the local and territorial
scales and including the participation of relevant stakeholders and communities.
73. We commit ourselves to promoting the conservation and sustainable use of
water by rehabilitating water resources within the urban, peri -urban and rural areas,
reducing and treating wastewater, minimizing water losses, promoting water reuse
and increasing water storage, retention and recharge, taking into consideration the
water cycle.
74. We commit ourselves to promoting environmentally sound waste management
and to substantially reducing waste generation by reducing, reusing and recycling
waste, minimizing landfills and converting waste to energy when waste cannot be
recycled or when this choice delivers the best environmental outcome. We furt her
commit ourselves to reducing marine pollution through improved waste and
wastewater management in coastal areas.
75. We commit ourselves to encouraging national, subnational and local
governments, as appropriate, to develop sustainable, renewable and affordable energy
and energy-efficient buildings and construction modes and to promoting energy
conservation and efficiency, which are essential to enable the reduction of
greenhouse gas and black carbon emissions, ensure sustainable consumption and
production patterns, help create new decent jobs, improve public health and reduce
the costs of energy supply.
76. We commit ourselves to making sustainable use of natural resources and
focusing on the resource efficiency of raw and construction materials such as
concrete, metals, wood, minerals and land. We commit ourselves to establishing safe
material recovery and recycling facilities, promoting the development of sustainable
and resilient buildings and prioritizing the use of local, non -toxic and recycled
materials and lead-additive-free paints and coatings.
77. We commit ourselves to strengthening the resilience of cities and human
settlements, including through the development of quality infrastructure and spatial
planning, by adopting and implementing integrated, age- and gender-responsive
policies and plans and ecosystem-based approaches in line with the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and by mainstreaming holistic
and data-informed disaster risk reduction and management at all levels to reduce
vulnerabilities and risk, especially in risk-prone areas of formal and informal
settlements, including slums, and to enable households, communities, institutions
and services to prepare for, respond to, adapt to and rapidly recover from the ef fects
of hazards, including shocks or latent stresses. We will promote the development of
infrastructure that is resilient and resource efficient and will reduce the risks and
impact of disasters, including the rehabilitation and upgrading of slums and inf ormal
settlements. We will also promote measures for strengthening and retrofitting all
risky housing stock, including in slums and informal settlements, to make it resilient
to disasters, in coordination with local authorities and stakeholders.
78. We commit ourselves to supporting moving from reactive to more proactive
risk-based, all-hazards and all-of-society approaches, such as raising public awareness
of risks and promoting ex ante investments to prevent risks and build resilience,
while also ensuring timely and effective local responses to address the immediate
needs of inhabitants affected by natural and human-made disasters and conflicts.
This should include the integration of the “build back better” principles into the
post-disaster recovery process to integrate resilience-building, environmental and
14/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

spatial measures and lessons from past disasters, as well as awareness of new risks,
into future planning.
79. We commit ourselves to promoting international, national, subnational and
local climate action, including climate change adaptation and mitigation, and to
supporting the efforts of cities and human settlements, their inhabitants and all local
stakeholders as important implementers. We further commit ourselves to supporting
building resilience and reducing emissions of greenhouse gases from all relevant
sectors. Such measures should be consistent with the goals of the Paris Agreement
adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
including holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below
2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the
temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels.
80. We commit ourselves to supporting the medium- to long-term adaptation
planning process, as well as city-level assessments of climate vulnerability and
impact, to inform adaptation plans, policies, programmes and actions that build the
resilience of urban inhabitants, including through the use of ecosystem -based
adaptation.
Effective implementation
81. We recognize that the realization of the transformative commitments set out in
the New Urban Agenda will require enabling policy frameworks at the national,
subnational and local levels, integrated by participatory planning and management
of urban spatial development and effective means of implementation, complemented
by international cooperation as well as efforts in capacity development, including
the sharing of best practices, policies and programmes among Governments at all
levels.
82. We invite international and regional organizations and bodies, including those
of the United Nations system and multilateral environmental agreements,
development partners, international and multilateral financial institutions, regional
development banks, the private sector and other stakeholders, to enhance
coordination of their urban and rural development strategies and programmes to
apply an integrated approach to sustainable urbanization, mainstreaming the
implementation of the New Urban Agenda.
83. In this regard, we emphasize the need to improve United Nations system -wide
coordination and coherence in the area of sustainable urban development, within the
framework of system-wide strategic planning, implementation and reporting, as
stressed in paragraph 88 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
84. We strongly urge States to refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full achievement of
economic and social development, particularly in developing countries.
Building the urban governance structure: establishing a supportive framework
85. We acknowledge the principles and strategies contained in the International
Guidelines on Decentralization and Strengthening of Local Authorities and the
International Guidelines on Access to Basic Services for All, adopted by the

15/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat) in its resolutions 21/3 of 20 April 2007 15 and 22/8 of 3 April 2009. 16
86. We will anchor the effective implementation of the New Urban Agenda in
inclusive, implementable and participatory urban policies, as appropriate, to
mainstream sustainable urban and territorial development as part of integrated
development strategies and plans, supported, as appropriate, by national,
subnational and local institutional and regulatory frameworks, ensuring that they are
adequately linked to transparent and accountable finance mechanisms.
87. We will foster stronger coordination and cooperation among national,
subnational and local governments, including through multilevel consultation
mechanisms and by clearly defining the respective competences, tools and resources
for each level of government.
88. We will ensure coherence between goals and measures of sectoral policies,
inter alia, rural development, land use, food security and nutrition, management of
natural resources, provision of public services, water and sanitation, health,
environment, energy, housing and mobility policies, at different levels and scales of
political administration, across administrative borders and considering the
appropriate functional areas, in order to strengthen integrated approaches to
urbanization and implement integrated urban and territorial planning strategies that
factor them in.
89. We will take measures to establish legal and policy frameworks, based on the
principles of equality and non-discrimination, to enhance the ability of Governments
to effectively implement national urban policies, as appropriate, and to empower
them as policymakers and decision makers, ensuring appropriate fiscal, political and
administrative decentralization based on the principle of subsidiarity.
90. We will, in line with countries’ national legislation, support strengthening the
capacity of subnational and local governments to implement effective local and
metropolitan multilevel governance, across administrative borders, and based on
functional territories, ensuring the involvement of subnational and local
governments in decision-making and working to provide them with the necessary
authority and resources to manage critical urban, metropolitan and territorial
concerns. We will promote metropolitan governance that is inclusive and
encompasses legal frameworks and reliable financing mechanisms, including
sustainable debt management, as applicable. We will take measures to promote
women’s full and effective participation and equal rights in all fields and in
leadership at all levels of decision-making, including in local governments.
91. We will support local governments in determining their own administrative
and management structures, in line with national legislation and policies, as
appropriate, in order to adapt to local needs. We will encourage appropriate
regulatory frameworks and support to local governments in partnering with
communities, civil society and the private sector to develop and manage basic
services and infrastructure, ensuring that the public interest is preserved and concise
goals, responsibilities and accountability mechanisms are clearly defined.
92. We will promote participatory age- and gender-responsive approaches at all
stages of the urban and territorial policy and planning processes, from
_______________
15
16

16/29

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/62/8), annex I.
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/64/8), annex I.

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

conceptualization to design, budgeting, implementation, evaluation and review,
rooted in new forms of direct partnership between Governments at all levels and
civil society, including through broad-based and well-resourced permanent
mechanisms and platforms for cooperation and consultation open to all, using
information and communications technologies and accessible data solutions.
Planning and managing urban spatial development
93. We acknowledge the principles and strategies for urban and territorial planning
contained in the International Guidelines on Urban and Territorial Planning,
approved by the Governing Council of UN-Habitat in its resolution 25/6 of
23 April 2015. 17
94. We will implement integrated planning that aims to balance short-term needs
with the long-term desired outcomes of a competitive economy, high quality of life
and sustainable environment. We will also strive to build flexibility into our plans in
order to adjust to changing social and economic conditions o ver time. We will
implement and systematically evaluate these plans, while making efforts to leverage
innovations in technology and to produce a better living environment.
95. We will support the implementation of integrated, polycentric and balanced
territorial development policies and plans, encouraging cooperation and mutual
support among different scales of cities and human settlements, strengthening the
role of small and intermediate cities and towns in enhancing food security and
nutrition systems, providing access to sustainable, affordable, adequate, resilient and
safe housing, infrastructure and services, facilitating effective trade links across the
urban-rural continuum and ensuring that small-scale farmers and fishers are linked
to local, subnational, national, regional and global value chains and markets. We
will also support urban agriculture and farming, as well as responsible, local and
sustainable consumption and production, and social interactions, through enabling
and accessible networks of local markets and commerce as an option for
contributing to sustainability and food security.
96. We will encourage the implementation of sustainable urban and territorial
planning, including city-region and metropolitan plans, to encourage synergies and
interactions among urban areas of all sizes and their peri -urban and rural
surroundings, including those that are cross-border, and we will support the
development of sustainable regional infrastructure projects that stimulate
sustainable economic productivity, promoting equitable growth of regions across the
urban-rural continuum. In this regard, we will promote urban-rural partnerships and
inter-municipal cooperation mechanisms based on functional territories and urban
areas as effective instruments for performing municipal and metropolitan
administrative tasks, delivering public services and promoting both local and
regional development.
97. We will promote planned urban extensions and infill, prioritizing renewal,
regeneration and retrofitting of urban areas, as appropriate, including the upgrading
of slums and informal settlements, providing high -quality buildings and public
spaces, promoting integrated and participatory approaches involving all relevant
stakeholders and inhabitants and avoiding spatial and socioeconomic segregation
and gentrification, while preserving cultural heritage and preventing and containing
urban sprawl.
_______________
17

Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/70/8), annex.

17/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

98. We will promote integrated urban and territorial planning, including planned
urban extensions based on the principles of equitable, efficient and sustainable use
of land and natural resources, compactness, polycentrism, appropriate density and
connectivity, and multiple use of space, as well as mixed social and economic uses
in built-up areas, in order to prevent urban sprawl, reduce mobility challenges and
needs and service delivery costs per capita and harness density and economies of
scale and agglomeration, as appropriate.
99. We will support the implementation of urban planning strategies, as
appropriate, that facilitate a social mix through the provision of affordable housing
options with access to quality basic services and public spaces for all, enhancing
safety and security and favouring social and intergenerational interaction and the
appreciation of diversity. We will take steps to include appropriate training and
support for service delivery professionals and communities in areas affected by
urban violence.
100. We will support the provision of well-designed networks of safe, accessible,
green and quality streets and other public spaces that are accessible to all and free
from crime and violence, including sexual harassment and gender -based violence,
considering the human scale, and measures that allow for the best possible
commercial use of street-level floors, fostering both formal and informal local
markets and commerce, as well as not-for-profit community initiatives, bringing
people into public spaces and promoting walkability and cycling with the goal of
improving health and well-being.
101. We will integrate disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and
mitigation considerations and measures into age- and gender-responsive urban and
territorial development and planning processes, including greenhouse gas emissions,
resilience-based and climate-effective design of spaces, buildings and construction,
services and infrastructure, and nature-based solutions. We will promote cooperation
and coordination across sectors and build the capacities of local authorities to
develop and implement disaster risk reduction and response plans, such as risk
assessments concerning the location of current and future public facilities, and to
formulate adequate contingency and evacuation procedures.
102. We will strive to improve capacity for urban planning and design and the
provision of training for urban planners at the national, subnational and local levels.
103. We will integrate inclusive measures for urban safety and the prevention of
crime and violence, including terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism. Such measures will, where appropriate, engage relevant local
communities and non-governmental actors in developing urban strategies and
initiatives, including taking into account slums and informal settlements as well as
vulnerability and cultural factors in the development of policies concerning public
security and crime and violence prevention, including by preventing and countering
the stigmatization of specific groups as posing inherently greater security threats.
104. We will promote compliance with legal requirements through strong, inclusive
management frameworks and accountable institutions that deal with land
registration and governance, applying transparent and sustainable management and
use of land, property registration and sound financial systems. We will support local
governments and relevant stakeholders, through a variety of mechanisms, in
developing and using basic land inventory information, such as cadastres, valuation
and risk maps, and land and housing price records, to generate the high-quality,
timely and reliable data — disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity,
migration status, disability, geographic location and other characteristics relevant in
18/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

the national context — needed to assess changes in land values, while ensuring that
these data will not be used for discriminatory land -use policies.
105. We will foster the progressive realization of the right to adequate housing as a
component of the right to an adequate standard of living. We will develop and
implement housing policies at all levels, incorporating participatory planning and
applying the principle of subsidiarity, as appropriate, in order to ensure coherence
among national, subnational and local development strategies, land policies and
housing supply.
106. We will promote housing policies based on the principles of social inclusion,
economic effectiveness and environmental protection. We will support the effective
use of public resources for affordable and sustainable housing, including land in
central and consolidated areas of cities with adequate infrastructure, and encourage
mixed-income development to promote social inclusion and cohesion.
107. We will encourage the development of policies, tools, mechanisms and
financing models that promote access to a wide range of affordable, sustainable
housing options, including rental and other tenure options, as well as cooperative
solutions such as co-housing, community land trusts and other forms of collective
tenure that would address the evolving needs of per sons and communities, in order
to improve the supply of housing (especially for low-income groups), prevent
segregation and arbitrary forced evictions and displacements and provide dignified
and adequate reallocation. This will include support to increment al housing and selfbuild schemes, with special attention to programmes for upgrading slums and
informal settlements.
108. We will support the development of housing policies that foster local
integrated housing approaches by addressing the strong links b etween education,
employment, housing and health, preventing exclusion and segregation.
Furthermore, we commit ourselves to combating homelessness as well as to
combating and eliminating its criminalization through dedicated policies and
targeted active inclusion strategies, such as comprehensive, inclusive and
sustainable housing-first programmes.
109. We will consider increased allocations of financial and human resources, as
appropriate, for the upgrading and, to the extent possible, prevention of slums and
informal settlements, with strategies that go beyond physical and environmental
improvements to ensure that slums and informal settlements are integrated into the
social, economic, cultural and political dimensions of cities. These strategies should
include, as applicable, access to sustainable, adequate, safe and affordable housing,
basic and social services, and safe, inclusive, accessible, green and quality public
spaces, and they should promote security of tenure and its regularization, as well as
measures for conflict prevention and mediation.
110. We will support efforts to define and reinforce inclusive and transparent
monitoring systems for reducing the proportion of people living in slums and
informal settlements, taking into account the exper iences gained from previous
efforts to improve the living conditions of slum and informal -settlement dwellers.
111. We will promote the development of adequate and enforceable regulations in
the housing sector, including, as applicable, resilient building codes, standards,
development permits, land-use by-laws and ordinances, and planning regulations,
combating and preventing speculation, displacement, homelessness and arbitrary
forced evictions and ensuring sustainability, quality, affordability, health, safety,
accessibility, energy and resource efficiency, and resilience. We will also promote
19/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

differentiated analysis of housing supply and demand based on high -quality, timely
and reliable disaggregated data at the national, subnational and local levels,
considering specific social, economic, environmental and cultural dimensions.
112. We will promote the implementation of sustainable urban development
programmes with housing and people’s needs at the centre of the strategy,
prioritizing well-located and well-distributed housing schemes in order to avoid
peripheral and isolated mass housing developments detached from urban systems,
regardless of the social and economic segment for which they are developed, and
providing solutions for the housing needs of low-income groups.
113. We will take measures to improve road safety and integrate i t into sustainable
mobility and transport infrastructure planning and design. Together with awareness raising initiatives, we will promote the safe-system approach called for in the
Decade of Action for Road Safety, with special attention to the needs of a ll women
and girls, as well as children and youth, older persons and persons with disabilities
and those in vulnerable situations. We will work to adopt, implement and enforce
policies and measures to actively protect and promote pedestrian safety and cycl ing
mobility, with a view to broader health outcomes, particularly the prevention of
injuries and non-communicable diseases, and we will work to develop and
implement comprehensive legislation and policies on motorcycle safety, given the
disproportionally high and increasing numbers of motorcycle deaths and injuries
globally, particularly in developing countries. We will promote the safe and healthy
journey to school for every child as a priority.
114. We will promote access for all to safe, age- and gender-responsive, affordable,
accessible and sustainable urban mobility and land and sea transport systems,
enabling meaningful participation in social and economic activities in cities and
human settlements, by integrating transport and mobility plans into ov erall urban
and territorial plans and promoting a wide range of transport and mobility options,
in particular by supporting:
(a) A significant increase in accessible, safe, efficient, affordable and
sustainable infrastructure for public transport, as wel l as non-motorized options such
as walking and cycling, prioritizing them over private motorized transportation;
(b) Equitable “transit-oriented development” that minimizes the
displacement, in particular, of the poor, and features affordable, mixed -income
housing and a mix of jobs and services;
(c) Better and coordinated transport and land-use planning, which would
lead to a reduction of travel and transport needs, enhancing connectivity between
urban, peri-urban and rural areas, including waterways, and transport and mobility
planning, particularly for small island developing States and coastal cities;
(d) Urban freight planning and logistics concepts that enable efficient access
to products and services, minimizing their impact on the environment and on the
liveability of the city and maximizing their contribution to sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth.
115. We will take measures to develop mechanisms and common frameworks at the
national, subnational and local levels to evaluate the wider benefits of urban and
metropolitan transport schemes, including impacts on the environment, the
economy, social cohesion, quality of life, accessibility, road safety, public health and
action on climate change, among other things.

20/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

116. We will support the development of these mechanisms and frameworks, based
on sustainable national urban transport and mobility policies, for sustainable, open
and transparent procurement and regulation of transport and mobility services in
urban and metropolitan areas, including new technology that enables shared
mobility services. We will support the development of clear, transparen t and
accountable contractual relationships between local governments and transport and
mobility service providers, including on data management, which further protect the
public interest and individual privacy and define mutual obligations.
117. We will support better coordination between transport and urban and territorial
planning departments, in mutual understanding of planning and policy frameworks,
at the national, subnational and local levels, including through sustainable urban and
metropolitan transport and mobility plans. We will support subnational and local
governments in developing the necessary knowledge and capacity to implement and
enforce such plans.
118. We will encourage national, subnational and local governments to develop and
expand financing instruments, enabling them to improve their transport and mobility
infrastructure and systems, such as mass rapid-transit systems, integrated transport
systems, air and rail systems, and safe, sufficient and adequate pedestrian and
cycling infrastructure and technology-based innovations in transport and transit
systems to reduce congestion and pollution while improving efficiency,
connectivity, accessibility, health and quality of life.
119. We will promote adequate investments in protective, accessible and
sustainable infrastructure and service provision systems for water, sanitation and
hygiene, sewage, solid waste management, urban drainage, reduction of air
pollution and storm water management, in order to improve safety in the event of
water-related disasters, improve health, ensure universal and equitable access to safe
and affordable drinking water for all, as well as access to adequate and equitable
sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, with special attention to the
needs and safety of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations. We will seek
to ensure that this infrastructure is climate resilient and forms part of integrated
urban and territorial development plans, including housing and mobility, among
other things, and is implemented in a participatory manner, considering innovative,
resource-efficient, accessible, context-specific and culturally sensitive sustainable
solutions.
120. We will work to equip public water and sanitation utilities with the capacity to
implement sustainable water management systems, including sustainable
maintenance of urban infrastructure services, through capacity development, with
the goal of progressively eliminating inequalities and promoting both universal and
equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all and adequate and
equitable sanitation and hygiene for all.
121. We will ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy
services by promoting energy efficiency and sustainable renewable energy and
supporting subnational and local efforts to apply them in public buildings,
infrastructure and facilities, as well as in taking advantage of the direct control,
where applicable, by subnational and local governments of local infrastructure and
codes, to foster uptake in end-use sectors, such as residential, commercial and
industrial buildings, industry, transport, waste and sanitation. We also encourage the
adoption of building performance codes and standards, renewable portfolio targets,
energy-efficiency labelling, retrofitting of existing buildings and public procurement
policies on energy, among other modalities as appropriate, to achieve energy 21/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

efficiency targets. We will also prioritize smart-grid, district energy systems and
community energy plans to improve synergies between renewable energy and
energy efficiency.
122. We will support decentralized decision-making on waste disposal to promote
universal access to sustainable waste management systems. We will support the
promotion of extended producer-responsibility schemes that include waste
generators and producers in the financing of urban waste management systems ,
reduce the hazards and socioeconomic impacts of waste streams and increase
recycling rates through better product design.
123. We will promote the integration of food security and the nutritional needs of
urban residents, particularly the urban poor, in urban and territorial planning, in
order to end hunger and malnutrition. We will promote the coordination of
sustainable food security and agriculture policies across urban, peri-urban and rural
areas to facilitate the production, storage, transport and marketing of food to
consumers in adequate and affordable ways in order to reduce food losses and
prevent and reuse food waste. We will further promote the coordination of food
policies with energy, water, health, transport and waste policies, maintain the
genetic diversity of seeds, reduce the use of hazardous chemicals and implement
other policies in urban areas to maximize efficiencies and minimize waste.
124. We will include culture as a priority component of urban plans and strategies
in the adoption of planning instruments, including master plans, zoning guidelines,
building codes, coastal management policies and strategic development pol icies that
safeguard a diverse range of tangible and intangible cultural heritage and
landscapes, and will protect them from potential disruptive impacts of urban
development.
125. We will support the leveraging of cultural heritage for sustainable urban
development and recognize its role in stimulating participation and responsibility.
We will promote innovative and sustainable use of architectural monuments and
sites, with the intention of value creation, through respectful restoration and
adaptation. We will engage indigenous peoples and local communities in the
promotion and dissemination of knowledge of tangible and intangible cultural
heritage and protection of traditional expressions and languages, including through
the use of new technologies and techniques.
Means of implementation
126. We recognize that the implementation of the New Urban Agenda requires an
enabling environment and a wide range of means of implementation, including
access to science, technology and innovation and enhanced knowled ge-sharing on
mutually agreed terms, as well as capacity development and mobilization of
financial resources, taking into account the commitment of developed and
developing countries and tapping into all available traditional and innovative
sources at the global, regional, national, subnational and local levels, as well as
enhanced international cooperation and partnerships among Governments at all
levels, the private sector, civil society, the United Nations system and other actors,
based on the principles of equality, non-discrimination, accountability, respect for
human rights and solidarity, especially for those who are the poorest and most
vulnerable.
127. We reaffirm the commitments on means of implementation included in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.

22/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

128. We will encourage UN-Habitat, other United Nations programmes and
agencies, and other relevant stakeholders to generate evidence -based and practical
guidance for the implementation of the New Urban Agenda and the urban dimension
of the Sustainable Development Goals, in close collaboration with Member States,
local authorities, major groups and other relevant stakeholders, as well as through
the mobilization of experts. We will build on the legacy of the Habitat III conference
and the lessons learned from its preparatory process, including the regional and
thematic meetings. We note, in this context, the valuable contributions of, inter alia,
the World Urban Campaign, the General Assembly of Partners for H abitat III and
the Global Land Tool Network.
129. We urge UN-Habitat to continue its work to develop its normative knowledge
and provide capacity development and tools to national, subnational and local
governments in designing, planning and managing sustainable urban development.
130. We recognize that sustainable urban development, guided by prevailing urban
policies and strategies, as appropriate, can benefit from integrated financing
frameworks that are supported by an enabling environment at all leve ls. We
acknowledge the importance of ensuring that all financial means of implementation
are firmly embedded in coherent policy frameworks and fiscal decentralization
processes, where available, and that adequate capacities are developed at all levels.
131. We support context-sensitive approaches to financing urbanization and
enhancing financial management capacities at all levels of government through the
adoption of specific instruments and mechanisms necessary to achieve sustainable
urban development, recognizing that each country has the primary responsibility for
its own economic and social development.
132. We will mobilize endogenous resources and revenues generated through the
capture of benefits of urbanization, as well as the catalysing effects and maximized
impact of public and private investments, in order to improve the financial
conditions for urban development and open access to additional sources,
recognizing that, for all countries, public policies and the mobilization and effective
use of domestic resources, underpinned by the principle of national ownership, are
central to our common pursuit of sustainable urban development, including
implementation of the New Urban Agenda.
133. We call upon businesses to apply their creativity and innovation to solving
sustainable development challenges in urban areas, acknowledging that private
business activity, investment and innovation are major drivers of productivity,
inclusive growth and job creation, and that private investment, particularly foreign
direct investment, along with a stable international financial system, are essential
elements of development efforts.
134. We will support appropriate policies and capacities that enable subnational and
local governments to register and expand their potential revenue base, for example
through multipurpose cadastres, local taxes, fees and service charges, in lin e with
national policies, while ensuring that women and girls, children and youth, older
persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, and
poor households are not disproportionately affected.
135. We will promote sound and transparent systems for financial transfers from
national Governments to subnational and local governments based on the latter’s
needs, priorities, functions, mandates and performance -based incentives, as
appropriate, in order to provide them with adequate, timely and predictable
resources and enhance their ability to raise revenue and manage expenditures.
23/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

136. We will support the development of vertical and horizontal models of
distribution of financial resources to decrease inequalities across subnationa l
territories, within urban centres and between urban and rural areas, as well as to
promote integrated and balanced territorial development. In this regard, we
emphasize the importance of improving the transparency of data on spending and
resource allocation as a tool for assessing progress towards equity and spatial
integration.
137. We will promote best practices to capture and share the increase in land and
property value generated as a result of urban development processes, infrastructure
projects and public investments. Measures such as gains-related fiscal policies could
be put in place, as appropriate, to prevent its solely private capture, as well as land
and real estate speculation. We will reinforce the link between fiscal systems and
urban planning, as well as urban management tools, including land market
regulations. We will work to ensure that efforts to generate land -based finance do
not result in unsustainable land use and consumption.
138. We will support subnational and local governments in their efforts to
implement transparent and accountable expenditure control instruments for
assessing the necessity and impact of local investment and projects, based on
legislative control and public participation, as appropriate, in support of open and
fair tendering processes, procurement mechanisms and reliable budget execution, as
well as preventive anti-corruption measures to promote integrity, accountability,
effective management and access to public property and land, in line with national
policies.
139. We will support the creation of robust legal and regulatory frameworks for
sustainable national and municipal borrowing, on the basis of sustainable debt
management, supported by adequate revenues and capacities, by means of local
creditworthiness as well as expanded sustainable municipal debt markets when
appropriate. We will consider the establishment of appropriate financial
intermediaries for urban financing, such as regional, national, subnational and local
development funds or development banks, including pooled financing mechanisms,
which can catalyse public and private, national and international financing. We will
work to promote risk mitigation mechanisms such as the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency, while managing currency risk, to reduce the cost of capital and
to stimulate the private sector and households to participate in sustainable urban
development and resilience-building efforts, including access to risk transfer
mechanisms.
140. We will support the development of appropriate and affordable housing
finance products and encourage the participation of a diverse range of multilateral
financial institutions, regional development banks and development finance
institutions, cooperation agencies, private sector lenders and investors, cooperatives,
moneylenders and microfinance banks to invest in affordable and incremental
housing in all its forms.
141. We will also consider establishing urban and territorial transport infrastructure
and service funds at the national level, based on a variety of funding sources ranging
from public grants to contributions from other public entities and the private sector,
ensuring coordination among actors and interventions as well as accountability.
142. We invite international multilateral financial institutions, regional development
banks, development finance institutions and cooperation agencies to provide
financial support, including through innovative financial mechanisms, to

24/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

programmes and projects for implementing the New Urban Agenda, particu larly in
developing countries.
143. We support access to different multilateral funds, including the Green Climate
Fund, the Global Environment Facility, the Adaptation Fund and the Climate
Investment Funds, among others, to secure resources for climate change adaptation
and mitigation plans, policies, programmes and actions for subnational and local
governments, within the framework of agreed procedures. We will collaborate with
subnational and local financial institutions, as appropriate, to develop climate
finance infrastructure solutions and to create appropriate mechanisms for identifying
catalytic financial instruments, consistent with any national framework in place to
ensure fiscal and debt sustainability at all levels of government.
144. We will explore and develop feasible solutions to climate and disaster risks in
cities and human settlements, including by collaborating with insurance and
reinsurance institutions and other relevant actors with regard to investments in urban
and metropolitan infrastructure, buildings and other urban assets, as well as for local
populations to secure their shelter and economic needs.
145. We support the use of international public finance, including official
development assistance, among other things, to catalyse additional resource
mobilization from all available sources, public and private, for sustainable urban
and territorial development. This may include the mitigation of risks for potential
investors, in recognition of the fact that international public finance plays an
important role in complementing the efforts of countries to mobilize public
resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries with
limited domestic resources.
146. We will expand opportunities for North-South, South-South and triangular
regional and international cooperation, as well as subnational, decentralized and
city-to-city cooperation, as appropriate, to contribute to sustainable urban
development, developing capacities and fostering exchanges of urban solutions and
mutual learning at all levels and by all relevant actors.
147. We will promote capacity development as a multifaceted approach that
addresses the ability of multiple stakeholders and institutions at all levels of
governance and combines the individual, societal and institutional capac ity to
formulate, implement, enhance, manage, monitor and evaluate public policies for
sustainable urban development.
148. We will promote the strengthening of the capacity of national, subnational and
local governments, including local government associa tions, as appropriate, to work
with women and girls, children and youth, older persons and persons with
disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, and those in vulnerable
situations, as well as with civil society, academia and research institu tions in
shaping organizational and institutional governance processes, enabling them to
participate effectively in decision-making about urban and territorial development.
149. We will support local government associations as promoters and providers of
capacity development, recognizing and strengthening, as appropriate, both their
involvement in national consultations on urban policies and development priorities
and their cooperation with subnational and local governments, along with civil
society, the private sector, professionals, academia and research institutions, and
their existing networks, to deliver on capacity development programmes. This
should be done by means of peer-to-peer learning, subject matter-related
partnerships and collaborative actions, such as inter-municipal cooperation, on a
25/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

global, regional, national, subnational and local scale, including the establishment of
practitioners’ networks and science-policy interface practices.
150. We underscore the need for enhanced cooperation and knowledge exchange on
science, technology and innovation to benefit sustainable urban development, in full
coherence, coordination and synergy with the processes of the Technology
Facilitation Mechanism established under the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and
launched under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
151. We will promote capacity development programmes to help subnational and
local governments in financial planning and management, anchored in institutional
coordination at all levels, including environmental sensitivity and anti-corruption
measures, embracing transparent and independent oversight, accounting,
procurement, reporting, auditing and monitoring processes, among others, and to
review subnational and national performance and compliance, with particular
attention to age- and gender-responsive budgeting and the improvement and
digitalization of accounting processes and records, in order to promote results -based
approaches and build medium- to long-term administrative and technical capacity.
152. We will promote capacity development programmes on the use of legal landbased revenue and financing tools, as well as on real estate market functioning for
policymakers and local public officials, focusing on the legal and economic
foundations of value capture, including the quantification, capturing and distribution
of land value increments.
153. We will promote the systematic use of multi-stakeholder partnerships in urban
development processes, as appropriate, establishing clear and transparent policies,
financial and administrative frameworks and procedures, as well as planning
guidelines for multi-stakeholder partnerships.
154. We recognize the significant contribution of voluntary collaborative initiatives,
partnerships and coalitions that plan to initiate and enhance the implementation of
the New Urban Agenda, highlighting best practices and innovative solutions,
including by promoting co-production networks between subnational entities, local
governments and other relevant stakeholders.
155. We will promote capacity development initiatives to empower and strengthen
the skills and abilities of women and girls, children and youth, older persons and
persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, as well as
persons in vulnerable situations, for shaping governance processes, engaging in
dialogue, and promoting and protecting human rights and anti -discrimination, to
ensure their effective participation in urban and territorial development decision making.
156. We will promote the development of national information and communications
technology policies and e-government strategies, as well as citizen-centric digital
governance tools, tapping into technological innovations, including capacity
development programmes, in order to make information and communications
technologies accessible to the public, including women and girls, children and
youth, persons with disabilities, older persons and persons in vulnerable situations,
to enable them to develop and exercise civic responsib ility, broadening participation
and fostering responsible governance, as well as increasing efficiency. The use of
digital platforms and tools, including geospatial information systems, will be
encouraged to improve long-term integrated urban and territorial planning and
design, land administration and management, and access to urban and metropolitan
services.

26/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

157. We will support science, research and innovation, including a focus on social,
technological, digital and nature-based innovation, robust science-policy interfaces
in urban and territorial planning and policy formulation and institutionalized
mechanisms for sharing and exchanging information, knowledge and expertise,
including the collection, analysis, standardization and dissemination of
geographically based, community-collected, high-quality, timely and reliable data
disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migration status, disability,
geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national, subnational and
local contexts.
158. We will strengthen data and statistical capacities at the national, subnational
and local levels to effectively monitor progress achieved in the implementation of
sustainable urban development policies and strategies and to inform decision making and appropriate reviews. Data collection procedures for the implementation
of, follow-up to and review of the New Urban Agenda should primarily be based on
official national, subnational and local data sources, and other sources as
appropriate, and be open, transparent and consistent with the purpose of respecting
privacy rights and all human rights obligations and commitments. Progress towards
a global people-based definition of cities and human settlements may support this
work.
159. We will support the role and enhanced capacity of national, subnational and
local governments in data collection, mapping, analysis and dissemination and in
promoting evidence-based governance, building on a shared knowledge base using
both globally comparable as well as locally generated data, including through
censuses, household surveys, population registers, community -based monitoring
processes and other relevant sources, disaggregated by income, sex, age, race,
ethnicity, migration status, disability, geographic location and other characteristics
relevant in national, subnational and local contexts.
160. We will foster the creation, promotion and enhancement of open, user -friendly
and participatory data platforms using technological and social tools available to
transfer and share knowledge among national, subnational and local governments
and relevant stakeholders, including non-State actors and people, to enhance
effective urban planning and management, efficiency and transparency through
e-governance, approaches assisted by information and communications
technologies, and geospatial information management.
Follow-up and review
161. We will carry out a periodic follow-up to and review of the New Urban
Agenda, ensuring coherence at the national, regional and global levels, in order to
track progress, assess impact and ensure the Agenda’s effective and timely
implementation, accountability to our citizens and transparency, in an inclusive
manner.
162. We encourage voluntary, country-led, open, inclusive, multilevel, participatory
and transparent follow-up and review of the New Urban Agenda. The process should
take into account contributions of national, subnational and local levels of
government and be supplemented by contributions from the United Nations system,
regional and subregional organizations, major groups and relevant stakeholders, and
should be a continuous process aimed at creating and reinforcing partnerships
among all relevant stakeholders and fostering exchanges of urban solutions and
mutual learning.

27/29

A/RES/71/256

New Urban Agenda

163. We acknowledge the importance of local governments as active partners in the
follow-up to and review of the New Urban Agenda at all levels and encourage them
to develop, jointly with national and subnational governments, as appropriate,
implementable follow-up and review mechanisms at the local level, including
through relevant associations and appropriate platforms. We will consider
strengthening, where appropriate, their capacity to contribute in this respect.
164. We stress that the follow-up to and review of the New Urban Agenda must
have effective linkages with the follow-up to and review of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to ensure coordination and coherence in their
implementation.
165. We reaffirm the role and expertise of UN-Habitat, within its mandate, as a
focal point for sustainable urbanization and human settlements, in collaboration
with other United Nations system entities, recognizing the linkages between
sustainable urbanization and, inter alia, sustainable development, disaster ris k
reduction and climate change.
166. We invite the General Assembly to request the Secretary-General, with
voluntary inputs from countries and relevant regional and international
organizations, to report on the progress of the implementation of the New Ur ban
Agenda every four years, with the first report to be submitted during the seventy second session of the Assembly.
167. The report will provide a qualitative and quantitative analysis of the progress
made in the implementation of the New Urban Agenda and internationally agreed
goals and targets relevant to sustainable urbanization and human settlements. The
analysis will be based on the activities of national, subnational and local
governments, UN-Habitat, other relevant entities of the United Nations system,
relevant stakeholders in support of the implementation of the New Urban Agenda
and the reports of the UN-Habitat Governing Council. The report should
incorporate, to the extent possible, the inputs of multilateral organizations and
processes where appropriate, civil society, the private sector and academia. It should
build on existing platforms and processes such as the World Urban Forum convened
by UN-Habitat. The report should avoid duplication and respond to local,
subnational and national circumstances and legislation, capacities, needs and
priorities.
168. The preparation of the report will be coordinated by UN -Habitat in close
collaboration with other relevant entities of the United Nations system, ensuring an
inclusive United Nations system-wide coordination process. The report will be
submitted to the General Assembly through the Economic and Social Council. 18 The
report will also feed into the high-level political forum on sustainable development
convened under the auspices of the General Asse mbly, with a view to ensuring
coherence, coordination and collaborative linkages with the follow -up to and review
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
169. We will continue to strengthen mobilization efforts through partnerships,
advocacy and awareness-raising activities relating to the implementation of the New
Urban Agenda using existing initiatives such as World Habitat Day and World Cities
_______________
18

The report is intended to replace the report of the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council
on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda. It is also intended to be part of, and not
additional to, the report of the Secretary-General requested by the General Assembly in its resolution under
the relevant agenda item.

28/29

New Urban Agenda

A/RES/71/256

Day, and will consider establishing new initiatives to mobilize and generate support
from civil society, citizens and relevant stakeholders. We note the importance of
continuing to engage in the follow-up to and review of the New Urban Agenda with
subnational and local government associations represented at the World Assembly of
Local and Regional Governments.
170. We reaffirm General Assembly resolutions 51/177 of 16 December 1996,
56/206 of 21 December 2001, 67/216, 68/239 and 69/226, as well as other relevant
resolutions of the Assembly, including resolutions 31/109 of 16 December 1976 and
32/162 of 19 December 1977. We reiterate the importance of the Nairobi
headquarters location of UN-Habitat.
171. We underline the importance of UN-Habitat, given its role within the United
Nations system as a focal point on sustainable urbanization and human settlements,
including in the implementation, follow-up to and review of the New Urban Agenda,
in collaboration with other United Nations system entities.
172. In the light of the New Urban Agenda and with a view to enhancing the
effectiveness of UN-Habitat, we request the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly during its seventy-first session an evidence-based and
independent assessment of UN-Habitat. The result of the assessment will be a report
containing recommendations to enhance the effectiveness, efficiency, accountability
and oversight of UN-Habitat, and in this regard it should analyse:
(a)

The normative and operational mandate of UN-Habitat;

(b) The governance structure of UN-Habitat, for more effective, accountable
and transparent decision-making, considering alternatives, including universalization
of the membership of its Governing Council;
(c) The work of UN-Habitat with national, subnational and local
governments and with relevant stakeholders in order to tap the full potential of
partnerships;
(d)

The financial capability of UN-Habitat.

173. We decide to hold a two-day high-level meeting of the General Assembly, to
be convened by the President of the General Assembly during the seventy -first
session, to discuss the effective implementation of the New Urban Agenda and the
positioning of UN-Habitat in this regard. The meeting will discuss, inter alia, best
practices, success stories and the measures contained in the report. A Chair’s
summary of the meeting will serve as an input to the Second Committee during the
seventy-second session for its consideration of action to be taken in the light of the
recommendations contained in the independent assessment in its annual resolution
under the relevant agenda item.
174. We encourage the General Assembly to consider holding the next United
Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat IV) in
2036 within a renewed political commitment to assessing and consolidating progress
on the New Urban Agenda.
175. We request the Secretary-General, in his quadrennial report to be presented in
2026 pursuant to paragraph 166 above, to take stock of the progress made and
challenges faced in the implementation of the New Urban Agenda since its adoption
and to identify further steps to address them.

29/29
