General AHembly-Twenty-first SeHion

the present session and at previous sessions, together
with all the reports available on this item.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

2197 (XXI). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees• and having heard
his statement, 11
Taking note of the progress achieved in all the countries of the world where the Office of the High Commissioner is carrying out its activities, in the field of
the international protection of refugees and in the
search for permanent solutions to their problems
through voluntary repatriation, voluntary integration
in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries,
Considering the increasing number and scope of refugee problems in Africa and in other regions of the
world, and the additional responsibilities incumbent
upon the High Commissioner as a result of the extension of his activities to new countries, most of which are
in a developing stage,
Recalling its resolution 2040 (XX) of 7 December
1965, in which particular attention is given to the question of the assistance of refugees in Africa,
Noting with concern the serious financial crisis at
present affecting the assistance programme of the High
Commissioner,
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international protection to refugees who are his concern, within the limits
of his competence, and to promote permanent solutions
to their problems :
(a) By facilitating their voluntary repatriation
through any steps he may consider appropriate and in
conformity with the humanitarian character of his mandate;
(b) By facilitating the voluntary and rapid settlement of these refugees in the countries of asylum and
by making available to these countries, especially developing countries, a maximum of aid, taking into ac<:ount the specific requirements existing in each country
of asylum;
( c) By assuring that in developing countries the
plans for the economic and social integration of refugees, pending their possible inclusion in the economic
and social programmes carried out by the competent
organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations,
are properly co-ordinated with those programmes, and
also with such other programmes as might be carried
out by regional organizations ;
2. Requests the competent organs and specialized
agencies of the United Nations, when considering development plans, to take into account, at the request
of the Governments concerned, the needs of the refugees;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to give their
full support to the High Commissioner in the accom• Official Records of the Gen.eral Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/6311/Rev.1) and Supplement
No. llA (A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1).
II ]bid., Twenty-first Session, Third Committee, 1447th
meeting, paras. 1-22.

plishment of his humanitarian task and to place at his
disposal the financial means necessary for the completion of his assistance programme.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2198 (XXI). Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, signed at Geneva on 28 July 1951,11
covers only those persons who have become refugees
as a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951,
Considering that new refugee situations have arisen
since the Convention was adopted and that the refugees concerned may therefore not fall within the scope
of the Convention,
Considering that it is desirable that equal status
should be enjoyed by all refugees covered by the definition in the Convention, irrespective of the date-line of
1 January 1951,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 7 that the draft Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees should be submitted to the General Assembly after consideration by
the Economic and Social Council, in order that the
Secretary-General might be authorized to open the
Protocol for accession by Governments within the shortest possible time,
Considering that the Economic and Social Council
in its resolution 1186 (XLI) of 18 November 1966'
took note with approval of the draft Protocol 8 con~
tained in the addendum to the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and concerning measures to extend the personal scope of the
Convention, and transmitted the addendum to the General Assembly,
1. Takes note of the Protocol relating to the Status
of Refugees, the text of which 8 is contained in the addendum to the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the Protocol to the States mentioned
in article V thereof, with a view to enabling them to
accede to the Protocol.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2199 (XXI). Draft Declaration on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1921 (XVIII) of 5 December 1%3, in which it requested the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission on the Status of
Women to prepare a draft declaration on the dimina,.
tion of discrimination against women,
Noting with interest the text of the draft Declaration
adopted unanimously by the Commission on the Status
of Women on 8 March 1966 and transmitted to the
General Assembly by the Economic and Social Counct1
in its resolution 1131 (XLI) of 26 July 1966,
6 Unit~ Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first

Session, Supplement No. llA
two , para. 38.
s Ibid., part one, para. 2.

(A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1), part
