S/PV.8370

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8370th meeting

Thursday, 11 October 2018, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz/Mrs. Cordova Soria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Edjang Mangue
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2018/882)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2018/886)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-31620 (E)
*1831620*

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.

I would also like to thank the Council for its visit to
Kinshasa this past weekend despite its busy agenda.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2018/882)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2018/886)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in today’s meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region.
Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Djinnit will join today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Kinshasa and
Addis Ababa, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/882, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and document S/2018/886, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I thank the
Security Council for this opportunity to discuss the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
2/28

11/10/2018

The visit was very useful for several reasons — for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Congolese,
but also for our partners and, lastly, for ourselves.
Through discussions with the major actors involved
in the ongoing political and electoral process, the visit
provided a unique opportunity for Council members
to observe at first-hand the situation on the ground,
stakeholder engagement and the progress already
made, as well as unresolved areas of disagreement.
With two and a half months remaining before the
national and provincial presidential and legislative
elections, the electoral process is unfolding according
to the electoral calendar. As Council members noted,
decisive steps have been taken. The electoral law has
been revised; the electoral register has been prepared
and submitted for auditing; 21 candidates have been
validated as candidates vying for the presidency, 15,505
as candidates for the National Assembly and 19,640
as candidates for the provincial assemblies. However,
regrettably, although more than 50 per cent of voters
are women, the percentage of female candidates is not
more than 12 per cent of the total number of candidates
in the legislative and provincial elections and there is
only one female candidate in the presidential elections.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend the
constructive stance of political actors on all sides, who
have been consistent in demonstrating their continued
engagement in the electoral process, including following
the decisions of the Constitutional Court, which
resulted in some leaders of the political opposition
being disqualified from standing as candidates in the
presidential elections. At the same time, as Council
members heard repeatedly in Kinshasa, the main
opposition leaders have a strong mistrust of the process
in general. Nonetheless, they have remained committed
to it thus far. In particular, they are calling for doing
away with the voting machines and for the electoral
register to be updated. It is therefore essential that
the main Congolese stakeholders reach consensus on
those issues so as not to compromise the acceptance of
election results. It is in that spirit that I am determined
to continue my mission of good offices.
On 4 October, the Independent National Electoral
Commission met with the 21 presidential candidates to
discuss differences on critical aspects of organization
of the elections. A technical committee to continue
the dialogue on the subject was set up, with its first
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

meeting having been held yesterday. Regrettably, it
ended with major differences of opinion. I welcome
the Commission’s awareness-raising effort and urge
the joint forum to reach consensus on the points of
contention. I also welcome the publication of the
recommendations of the Westminster Foundation for
Democracy, which aim to clarify some of the concerns
raised about the voting machines. With regard to the
setting up and distribution of the voting machines and
electoral material, the President of the Commission
has assured us that the first set of voting machines was
received last Friday at the port of Matadi. He added
that delivery would continue in the coming weeks. The
machines and other material must now be transported
to the rest of the Congo, which, since the rainy season
has just begun and given the relatively short deadline of
23 December, represents a major logistical challenge.
In the context of the implementation of the measures
to ease tensions that were outlined in the political
agreement of 31 December 2016, it should be noted
that the public meeting organized on 29 September in
Kinshasa by seven main opposition parties took place
without challenges or major incidents. I welcome the
peaceful nature of the event and the restraint shown
by the demonstrators and the security services. We
have also just learned that an agreement has been
reached between the authorities and the opposition
to hold a march on 13 October in Lubumbashi, which
would be the first of its kind in the capital of HautKatanga province. Such signs are encouraging, and I
will continue my good offices efforts in that regard to
help create an environment that allows candidates to
conduct their campaigns peacefully and in conditions
that foster the sharing of ideas and opinions. Applying
similar rules for all involved is a fundamental guarantee
of the credibility of the entire process.
Ensuring the security of the elections is another
prerequisite for credible and peaceful elections. It
is important to ensure the security not only of the
candidates for the upcoming elections, but also and
above all of the environment in which the campaign and
the actual polls. The task of securing the areas in which
armed groups — who are increasingly using the political
agenda for the benefit of their own interests — are
stationed promises to be a difficult one. To that end,
we recommend the establishment of electoral security
mechanisms and strategic coordination of the various
national defence and security entities.

S/PV. 8370

(spoke in English)
As the Democratic Republic of the Congo moves
towards elections, the complexity of the security
situation and the continuing activities of armed groups
in the east of the country continue to pose a major
challenge to the protection of civilians. To cite just one
recent alarming example, in the Petit Nord of North
Kivu at least 14 people — including a woman and three
children — were killed by alleged Nyatura combatants
this week. With potential links to political and
economic interests and a possibility of reprisal attacks,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
immediately deployed a standing combat deployment,
together with civilian components, to prevent any
further deterioration.
However, I am most concerned about current
developments in Beni, in the Grand Nord of North Kivu.
Presumed Allied Democratic Forces continue to stage
near-daily attacks on civilians, the Forces armées de
la République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and
MONUSCO, increasingly close to the centre of Beni
town. I wish to acknowledge the high toll borne by the
FARDC in the context of this deteriorating situation.
Despite the rate of attacks, our Intervention Brigade has
taken an increasingly robust posture in recent months
under exemplary leadership. They undertake proactive
long-range patrols to ensure a protective environment
and respond swiftly to alerts, in several recent cases
repelling attacks as they are under way — most recently,
just two days ago.
The growing frequency and proximity to Beni
town of these attacks are, understandably, leading to
frustration on the part of the local population. In this
context, we are simultaneously stretched to respond
to an outbreak of Ebola in the Beni health zone and
surrounding areas, now including a town neighbouring
Uganda. I am increasingly concerned about the
trajectory of the disease. As of today, we have 194
confirmed or probable cases and 120 deaths.
While the response of the Congolese authorities
and humanitarian partners, supported by MONUSCO,
has been swift and exemplary, the security situation
has rendered the response increasingly challenging. In
some areas, the local population has shown mistrust
towards Ebola responders, in one case attacking a
convoy of health workers. Responders are currently
grappling with the issue of simultaneously scaling up

18-316203/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

response efforts both in Beni and in other nearby areas,
while adapting their footprint to the deteriorating
security situation.
In these cases, as in many places throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, our uniformed and
civilian colleagues undertake significant efforts and
risks on a daily basis to implement our mandate to
protect civilians and provide security for humanitarian
personnel. In addition to the efforts of our Intervention
Brigade, I am equally encouraged to report that our
broader force shows a willing mindset to deploy where
it is most needed to ensure the protection of civilians,
and to note the integration of our response efforts
across our uniformed and civilian components and in
support of humanitarian partners.
It is therefore unfortunate that, even within this
concerning security context, we face challenges
in ensuring that our military personnel are as well
prepared as they should be and able to undertake
operations within the full spectrum of the mandate. In
recent weeks, we have faced increasing restrictions on
the importation of arms, ammunition and other military
equipment for several of our contingents, including our
incoming rapidly deployable battalions.
Although we continue to engage on these issues
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, I must unfortunately inform the Council
that discussions have not yet yielded tangible results.
This increasingly places our forces in a situation where
they are inadequately resourced to ensure the security
of our own personnel, protect civilians and ensure
preparedness for contingency planning, as requested by
the Council in the latest MONUSCO mandate.
(spoke in French)
Despite all these challenges, we remain optimistic
and continue to make every effort, together with the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
ensure that this process is successful. The international
community has sent a positive message by awarding the
Nobel Peace Prize to Dr. Denis Mukwege and, through
him, to all women and girls of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo who are victims of sexual violence. I take
this opportunity to congratulate Dr. Mukwege on being
awarded the Prize for his fight against sexual violence
in times of war. This award honours him and the women
and girls he has cared for, who pay a heavy price for
the turmoil in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where rape is used as a weapon of war.
4/28

11/10/2018

In South Kivu province, the cradle of the Panzi
Foundation, as in the other provinces affected by
insecurity, sexual violence continues to be perpetrated
daily by parties to the conflict. We hope that this award
to Dr. Mukwege and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will mark a turning point in obtaining assistance
for the thousands of victims of sexual violence and in
the fight against impunity against the perpetrators of
such violence. MONUSCO continues to stand with
them in this noble and indispensable struggle.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit: I have the honour to present the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/886) on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo
and the Region, covering the period from 1 March to
31 August. I am pleased to do so just a few days after
the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, held in Kampala on 8 October.
In line with my road map, and working in close
collaboration with the other guarantors of the framework
agreement — the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR)
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), as well as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations system
and other partners — my colleagues in the Office and
I have spared no effort to promote joint action aimed at
advancing key commitments and the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. In that regard, our priority
areas of work include the following.
The first concerns the neutralization of negative
forces. Insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo persists as the result of the continued
presence of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR),
the ex-Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and some armed
Burundian elements, in addition to a plethora of local
armed groups in the same region. Allegations of crossborder interventions continue to be made. In addition
to creating insecurity and causing the displacement of
populations, the activities of those negative forces fuel
mistrust among countries of the region and constitute a
threat to regional peace and security.
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With regard to the strengthening of the MONUSCO
Force Intervention Brigade, as recommended by
the Brazzaville meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism in October 2017, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and MONUSCO embarked
on the implementation of the recommendations made
by the United Nations-SADC joint assessment mission
dispatched to the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo in April. For its part, my Office continued to
promote regional and international support for related
existing mechanisms, including the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Joint Intelligence Fusion
Centre and the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on the ADF.
Meanwhile, with regard to the repatriation of
disarmed combatants sustained efforts have been
exerted through the reactivation of the relevant
Follow-up Mechanism, which yielded some results.
Following a series of field visits, which were attended
by representatives of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, together with the
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, a total of 41 people have been repatriated
to their countries of origin, including five former
FDLR combatants and their 22 dependents, as well
as 14 former M-23 combatants. While those visits
might be modest, what is important is the fact that the
Follow-up Mechanism has created a positive dynamic
of cooperation among the countries concerned. It has
also demonstrated that goodwill and cooperation by
stakeholders lead to results on the ground. We will
endeavour to foster the same spirit of collaboration,
which is needed to address the long-standing challenge
of negative forces in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The second priority area relates to efforts to
strengthen the bonds of friendship and cooperation
among the core countries of the region. As I reported
in my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8227),
the workshop that had been jointly organized with the
African Union on the occasion of the fifth anniversary
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
early this year in Addis Ababa, emphasized, inter
alia, the need to address the persisting mistrust among
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda. Consequently, in my engagement
with stakeholders in the region, I have encouraged
initiatives to promote frank dialogue among leaders
to resolve differences and address any issue that could

S/PV. 8370

jeopardize good relations and cooperation among
them. In that regard, I am pleased to report that,
based on my suggestion, the ninth high-level meeting
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, during which
President Museveni took over the chairmanship from
President Sassou Nguesso, provided an opportunity for
such conversation.
Despite the absence of the Heads of State of
several core countries, discussions during the closeddoor session revealed the deep concerns of member
States about the local and regional implications of the
negative forces as the main cause of mistrust among the
core countries of the region. The meeting recognized
the need for a new approach beyond the existing
measures to enhance regional cooperation against
the threat posed by the negative forces. It mandated
President Museveni to convey to President Kabila
the outcomes of the discussions at the meeting and to
consult with the Chairperson of the African Union,
the ICGLR and the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security Cooperation on the next steps to take in
joint engagement in that area. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism also requested President Sassou Nguesso,
as the Chairperson of the ICGLR and outgoing
Chairperson of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, to
consider taking initiatives to strengthen the bonds of
friendship and cooperation among the core countries of
the region, building on the previous initiatives that he
has taken in that regard.
The third priority area concerns support for
peaceful, credible and inclusive electoral and political
processes in the region. Despite some positive
developments, the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Burundi, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan continues to contribute to instability
in the region. Recognizing the importance of peaceful
and credible elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for stability in the region as a whole, I have
focused my efforts on mobilizing concerted regional
and international support for the implementation of
the 31 December 2016 agreement. Throughout my
consultations in the region, including with President
Sassou Nguesso, as Chairperson of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism and of the ICGLR; President
Lourenço of Angola, as outgoing Chairperson of
the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation; and President Lungu of Zambia as
incoming Chairperson of the SADC Organ, as well as
with the leadership of the African Union Commission,

18-316205/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I encouraged sustained regional engagement in support
of peaceful, credible and inclusive elections in line with
the 31 December agreement.
I have also continued to emphasize the importance
of addressing persisting differences between the
Government and the opposition in Burundi through
inclusive dialogue. As we await the outcome of the
discussions of the fifth round of the inter-Burundian
dialogue, it is important that the region continue to
stand with the Burundian Government and people in
support of inclusive, credible and peaceful elections
in 2020, in full respect for the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi. The situation
in those countries was also on the agenda of the
recently concluded meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, which among other things called for
inclusive electoral and political processes in the region,
while noting that the exclusion of national stakeholders
leads to perpetuating instability.
Enhanced commitment to inclusive dialogue
and inclusive politics should also mean the greater
participation of women, youth and civil society in peace
and political processes in the Great Lakes region. That
was our fourth priority during the period under review.
In addition to continuing to support the preparation of a
regional action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), my Office — in collaboration with the
ICGLR, the African Union, FemWise-Africa and UNWomen — facilitated joint solidarity missions led by
women leaders in the region to Burundi, the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in July and August. In all the countries visited,
they were able to engage stakeholders at all levels,
including the respective Heads of State and legislative
and executive authorities, and were successful in
raising awareness of the importance of ensuring that
women are included in political decision-making.
The key recommendation from those missions is to
work towards achieving full gender parity and, in the
interim, ensure a minimum of 30 per cent representation
of women in peace and political processes, as well
as in executive and legislative bodies, by 2023. That
recommendation was endorsed by the ninth meeting
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, following a
statement delivered by Ms. Samba-Panza, former
interim President of the Central African Republic,
on behalf of the Advisory Board of the Women’s
Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation
6/28

11/10/2018

Framework. We will, of course, continue to pursue that
initiative vigorously.
The fifth priority area covered efforts to address
the root causes of conflicts in the region. In that regard,
my Office focused on efforts to fight impunity and
address the protracted displacement in the region, in
addition to supporting initiatives to address the illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources. We continue
to support the operationalization of the Great Lakes
Judicial Cooperation Network, including through the
holding of its second meeting on 13 and 14 June in Dar
es Salaam. I am pleased to report that the Network has
now started to address specific cases of war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
My Office, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the ICGLR
and other partners, has also continued to promote
durable solutions to protracted displacements pertaining
to refugees from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, whose presence contributes to
mistrust among countries in the region. In that regard, I
am pleased to note the request of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism in Kampala that President Museveni lead
efforts on displacement in the region, including by
hosting ministerial-level consultations later this year,
to be jointly convened by my Office and the ICGLR.
We expect that event to generate political will and
commitments to making progress in this critical area.
Lastly, I would like to stress that the illegal
exploitation and trade of natural resources remain
factors for instability in the Great Lakes region and
deprive the region and its people of much-needed
sources of socioeconomic growth. During the period
of the review, we continued to consult with the
ICGLR on joint efforts in the implementation of the
recommendations that were made at the workshop that
we jointly convened in July 2016 in Nairobi.
Despite some progress, a lot remains to be done
to fully achieve the objectives of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. Sustained economic
development will depend on progress in establishing
security in parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region as a whole, and in strengthening
collaboration among the countries concerned in order to
ensure that the resources of the countries of the region
benefit the people of the region. Greater goodwill is
needed to address the root causes of instability in the
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

region. My Office will of course continue to support
the countries of the region in those efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Djinnit for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for their very informative
briefings and their commitment.
We have just presented our report on the Security
Council mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I will not dwell on that except to once again
pay tribute to the work of Ms. Zerrougui and her teams,
stress the historic opportunity represented by the
elections of 23 December, and call on all Congolese
actors to seize that opportunity and overcome their
differences through dialogue in order to reach the
widest possible consensus on the technical and political
conditions for the organization of those elections. The
entire Congolese population expects its leaders to hold
credible, free and transparent elections in a peaceful
climate. We hope that their calls will heeded.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region
was designed in 2013 to ensure peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region, which had just experienced a series
of conflicts. The framework agreement is specifically
designed to address the common challenges facing the
Great Lakes region and is an essential instrument for
building confidence among the countries of the region.
The inclusive agrement makes it possible to combine
the efforts of a large number of actors, the countries of
the region, relevant regional institutions and external
partners towards the same purpose. It carries a longterm vision that encompasses all possible avenues
to ensure the human and economic development of
the region.
The agreement should work as a catalyst for action,
but in our view it is not yet working optimally. There are
several reasons for that. The region remains confronted
by unresolved challenges, such as fragile electoral
processes, massive population displacements caused by

S/PV. 8370

uncontrolled armed groups, incomplete reconciliation
processes and the slow pace of justice. New threats have
emerged, such as Ebola epidemics, the radicalization of
youth and environmental damage related to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. The appropriate
means to collectively address those challenges are not
yet truly in place. I am thinking in particular of the
lack of adequate regional legal and technical capacity
in the field of police and judicial cooperation in the
fight against trafficking and impunity. Finally, we are
aware of the extent to which the lack of trust is both
harmful and prejudicial. Rebuilding trust is therefore at
the heart of our shared priorities.
France commends the outstanding work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, who spares no effort in
seeking all possible ways and means to overcome the
challenges. Elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are on the horizon. We have just spoken about their
importance to regional stability. The elections are also
a historic opportunity for the entire region. They must
offer an opportunity to the region, once the elections
are over, to come together on a renewed regional road
map that can identify new modes of interaction among
neighbouring countries and contribute to overcoming
the many challenges that remain.
France will remain faithful to the commitment
made in 2013, in solidarity with the region. We have a
common goal to help forge long-term regional stability.
We stand ready to work closely with all countries of
the region to serve that purpose and overcome the
current challenges.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit,
for their insightful briefings. We also welcome the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
the Chamber.
At the outset, we would like to note that the
recent mission of the Council provided an opportunity
to receive first-hand information and a deeper
understanding of the situation on the ground, and
express support to the Government and people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We thank the
Congolese national authorities and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) team for hosting

18-316207/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Council’s delegation, as well as the Department of
Political Affairs, the Security Council Affairs Division,
the Department of Safety and Security, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and others for arranging
that visit so efficiently under difficult circumstances.
We pay tribute to the brave women and men of
MONUSCO who risk their lives in hazardous conditions.
It is one of the largest peacekeeping operations in history
and has been serving the host country with courage and
selflessness. We see Leila and Said’s dedication and
loyalty to their duty, which have received international
recognition. They have complex mandates and have
given us many lessons to learn. We note and appreciate
the coordinated and important work they do. They have
a large and complex agenda, and we see the different
and unique ways in which they contribute.
As an observer at the African Union, we express our
solidarity and associate ourselves with the statements
of the African troika to be delivered today. I would like
to make the following observations.
On the security front, we note with regret the
renewed intercommunal violence and activities of
armed groups, which exacerbate the already dire
humanitarian situation, thereby leading to mass
displacement of innocent Congolese people. We
strongly condemn all attacks on the civilian population,
peacekeepers and humanitarian and health workers and
call on all local and foreign armed groups to lay down
their weapons. We commend the work of MONUSCO in
developing Mission-wide strategies to address the issue
of attacks by armed groups and thereby implement the
protection-through-projection strategy. The Mission’s
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians,
including the concept of operations of the Mission’s
force and police components, becomes even more
important in preventing risks linked to violence
intended to impede the upcoming elections. We also
welcome MONUSCO’s continued support to the peace
processes on a provincial level, thereby addressing
the underlying causes of intercommunal violence by
advancing peace through awareness-raising campaigns
with the full engagement of local leaders, women
and youth.
On the counter-terrorism front, we would like to
recall that, during our visit, President Kabila Kabange,
Prime Minister Tshibala Nzenzhe and Vice-Prime
Minister Mova Sakanyi stressed the importance
of fighting terrorism and expressed regret that the
8/28

11/10/2018

members of the Council had not included the issue
in their remarks. In particular, the Head of State
underlined that terrorism has threatened the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for 30 years now. Terrorists have
extended their tentacles into the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Africa, Mozambique, Somalia,
Ethiopia, Uganda and many other African countries.
President Kabila emphasized, “We are losing our
precious population, but we will continue to fight this
evil”. Kazakhstan therefore calls on Member States
to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
addressing the challenge posed by terrorism. We should
recognize that this important country is a significant
partner in our global effort aimed at the overall goal of
achieving a world free of terrorism.
On the political front, we underline the progress
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in preparing for elections according to
the electoral calendar. This nationally owned process
should be held with respect for the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate
the importance of the implementation by all parties
of the political agreement of 31 December 2016. We
call on the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue implementing measures to
create conditions conducive to holding credible and
transparent elections with the meaningful participation
of women in the process. Further efforts must be made
by all key political actors to establish a constructive
and inclusive inter-Congolese dialogue to achieve
political progress and build confidence in the electoral
process. We commend the committed determination of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government to
assume full responsibility for funding the elections. We
therefore encourage all national authorities to continue
cooperating with the Independent National Electoral
Commission to provide the necessary resources.
We welcome the assurances of President Kabila,
who, during the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly (see A/73/PV.7) and during the Council’s
visit said that the elections would be held on time, that
every necessary step will be taken to ensure peaceful
and credible elections and that he takes it very seriously.
In that regard, we underline that the support provided
by the United Nations and the African Union is of
crucial importance.
Although the elections are an important step in
stabilizing the situation in the Democratic Republic
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Congo, they are only a part of the solution. In
that vein, we would like to stress the importance of
further security-sector reforms, together with the
decentralization and consolidation of State authority
and the socioeconomic development of the country.
We should realize that there is no development without
security, but also that there is no security without
development. We believe that in the foreseeable future,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
should have a designated deputy who would have
oversight over, and be responsible for, development
and the fulfilment of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). In that vein, we would like to stress the
importance of the threefold approach to addressing
conflicts, which is intended to be a global model. Its
components are as follows: building capacity for the
interlinkages between security and development while
promoting the SDGs; a revamped and innovative
regional approach; and the One United Nations
principle, based on the holistic modus operandi of our
Organization. At the same time, as noted by Special
Djinnit today and by Special Representative Zerrougui
during our visit, we realize that good political will is
needed to address the root causes.
On the humanitarian front, we note with regret that
the existing situation, with a large number of internally
displaced persons and refugees, against the backdrop
of the underfunded humanitarian response plan, has
been aggravated by the outbreak of the Ebola virus,
which has caused more than 100 human deaths. We
commend the efforts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo authorities, with the coordinated support of
the United Nations and the African Union, to fight this
epidemic. However, efforts to combat the Ebola virus
are significantly hampered due to the unstable security
situation in the affected zones.
On implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, we positively note the
enhanced cooperation by the signatory countries on
security, political and economic matters, as well as the
fight against impunity through judicial cooperation.
Our delegation raised this matter during the Council’s
meeting with Prime Minister Tshibala Nzenzhe. In that
regard, we welcome the outcomes of the ninth high-level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held
on 8 October in Kampala. We encourage the signatory
countries to continue to increase their ownership of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and

S/PV. 8370

intensify their efforts to fully implement national and
regional commitments. Regional institutions should
also play a key role in the quest for lasting peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region. The Framework
remains a viable context and platform to help the
countries and institutions of the region to achieve peace
and stability in line with the objectives of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
Lastly, we once again express our gratitude for
the visit, which enabled us to see at first hand what is
happening in the country and what has been done to
achieve peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That is our absolute priority, and we will
continue to extend our support.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Mr. Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region, for their briefings today.
We deeply appreciate their updates, especially in these
final two months before elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Following the Security Council’s trip to Kinshasa,
our focus remains on the state of elections preparations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are
particularly glad that the Security Council met with
the President of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, who had not been able to join us for the
August Council briefing (see S/PV.8331). We agree
with the Electoral Commission officials that another
electoral delay is not acceptable and appreciate their
focus on maintaining the 23 December date. The
Congolese people have already waited two years to cast
their votes.
With that in mind, we will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) to establish contingency plans to distribute
voting materials if the Congolese Government makes a
last-minute request. We encourage MONUSCO to be
transparent with the Congolese Government regarding
deadlines for requesting that assistance. However,
we recall that it is not MONUSCO’s responsibility to
organize Congolese elections, it is the responsibility
of the Independent National Electoral Commission of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Although the

18-316209/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/10/2018

Commission has had an extra two years to organize
this election, we remain deeply concerned about the
specific choices that it has made, in that they are likely
to lead to widespread problems on election day.

When the time is right, we will be the first to
celebrate MONUSCO’s closure, as called for by
President Kabila Kabange in his address, but today it is
too soon to celebrate.

We believe that Congolese officials intend to hold
elections on 23 December, but we are not the people
who need to be convinced. The Congolese people need
to know that they will have the chance to exercise their
vote in a credible election. Now is the time to build that
confidence. End the detention of political prisoners and
implement fully the December 2016 agreement. Develop
a logistics plan to deliver elections materials in time.
Release the voter registry in an electronic, searchable
format. Build consensus around the electronic voting
machines and develop a back-up procedure to ensure
voters can still vote even if the machines malfunction or
fail to be delivered to all voting stations. Train sufficient
poll workers on voting equipment and processes. Those
are actions that the Congolese Government, and the
Commission in particular, could take today to address
the concerns of Congolese voters.

Finally, we note that Congolese authorities have
started the trial on the murder of two United Nations
experts, Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, who were
killed while investigating human rights violations in the
Kasais. We want to remind the Congolese authorities
of the importance of a thorough investigation and fair
trial without the pressure of artificial timelines. No one
wants to see innocent people convicted for a murder
they did not commit or those guilty walk free. We
encourage the Secretary-General to renew the Followup Mechanism to accompany Congolese authorities in
seeking justice for Michael and Zaida.

The goal for 23 December 2018 is free, fair and
credible elections. One way to safeguard that is through
elections observers. We encourage the Independent
National Electoral Commission to speedily begin to
welcome and accredit election observers in coordination
with the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community and Congolese civil society.
Two weeks ago, on the floor of the General
Assembly, President Kabila Kabange called for the end
of MONUSCO (see A/73/PV.7). We share that goal,
but our focus is on the execution and on the timing.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/882)
documents, MONUSCO is essential for civilian
protection in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Armed groups continue their attacks and human rights
violations, especially against civilians in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recognize the
efforts of the United Nations to repatriate or relocate
former combatants from Rwanda and South Sudan,
even as we remain deeply concerned about attacks
by the Allied Democratic Forces, which appear to be
increasing in frequency and lethality. In North Kivu
and Ituri, MONUSCO is providing life-saving logistic
support to the Ebola response, protecting convoys and
ensuring that humanitarian workers can operate safely
in difficult conditions. That health crisis will require
our full attention and ingenuity to halt Ebola’s spread.
10/28

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and Special Envoy
Djinnit for their briefings. I extend my gratitude to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the co-leads France, Equatorial Guinea and
Bolivia, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the United Nations country team
for organizing our visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last week. The visit, although limited
to Kinshasa, offered very useful impressions of the
progress on the electoral calendar, but also on remaining
challenges, the human rights situation, humanitarian
needs and security.
Today I will address the elections, the overall
security and human rights situation and the role of the
United Nations, and will share a few thoughts on the
way forward.
When Sweden joined the Council in January 2017,
a major crisis had just been avoided by the signing
of the 31 December 2016 agreement. The agreement
provides the road map towards peaceful, credible and
inclusive elections on 23 December — elections that are
indeed critical to peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the broader region.
Those elections are now less than three months
away. Important progress has made in recent months.
We welcome the important preparatory steps that
have been taken. Efforts are now urgently needed to
implement all parts of the agreement, including the
confidence-building measures. The opening of equal
democratic space for all is essential, including the
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

freedom of assembly and of expression. As in any other
country, the Government has a special role to play in
ensuring the fulfilment of those measures. Everyone
must be able to campaign freely and peacefully, political
prisoners must be released, and the political rights of all
must be safeguarded.
Women’s full and equal participation in the
elections is vital and must be supported and encouraged.
Unfortunately, the conditions for women’s participation
still look dire. Much more needs to be done to mitigate
the political, economic, security and social impediments
to women’s participation on equal terms.
The Independent National Electoral Commission
has a critical role to play. As preparations proceed,
there is need for more proactive outreach and increased
public information about the electoral process. That
includes clear guidance on the functioning of the voter
registry and the voting machines. Legitimate concerns
and recommendations on how to improve those
processes should be taken on board and considered in
a transparent and collaborative fashion. Independent
election observers would bring further credibility
to the electoral process and help to bring added trust
and confidence. We welcome the intention of the
Southern African Development Community to provide
support with an observation mission, and encourage
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to also engage
with other national, regional and international actors.
The continued readiness of MONUSCO to assist with
technical and logistical support is welcomed.
The ambitious efforts of the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO) to train and deploy
national observers should be encouraged and supported.
Further efforts are clearly needed to build confidence
and for the elections to be widely accepted among the
Congolese people. Good offices functions by CENCO
or the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
as needed, are important in that regard. Any concerns
about the conduct of the elections should be addressed
peacefully and through established channels and
institutions, and be duly considered in accordance with
international standards.
Continued regional leadership and international
unity are key. The recent discussions in Kampala
on advancing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, as referred to by Special Envoy Djinnit,
highlight the importance of regional coordination,

S/PV. 8370

including for the conduct of credible elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The joint statement
of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council earlier in July illustrated international
unity on the need for those elections to be credible.
We condemn continued human rights violations by
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are especially concerned about the escalation of
violence and attacks in and around Beni, in the Kasai
region and most recently in the mining town of Rubaya.
Sexual and gender-based violence is widespread.
The destabilizing activities of armed groups are of
grave concern.
It is important never to let violence and human
rights violations become the new normal, and all
parties are responsible for that. The Government has a
particular responsibility to address violence and abuse,
including sexual and gender-based violence. The high
percentage of violations that are attributed to State
agents is of great concern. Fighting impunity is key.
We call on the Government to continue to strengthen
efforts to ensure that those responsible for violations
are held to account.
The fragile security situation has also had a
negative impact on the Ebola response, as well as other
humanitarian efforts. We call for a period of tranquillity
to allow for addressing the threat of Ebola. More
funding is needed for the overall humanitarian response
and, not least, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
must be granted.
We commend the work of MONUSCO, which
operates under difficult conditions and with an extensive
mandate. We appreciate the more proactive posture of
the Mission, which has enabled better protection for both
civilians and peacekeepers. With limited resources,
MONUSCO has been able to deliver important results.
We fully support the mandate of the Mission and the
continued good offices of Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui. It is important that MONUSCO be prepared
to manage violence and insecurity in connection with
the elections, including in the post-election context.
Continued efforts for the transfer of capacity can, we
hope, be explored after the elections.
The United Nations country team also deserves credit
for its important work, exploring a broader peace and
development agenda amid honourable efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance in difficult circumstances. In
an ideal scenario, venues will open up after the elections

18-3162011/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/10/2018

for a stronger development focus, based on a credible
Government plan focusing on the long-term needs of
the population for socioeconomic development, based
on the Sustainable Development Goals.

in the region and the international community must
now focus efforts on ensuring that the opportunity to
change the trajectory in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is seized.

I want to take this opportunity to note some
new dynamics in the trial and investigation into the
murders of United Nations experts Zaida Catalán and
Michael Sharp, which were also raised by my American
colleague. We underscore the continued need for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to fully
cooperate with the follow-on mechanism, initiated by the
Secretary-General and led by Mr. Robert Petit, as well
as national investigations. It is also important that the
national investigations take note of recommendations
made by the mechanism, especially in terms of
conducting thorough and legally robust investigations
without artificial timelines for its completion. We
welcome the anticipated extension of the mechanism.
The Swedish investigation is still experiencing issues
relating to cooperation with Democratic Republic of the
Congo authorities. We would also like to acknowledge
the ongoing efforts of the Secretariat to improve the
overall security and conditions for United Nations
experts, an issue that requires the Council’s further
attention and support.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in
French): Last week’s visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo made possible a better analysis of the
challenges facing the country in the run-up to the
elections. I would like to thank the representatives
of France, Bolivia and Equatorial Guinea for their
preparatory work and their very thorough briefings this
morning. I would also like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui
and Mr. Said Djinnit for their briefings just now. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands continues to provide them
with its full support.

Just as we landed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we were met with the announcement that Dr.
Mukwege and the Panzi hospital had been awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize. That is very significant recognition
for all women affected by sexual abuse, and it has shed
light on the tremendous suffering that conflict-related
sexual violence imposes on victims, their families and
entire societies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and elsewhere. Let us hope that the prize will help turn
the corner towards putting an end once and for all to
that most horrendous of crimes and that women will be
empowered to play a full and equal part in the future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Congolese people have suffered for too long.
The upcoming elections and the subsequent democratic
transfer of power will offer an opportunity for renewed
momentum in putting the interests of the people first.
Credible and peaceful elections are necessary but not
sufficient on the road ahead for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Moving from constant emergency mode
and humanitarian crisis towards real development based
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the enjoyment by all Congolese of their fundamental
rights is necessary. All national stakeholders, countries
12/28

Today I would like to dwell on three points. First,
I would like to share some of the highlights of the
Security Council’s visit. Secondly, I will emphasize the
importance of confidence-building in the final phase
of the election preparations. Lastly, I will address the
role of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in relation to Action for Peacekeeping.
On my first point, I would like to share some
reflections on our recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I thank the Congolese authorities and
MONUSCO for their hospitality. Our various interviews
revealed to what extent the political differences among
the different parties affect people’s lives. Our meeting
with the female candidates particularly struck me. They
were bursting with positive energy and had the clear
will to improve Congo’s future.
During our visit, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded
to Dr. Denis Mukwege. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
admires his commitment to the health and the dignity of
women in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That honour sends a political signal to all
countries of the world and calls on them to continue the
fight against sexual violence in conflict areas. We also
welcome President Kabila Kabange’s reaffirmation of
that message of zero tolerance for sexual violence. We
look forward to seeing its further implementation.
My second point concerns the two months
remaining to prepare the elections. Several important
steps have been taken to ensure the holding of the
elections on 23 December. I am thinking of the
training of national observers and the provision by
the authorities of the necessary logistical materiel. As
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

pointed out by our French colleague, the outstanding
problem can be summed up in one word — trust.
There are deep political divisions. We call on all
actors to strengthen their cooperation so as to reach
agreement on outstanding issues. We call on the
Independent National Electoral Commission to increase
transparency and openness. We underline the need for
all political parties to be able to campaign safely. We
call for the full implementation of the New Year’s Eve
agreement, in particular the opening of political space.
We encourage the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to invite independent observers.
Such confidence-building measures are crucial to the
credibility of the elections.
My third point concerns MONUSCO. I recall that
MONUSCO is ready to provide logistical support
to the electoral process. However, it is important to
look beyond that deadline because the elections will
not remove the root causes of the conflict, which still
affects millions of civilians in eastern Congo.
During our visit, I was impressed by MONUSCO’s
efforts towards Action for Peacekeeping. Last March,
our Prime Minister, Mark Rutte, helped to launch
that initiative here in the Security Council in support
of Secretary-General Guterres (see S/PV.8218).
MONUSCO has shown itself able to act more proactively
and more flexibly. We commend the Force Commander
for his commitment to Action for Peacekeeping. His
goal is to save lives, not to count the bodies. At the
same time, I noted the need for resources to implement
the new protection-through-projection strategy. That
includes air assets, night-vision goggles and intelligence.
The strategy will need to be evaluated in order to draw
lessons for other peacekeeping operations.
It is also imperative that MONUSCO rapidly
have access to all the materiel that has not yet entered
Congolese territory. The primary task of the Mission
remains the protection of civilians. The violence
perpetrated by the Allied Democratic Forces in the
vicinity of Beni — an area affected by the Ebola
virus — once again illustrates the importance of
that task.
The visit clearly showed me the need for a
realistic mandate and for MONUSCO to focus on the
key tasks. That clearly demonstrates that any exit
strategy for MONUSCO should be considered only
with the utmost caution, taking into account the needs
of Congolese civilians. Moreover, a possible early

S/PV. 8370

reduction of MONUSCO troops risks having significant
consequences beyond the national territory.
In the context of regional aspects, the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region remains highly
relevant, as the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism emphasized. Only the political
will of the stakeholders will be able to fully realize the
potential of the Framework.
In conclusion, the time remaining before the
elections on 23 December will be crucial. All parties
must step up their efforts to ensure free, credible
and peaceful elections that enhance the prospects for
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
They can count on our support. For the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we must maintain
the unity of the Security Council.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting and the important
briefings by Special Representative Leila Zerrougui
and Special Envoy Said Djinnit. I would like to very
briefly join the Permanent Representative of Sweden in
expressing thanks to the leader of the Security Council
mission, the Permanent Representative of France, and
to the co-leaders, the Permanent Representatives of
Bolivia and Equatorial Guinea, as well as the members
of the Council secretariat, for their outstanding conduct
of the mission.
We would like to start by emphasizing the
importance of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
holding on 23 December free, transparent, inclusive
and credible elections, allowing for the establishment
of a new Government that will be called on to address
the serious challenges that the country faces. In that
regard, we wish to acknowledge the efforts undertaken
by the Government, in particular the firm commitment
that the Head of State himself, President Kabila
Kabange, expressed to us last week, for the success of
the December elections. We also highlight the work
of the Independent National Electoral Commission in
complying with the electoral calendar. We reiterate
the importance of the international community’s
support in that process, while respecting the principle
of sovereignty.
As has been mentioned, the members of the
Security Council had an opportunity to get close to
the situation and interact with Congolese authorities

18-3162013/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and civil society, to whom we are grateful for their
generous hospitality.
We take due note of the concerns voiced by the
opposition with regard to the use of voting machines.
We are confident that it will be possible to reach an
understanding. We also hope that there will be adequate
training on their use so that the Congolese people can
express their will without major setbacks. Beyond the
technical and logistical discussions on the process, we
consider it essential that a healthy debate and exchange
of ideas and proposals among the candidates be
generated so that Congolese citizens are well informed
when choosing their future leaders.
We also express our concern about the arbitrary
arrests of members of the opposition and representatives
of civil society, which are contrary to the democratic
climate in which elections must be conducted. In that
regard, we underline the need to fully implement
the confidence-building measures set forth in the
31 December 2016 political agreement.
We also stress the important supporting role of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the African Union and subregional organizations, as
well as that of neighbouring countries, in ensuring that
the electoral process can become a turning point in the
building of sustainable peace in the country.
With regard to the security situation, we deplore
the continuing attacks by armed groups against the
civilian population in the east of the country and the
inter-ethnic violence in the South Kivu region, as
well as the theft of weapons from the armed forces by
militias. We consider it essential that the armed forces,
MONUSCO and the Intervention Brigade continue to
work together to more effectively protect the civilian
population, especially from Allied Democratic Forces
attacks in the North Kivu region.
We would also like to underline the organization
of workshops to determine the humanitarian needs
in the country, conducted by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We believe that
initiative will foster cooperation between Congolese
authorities and humanitarian agencies at the national
and sub-national levels.
We also welcome MONUSCO’s quite committed and
steadfast work in the area of human rights, in particular
in the implementation of the road map to secure the
14/28

11/10/2018

release of children recruited by armed groups, and we
stress the need to bring those responsible to justice.
Along the same lines, we welcome the community
violence-reduction projects implemented in the east of
the country, which have given ex-combatants access
to jobs and reduced the risk of young people being
recruited by militias.
Finally, we express our deep concern about the
new outbreak of the Ebola virus, and regret that it has
cost the lives of 120 people and threatens almost 200
other affected people, at the very least. We highlight
and support the work of the World Health Organization
and the United Nations to tackle the situation in
coordination with the Government. However, we
note with alarm that the virus is spreading in areas
affected by constant attacks by armed groups. That
obviously hampers prevention efforts for a timely and
comprehensive response to the threat posed by the
virus. The MONUSCO staff and the health personnel
deployed to those areas deserve our admiration
and support.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui and Special Envoy Said Djinnit for their
comprehensive and informative briefings, as well as
for their continued efforts and capable leadership in
the field.
We note the significant progress that has been made
in the preparations for the holding of the 23 December
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We appreciate the efforts of the Independent National
Electoral Commission to ensure the achievement
of key milestones in the electoral process. In that
regard, the publication of the final list of candidates
for the presidential, national and provincial legislative
elections is encouraging. We very much welcome the
decision of President Joseph Kabila Kabange not to run
for office, in line with the Congolese Constitution.
The Security Council visit to Kinshasa was indeed
very useful in witnessing the ongoing preparations for
the upcoming elections in December and interacting
with all the relevant stakeholders. We thank the co-leads
for their briefing on the series of important discussions
we had during the visit.
Despite the progress made thus far, many
challenges persist. We observed a lack of trust in
the electoral process, which greatly underscores the
need to implement the confidence-building measures
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8370

identified in the 31 December 2016 political agreement.
All Congolese political stakeholders need to engage
positively and constructively, with full respect for the
Congolese Constitution and its institutions, to create
the necessary conditions for the holding of free, fair,
credible and peaceful elections.

international support for the ongoing response efforts
to contain the spread of the disease. In that context,
we are planning to propose a draft resolution that will
build on the important discussion we had last week. We
look forward to engaging with all Council members on
the matter over the coming days.

We observed at first-hand what the United Nations
is doing on the ground to support the electoral process
and witnessed the readiness of MONUSCO to provide
technical and logistical support to the Electoral
Commission. We note that the Mission is carrying out
its mandate under difficult circumstances and needs all
the support it can get from the Council.

Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui and Special Envoy
Djinnit for their leadership, dedication and outstanding
briefings on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region.

The role that MONUSCO has played in Ebola
response efforts, which include operations to address
the persistent threat of armed groups and to protect
humanitarian spaces, is commendable.
The continued activities of negative forces operating
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
remains a matter of concern. We note the outcome of
the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, held in Kampala a few days ago,
which, among other things, stressed the need for a new
approach that goes beyond existing measures to ensure
greater regional cooperation in fully neutralizing those
elements without delay.
Five years after the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, the Great Lakes region
continues to face enormous challenges. That there
is need to do more to build trust among countries of
the region is very clear. We hope greater efforts will
be made in that regard, without which no meaningful
progress can be made in realizing the objectives set out
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The Security Council should support and encourage the
countries of the region to build trust.
As we discussed last week, the Ebola situation is
quite worrisome. We appreciate the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all other
international partners that are making every possible
effort to address and contain the spread of the disease.
The World Health Organization has already alerted
us about the possible risk of the virus spreading to
other parts of the country and the wider region, with
enormous implications for regional peace and stability.
That is why there is a need for greater mobilization of

First and foremost, we would like to express our
concern for, and encouragement to, our sisterly country
the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the
most recent Ebola outbreak.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea attaches the
utmost importance to the events unfolding in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given our strong
bonds of sisterhood and friendship and the fact that we
are members of the same subregional institutions, we
view its problems as though they were our own. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has made efforts
to become stable and has embarked upon a process
of reconstruction. We commend those efforts. We
understand that the country is at a key juncture in its
history, and we are hopeful about the situation.
Positive developments ahead of the upcoming trio
of presidential, legislative and provincial elections on
23 December are key to future lasting stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, it is
worth noting that considerable progress has been made
in the electoral process with regard to preparations, as
stipulated by the electoral calendar, the publication of
the electoral roll in line with legislation, the easing of
political tensions and dialogue among all parties on
the use of voting machines, among other things. It is
for those reasons that we encourage the Government
and the Independent National Electoral Commission,
political parties, civil society and all the national
stakeholders concerned to continue strengthening the
process so as to ensure that all citizens can exercise
their right to vote in the best conditions, while raising
people’s awareness about how to exercise that right.
We encourage all Congolese actors to create
the conditions necessary for the holding of peaceful
elections and do everything possible to ensure that the
ballot on 23 December is credible, transparent, inclusive

18-3162015/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and held in a calm environment. Full compliance with
the Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016
is the best guarantee for the holding of satisfactory
elections and for a subsequent peaceful transfer of
power. Those are key aspects in ensuring the legitimacy
of elected authorities and, in particular, the stability of
the country and the region. Easing political tensions,
implementing the recommendations of the International
Organization of la Francophonie and ensuring dialogue
among all parties on the use of voting machines are also
key factors. In that regard, we welcome as a positive
step the meeting of the various political parties that
took place on 29 September.
One of the lessons learned from the most recent visit
by the Security Council to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is that for upcoming elections to be a
resounding success and viewed as a step forward for the
Congolese people, all possible post-election scenarios
must be analysed with a view to taking measures that
guarantee the building and strengthening of lasting
peace in the country.
We welcome the public statement on the state of the
nation made by President Joseph Kabila Kabange on
19 July before a joint session of the National Assembly
and the Senate. The President reiterated his intention to
respect the country’s Constitution and underscored that
his Government remained firmly committed to fully
shouldering its responsibility to fund the presidential,
legislative and provincial elections. He also stressed that
he did not intend to stand as a candidate in the presidential
elections. In a legitimate exercise of sovereignty and
independence, the President’s announcement illustrates
his determination and commitment to the country. The
international community must continue to support the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in its electoral process, while respecting
the principle of non-interference in its internal
affairs, as well as its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
With regard to the security situation, challenges
remain in the east of the country, as demonstrated by
violence between the Allied Democratic Forces and
the Forces armées de la République Démocratique
du Congo, in particular around Beni. We therefore
encourage the Government to continue taking measures
to address the security situation and the activities of
armed groups in various provinces and protect civilians,
with the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
16/28

11/10/2018

the Congo (MONUSCO). We also urge all the parties
concerned to act responsibly so as to promote social
cohesion, in particular during the electoral period, as
well as a cessation of hostilities by the armed groups.
We also encourage the Congolese authorities to remain
committed to ensuring that those responsible for crimes
and gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law are brought to justice.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea condemns
the pillaging and exploitation in conflict zones and
the transfer of raw materials to other regions, which
serve to underscore the double standards observed
during conflicts and, at times, explain the reasons for
them. Without a definitive solution to the problem, the
possibilities for successfully resolving the issue of peace
and security in the region will remain distant. The illegal
exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo produces considerable economic
benefits that do not go to benefit the Congolese people,
but other actors instead. It is therefore important to take
steps to put an end to that situation and, if necessary,
impose sanctions on those who do not comply with
international standards in that regard.
Equatorial Guinea believes that the assistance
provided by various international organizations,
including the United Nations, in close collaboration
with the European Union, the African Union, countries
of the region, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States, is essential in the quest for a lasting
solution to the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. To that end, Equatorial Guinea
would like to echo the call made by the African Union
Peace and Security Council to establish a coordination
mechanism that includes all of the actors I mentioned,
with a view to ensuring effective and consistent support
for the country. Equatorial Guinea also calls for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis
Ababa. We urge its signatories and guarantors to take
the necessary steps and redouble efforts to ensure its
full and effective implementation. It is therefore crucial
to neutralize the armed groups operating in the east of
the country.
The recent and well-deserved recognition of
the excellent work of Dr. Denis Mukwege and his
colleagues, at both the Panzi Hospital and Foundation,
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

as well as the resilience of the victims of sexual violence
in conflict situations in the Congo, is an example of
the commitment and personal investment of Congolese
brothers and sisters in the development of their country
and in the well-being of its people. It is that spirit of
triumph and solidarity that we need on the continent,
and it must be encouraged.
Let me therefore conclude by inviting all the parties
involved in the process to continue along the path of
internal inclusive dialogue and avoid any violent acts
that could lead to a disruption of the process. We
also take this opportunity to call on the international
community to fully support the Government,
MONUSCO, the Independent National Electoral
Commission and other parties directly concerned in the
process to foster confidence-building measures so as to
ensure an environment that is conducive to the holding
of peaceful elections, commitment to a road map and
the peaceful transfer of power in an environment of
peace and national harmony.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for their
valuable briefings.
With regard to the visit by the members of the
Security Council to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which took place from 5 to 7 October, we
would like to thank the Congolese Government for
having facilitated the organization of the delegation’s
visit from our arrival in the capital, Kinshasa, until
our departure. We also thank Ms. Zerrougui and all
MONUSCO staff, as well as the Security Council
secretariat. Of course, we also thank the delegations
of Bolivia, France and Equatorial Guinea for their
outstanding arrangements and efforts to make the visit
a success, with a positive effect on our discussion of
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would like to address three aspects in my statement.
First, on the political front, our discussion today
coincides with the beginning of the countdown to the
most important event for the Congolese people, namely,
the presidential and legislative elections at the national
and provincial levels to be held in approximately two

S/PV. 8370

months’ time. During our visit, we took note of the
determination and commitment of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
electoral timetable, as well as to holding the elections
on 23 December, which is the date specified in the
electoral calendar. We hope that the election process
will put an end to the political tensions the country has
been experiencing, and that the elections will be free,
transparent, inclusive of all segments of the Congolese
people and credible, as well as in line with the Congolese
Constitution and legislation. Confidence-building
measures must be ensured with the participation of all
Congolese political parties in the elections, as stipulated
in the political agreement of 31 December 2016.
We also welcome the efforts being made by the
Congolese Government and the Independent National
Electoral Commission to ensure the achievement of
key milestones in the electoral process, including the
publication of the final list of presidential and legislative
candidates at the national and provincial levels.
We underscore the importance of reaching
consensus on the outstanding contentious issues,
such as on the use of electronic voting machines,
the electoral roll and the financing of the electoral
process — which the Government has committed to
covering it in its entirety — as well as of MONUSCO’s
provision of technical and logistical support in the runup to the elections.
Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, the
ongoing humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is very worrisome. As set out
in the Secretary-General’s latest report, published
on 1 October (S/2018/882), the statistics pertaining
to refugees, displaced persons and people in need
of urgent humanitarian assistance are a source of
concern. That is all the more so following the Ministry
of Health’s declaration on 1 August that an Ebola
outbreak had begun, which to date has killed more
than 120 people. The Congolese Government and the
international community must cooperate in order to
meet humanitarian needs and alleviate the suffering of
the people. In that regard, we commend MONUSCO
and the World Health Organization for their efforts and
prompt response to counter the disease.
Thirdly, on the security situation, the ongoing
violence and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular in the eastern part of the
country, continue to escalate militarily, to varying levels

18-3162017/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/10/2018

of intensity, in various areas, which is also a source of
concern. Military attacks directly jeopardize unarmed
civilian lives and exhaust the natural and human
resources of the country. In that respect, we commend
the enormous efforts by MONUSCO and its personnel
to combat military attacks and protect civilians. We call
on all the parties responsible for the military clashes to
halt them in order to save unarmed civilian lives and
establish the desired security and stability.

thing away from the Council’s visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is that there is still much work
to be done. For elections to be credible, there needs to
be an environment conducive to holding free and fair
elections. But there remains distrust among opposition
figures, civil society and the Government, and many
Congolese clearly feel that the conditions for credible
elections do not currently exist. There remain a number
of unresolved issues.

In conclusion, we underline our full support for
the efforts made by Special Envoy Djinnit and for the
initiatives of the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in following
up on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. The aim is to address the
security, political and humanitarian challenges at the
national and regional levels and to end the conflicts and
instability that have existed for so long. We hope that
the African Union will be able to achieve its goal of
putting an end to all conflicts by 2020, in accordance
with the Framework Agreement.

First, with regard to the electronic voting machines,
Special Representative Zerrougui mentioned the
Westminster Foundation for Democracy study into
the machines and the recommendations it put forward.
We would urge the Independent National Electoral
Commission to implement those recommendations
on how to improve the machines and encourage it to
undertake outreach with the opposition and civil society
on how the machines work and how the Commission
is going about implementing the recommendations.
We would also encourage the opposition to engage
constructively with the Electoral Commission
when it comes to making the best of the electronic
voting machines.

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui for both her briefing and the
excellent assistance and advice she gave the Security
Council during our visit last week. I would also like
to thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his briefing and for
the work he has been doing in the region to support the
implementation of the 31 December agreement.

Secondly, there are questions around voter
registration. We urge the Independent National Electoral
Commission to implement the recommendations of the
International Organization of la Francophonie.

There are only 73 days left before the elections in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, elections that
will be crucial for both the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the prospects for peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region. If successful, as the
Ambassador from France has said, it will prove to be
a historic turning point: the first peaceful democratic
transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s history. It will serve as a foundation on which
to build peace, stability and prosperity.
I believe it is important that we, as the Council,
recognize the progress that has been made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the
publication of the list of candidates for presidential,
provincial and parliamentary elections and the fact that
all parties so far have stuck to the electoral timetable
that has been set out. But if I personally took one
18/28

Thirdly, as the Ambassador of Kuwait highlighted,
the 31 December agreement contained a number of
confidence-building measures, especially with regard to
the freedom of assembly and expression. We very much
welcome President Kabila Kabange’s commitment to
the Council that his Government would allow peaceful
rallies to take place in the run-up to the election.
Fourthly, we believe that independent election
observation would help build trust and confidence
within the Democratic Republic fo the Congo. We
welcome President Kabila Kabange’s commitment to
facilitate observers from the region.
Fifthly, and finally, I do not think that anyone
underestimates the logistical challenges of organizing
three sets of elections on the same day. The United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has
offered its support to the Government, and we very
much hope that the Government will take MONUSCO
up on that offer.
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

MONUSCO continues to play a vital role in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, both in supporting
elections and in protecting civilians. The United
Kingdom is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in North Kivu, South Kivu, Kasai
and Tanganyika and the impact that that has on the
civilian population. That is a very worrying trend, and
we support Secretary-General’s call for the authorities,
with the support of MONUSCO, to take the necessary
steps to protect civilians. We are also concerned about
the increase in reported human rights abuses and
violations from July to August, as compared to the
same period last year. As the Ambassador of Sweden
said, it is particularly concerning that 59 per cent of the
violations across the country were perpetrated by State
agents. We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to spare no effort in bringing
those responsible for such abuses and violations
to account.
We remain very concerned about the Ebola outbreak
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the leadership of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in cooperation
with the World Health Organization and MONUSCO,
in responding swiftly to the Ebola outbreak. We remain
ready to provide further support.
In conclusion. I would like to reiterate the
importance of the next 73 days. We have come a
long way, but much remains to be done. The Council,
together with the region, must remain engaged and
supportive to ensure that credible, transparent elections
lead to a peaceful transfer of power.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for her excellent briefing. We also thank Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, for his comprehensive briefing.
I should also like to join others in commending the
representatives of France, Bolivia, Equatorial Guinea
and the Secretariat for the impeccable organization of
the latest visit by the Security Council to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
As the holding of presidential and national and
provincial legislation elections in the Democratic
Republic of Congo is two months away, my delegation

S/PV. 8370

welcomes the progress made by the National Independent
Electoral Commission in the implementation of the
electoral calendar. Côte d’Ivoire once again urges all
Congolese political stakeholders, in particular the
candidates to the various 23 December elections, to
work towards creating an environment conducive to
the holding of free, credible and peaceful elections
in accordance with the recommendations of the joint
communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the United Nations Security Council
(SC/13430) issued following their twelfth annual joint
consultative meeting, held in New York on 19 July. My
delegation also notes the commitment of the Congolese
authorities to hold transparent elections within the
necessary time frame and to ensure their financing.
Nevertheless, my delegation believes that despite the
progress made in implementing the electoral calendar,
the lack of consensus on the use of voting machines
and the security situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remain matters of
concern. Concerning the issue of voting machines, Côte
d’Ivoire regrets the persistent divergent views among
Congolese actors. My delegation therefore encourages
the main political actors to engage in constructive
dialogue without delay so as to reach consensus on
that issue. With regard to the security situation, its
deterioration, which is linked to the activities of armed
groups in the provinces of Ituri, North Kivu, South
Kivu, Tanganyika and Haut-Uélé, and the consequent
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in those
regions are factors likely to destroy any hope of restoring
lasting peace, which is a prerequisite for development.
My delegation therefore urges MONUSCO to spare
no effort to ensure the protection of civilians and
strengthen its joint operations with the Congolese
armed forces in order to respond to the threats posed by
those armed groups.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the entire MONUSCO staff, as well as the relevant
agencies of the United Nations system, regional and
international organizations and all partners supporting
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation
shares the hope that the visit by the Security Council
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
5 to 7 October will make a significant contribution to
resolving remaining differences among stakeholders
with regard to the holding of free, credible and peaceful
elections on 23 December.

18-3162019/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With regard to the Great Lakes region, my
delegation welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa. Despite the
progress made, the prospects for achieving lasting
peace and security in the Great Lakes region continue
to face major political and humanitarian challenges
within a complex security environment. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire appreciates the work of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern
African Development Community, the East African
Community and the Economic Community of Central
African States, in synergy with the African Union and
the United Nations, with a view to providing appropriate
responses to the challenges I mentioned. My country
encourages the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to pursue his efforts to implement the Addis Ababa
Framework Agreement and supports addressing the
priorities identified together with the leaders of the
signatory countries and the Secretary-General, with a
view towards implementing paragraph 24 of resolution
2389 (2017).
The Addis Ababa Framework Agreement outlines
the key national, regional and international measures
required to end the cycles of persistent violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
The countries of the Great Lakes region, regional
organizations and the international community continue
to dispose of a fitting cooperative framework with
which they can concertedly tackle the structural causes
of instability in the region. Côte d’Ivoire therefore
calls on the United Nations and the entire international
community to increase their support for the effective
implementation of the Framework Agreement, which is
necessary to bring about peace and stability in that part
of the African continent.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin
by extending my thanks to our briefers, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Said Djinnit, for their comprehensive briefings. Allow
me also to thank the Congolese authorities for their
hospitality during our visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I would like to thank representatives of
the Secretariat, especially the Security Council Affairs
Division and the Department of Safety and Security,
for the excellent arrangements made for the Security
Council visit. We also express our gratitude to our
20/28

11/10/2018

colleagues from France, Bolivia and Equatorial Guinea
for the fruitful cooperation and our discussions.
The visit was very timely and extremely valuable.
The experience gained thanks to the trip to Kinshasa
leaves no doubt that the Congolese people want free and
fair elections, and they deserve it. Poland reiterates its
call on the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to organize a truly inclusive and transparent
electoral process. The upcoming presidential, national
and provincial legislative elections mark a historic
opportunity to initiate a period of peaceful transition
and constitute a move to another stage of needed
reforms. Building trust among all political and social
actors remains a precondition for the establishment
of an environment conducive to credible elections. In
that regard, it is important to ensure a comprehensive
political consensus on outstanding issues, mainly the
use of voting machines and the voter register. We
encourage the Government to pursue dialogue, fully
implement the confidence-building measures contained
in the Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016
and ensure a level playing field for all the parties.
Needless to say, respect for fundamental human rights,
including freedom of expression and freedom of
peaceful assembly, is crucial for a democratic transition
of power and the stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
At the same time, Poland encourages all political
actors, as well as the representatives of civil society,
to take ownership of the political process and truly
become involved in electoral preparations. In that
regard, Poland would also like to highlight the role
of women, who represent an extraordinary human
capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Fair
and safe participation in the ongoing political process
should be assured for them. They deserve a chance to
get more involved politically in the electoral process.
I was impressed by their enthusiasm and commitment
in that regard. I also want to take this opportunity to
underline the importance and visibility of the initiative
of the Congolese people. They can be especially proud
that one of their citizens, Dr. Denis Mukwege, shared
this year’s Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to put an
end to the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
and armed conflict.
Bearing in mind the security situation as well
as the increase in the activities of armed groups in
various provinces, we value the engagement of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in providing protection to civilians on the ground and
its efforts to mitigate the risks linked to the electoral
process. Poland would like to express its appreciation
of and full support for the joint work of Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and Special Envoy Said
Djinnit, as well as the men and women of MONUSCO.
Having noted the Government’s decision to fully fund
the electoral process, we encourage the authorities to
take advantage of MONUSCO’s readiness to provide
technical and logistical support to the Independent
National Electoral Commission.
The Great Lakes region continue to face persistent
and significant political and security challenges. The
root causes of instability continue to plague the region.
While we appreciate the efforts that have been made
so far, Poland encourages all the signatories to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region to
demonstrate greater political will and accelerate the
implementation of that commitment. The political
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has a significant impact on the stability of Central
and sub-Saharan Africa. Strong cooperation between
the regional and international organizations involved
in support of the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be maintained as a
matter of priority. In conclusion, let me stress that the
forthcoming elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should represent a crucial step on the path
to lasting security and a better future for the Congolese
people and the entire Central African region.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui
and Special Envoy Djnnit for their briefings.
Members of the Council recently visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, enabling us to gain
a first-hand and more in-depth understanding of the
situation in the country. Through that visit, we have
come to realize that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is firmly determined to take
ownership of the process for maintaining international
peace and stability and has achieved good progress
in election preparations, the political process and the
governance of the Kasai region. It is the Government
and the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who best understand the situation they face and the steps
they want to take. The Council and the international
community should fully respect and acknowledge the

S/PV. 8370

desires and efforts of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and further encourage them
to realize their potential and take on the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
stability. Meanwhile, the international community
should continue to provide the necessary assistance,
based on the country’s needs.
First, we must push for further dialogue and
communication among all parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the effective implementation
of the political agreements reached on 31 December
2016 and the smooth holding of elections. Secondly,
we must bring the role of the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other regional and subregional organizations fully
into play, enhance regional coordination, effectively
implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and focus on addressing the problem of
armed groups in order to promote regional peace and
stability. Thirdly, we must improve the efficiency of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and enhance consultations with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to improve
MONUSCO’s fulfilment of its mandate. Fourthly, we
must further expand the humanitarian relief efforts
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and help
control Ebola.
As always, China is firmly committed to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
the United Nations peacekeeping efforts there. We have
provided the country with humanitarian assistance such
as medical supplies and food and are actively engaged
in its economic and social development. China is ready
to join hands with the international community and to
continue to play a constructive role in supporting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in taking ownership
of the responsibility for its national peace, stability
and development.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
for their comprehensive briefings on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the process
of implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We also very grateful to all of the staff

18-3162021/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Secretariat and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as well as the other United
Nations agencies that helped us to carry out a very
successful and important visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
During our time in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, all the members of the Council expressed
the hope that the timely holding of elections on
23 December will help to reduce the country’s political
tensions and stabilize the situation there. As we all had
the opportunity to see for ourselves, the technical and
legislative preparations for the December elections
are proceeding in accordance with the electoral
calendar established by the Independent National
Electoral Commission. It is important to note that the
electoral rolls were audited under the auspices of the
International Organization of la Francophonie and a
final version from which repetitions and inaccuracies
had been removed was published in September.
We welcome the fact that half of the country’s
political parties have already signed on to the electoral
code of conduct. The election has also been advanced by
the publication of the final list of registered candidates.
We urge the opposition forces to abandon their negative
agendas, take an active part in the election campaign
and not expect the Security Council to evaluate the
decisions of the Congolese courts. At this important
stage it would be unacceptable and irresponsible,
in terms of the future of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to try to sway the situation. That also
particularly applies to the issue of bringing in electronic
machines for printing ballots, which is well under way,
as we were able to see for ourselves.
At the same time, however, we call on the
leadership of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
make additional efforts to build confidence among the
main political forces in the country. As we understand
it, the logistical preparations for the elections are
already being carried out by the Independent National
Electoral Commission. We agree that in order to avoid
disruptions during the electoral process, it will be
essential to ensure its sustainable financing. We respect
the decision of the Congolese Government to rely
largely on its own resources in that regard, while at the
same time we want to draw attention to the logistical
capacities of MONUSCO, which is ready to contribute
to the efforts of the authorities at any time. However,
MONUSCO’s role in organizing and holding the
22/28

11/10/2018

elections should not go beyond the mandate outlined
in resolution 2409 (2018). The protection of civilians
in the context of the elections must be carried out with
full respect for the basic principles of peacekeeping and
without interfering in Kinshasa’s internal affairs.
The elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are not a panacea in themselves. We must focus
on the social and economic agenda and on resolving the
underlying reasons for the crisis, while not forgetting
how important it is to continue countering the illegal
armed groups in the eastern areas of the country,
which are still a threat to the civilian population and
one that is capable of destabilizing the Great Lakes
region. We are certain that this last issue should be
considered the chief indicator of the country’s stability
and that decisions on the prospects and time frame
for MONUSCO’s withdrawal should depend on how it
develops, since the Mission’s main function is rectifying
the security situation.
It is impossible to stabilize the situation in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo by
military means alone. The implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
will have to continue in the eastern and Great Lakes
regions, as will the provision of assistance to State
authorities and the restoration of social institutions in
the parts of the country that have been liberated from
the rebels. We should not fail to note the significant
progress that has been made in implementing the
Framework’s provisions. We welcome the launch of
the mechanism for repatriating former combatants,
which is unquestionably bringing positive momentum
to relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. We sincerely hope that
they will eventually be able to resolve that longstanding problem. It is encouraging that the problem of
relocating the members of the South Sudan opposition
who arrived in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in August 2016 is close to being resolved. We also want
to note Mr. Djinnit’s role in supporting the effort to
attract private investors in order to boost economic
cooperation among the countries of the region and
strengthen peace and confidence there.
We agree with the view of the regional Powers that
resolving the problems of illegal armed groups in the
Great Lakes region could be helped by improving the
effectiveness of MONUSCO’s Intervention Brigade. In
that regard, we believe it makes sense to focus their
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

main activity on the most problematic areas of the
country. In conclusion, I would like to urge that we not
relax our attention to ensuring peacekeepers’ security
and safety.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
and Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, for their briefings,
and commend both of them for their efforts. With
regard to Ms. Zerrougui’s briefing, we want to highlight
the ongoing progress and commitment demonstrated
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
through its publication of the voting rolls and the lists
of candidates for the presidential, national legislative
and provincial elections.
We also welcome the efforts to hold transparent,
credible, inclusive and timely elections conducive to
a peaceful transfer of Government. We commend the
Government and the Independent National Electoral
Commission for taking the decision to have the country
finance its elections, which we see as evidence that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is on the right
path and has the capacity to meet this major challenge.
The international community must continue working
with the country in that regard in order to strengthen
the Government’s capacity to deal with the various
challenges surrounding the coordination and logistics
for the upcoming elections while respecting its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We reiterate that the parties must implement
the confidence-building measures enshrined in the
agreement of 31 December 2016, and we once again call
for the agreement’s full and complete implementation.
The Government and the opposition must work together
in order to make progress on this. In that regard, we
commend regional organizations and the Special
Envoy for their collaborative assistance in preparing
for the elections, and we encourage them to continue
their cooperation with the Independent National
Electoral Commission.
We condemn the violence perpetrated by the
armed groups in various parts of the country that are
chiefly responsible for the deteriorating humanitarian

S/PV. 8370

situation. We encourage the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to take new measures to put an end to
the threat posed by the armed groups — complying,
as appropriate, with both national and international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law — and with the support
of MONUSCO, within the framework of its mandate.
In that regard, we welcome MONUSCO’s efforts and
encourage it to continue its work in coordination
with the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Lastly, we want to express our solidarity with the
victims of the Ebola outbreak, and we commend the
Congolese authorities, the international community,
MONUSCO and the World Health Organization for
their swift response to that humanitarian health crisis.
With regard to Mr. Djinnit’s briefing, Bolivia
supports the political initiatives and recommendations
in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region (S/2018/886). We welcome
the cooperation between Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda in repatriating
former combatants and their dependents, as well
as the cooperation between the Congolese forces
and MONUSCO.
We also commend the work of the Special Envoy
and his Office and their efforts to reduce the illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources, which
we consider one of the root causes of the conflicts in
the region and which is why it will be crucial for the
Congolese Administration to bring about structural
change that can stabilize and strengthen the rule of
law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. If I may
comment on that, the problem is not just the illegal
exploitation or trafficking of natural resources, but
also the immoral distribution of the profits they bring.
As Mr. Djinnit put it so eloquently, it is essentially
a country’s own citizens — in this case those of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — who should be
benefiting from those profits.
We also commend the Special Envoy’s efforts
regarding cooperation on the judicial, economic and
humanitarian fronts and concerning gender equality
and the empowerment of women. We especially
applaud his role in building trust and in using his
good offices in the region, including his support to

18-3162023/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/10/2018

the inter-Burundian dialogue and his chairing of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security of
the Southern African Development Community. We
also commend his role in the ongoing dialogue with the
African Union, among other measures in his purview.

Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region. On behalf of my delegation, I would
like not only to congratulate them on their excellent
briefings but also to say how much the Democratic
Republic of the Congo appreciates their tireless efforts
to carry out their mandates as well as possible.

Lastly, we call on the signatories to the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework to focus their
efforts and political will on making progress in its
implementation, by reinforcing confidence-building
measures through strategic partnerships and
strengthening dialogue in close collaboration with
regional and subregional partners.

While we appreciate the thoroughness of the
Secretary-General’s report, I would still like to address
some concerns raised in the report and in some Council
members’ statements regarding the areas of the electoral
process; the political agreement of 31 December 2016
and measures for reducing tensions; MONUSCO and
the Intervention Brigade in the electoral context; the
security and humanitarian situation; and, lastly, peace,
cooperation and stability in the Great Lakes region.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the Plurinational State of Bolivia on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council, and
to express our satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. President,
presiding over the Council for the month of October.
I would also like to recognize your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, and to thank her for her masterly leadership
of the Council last month. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment to my country and for his reports on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2018/882 and S/2018/886), which the Council has
before it today.
First of all, I would like to convey to the Council
the apologies of Mr. Ignace Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta,
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to the United Nations, who wanted to
participate in this morning’s meeting in person but
was unfortunately prevented from doing so by some
urgent business that came up during the Security
Council delegation’s recent visit to our country, which
he accompanied.
The Security Council has just heard the briefing
by Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/882), and Mr. Said Djinnit,
24/28

As we heard in many statements today, the
electoral process has made a great deal of progress
and is proceeding properly in accordance with the
electoral calendar published by the Independent
National Electoral Commission on 5 November 2017.
As President Joseph Kabila Kabange of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has affirmed, our course towards
elections on 23 December is irreversible. Following
the publication on 19 September of the final list of
candidates, and with less than 75 days to go before the
elections are held, the Independent National Electoral
Commission has been diligently pursuing a campaign
to raise voters’ awareness about the voting machines
and how to use them, as well as recruiting polling
officers and publishing the provisional voting rolls.
In order to enable voters from all social sectors
to familiarize themselves with the machines that will
be used for voting on election day on 23 December,
the Electoral Commission has set them up in public
places such as schools, ports, airports and villages, and
in its local branches. The Commission is taking very
seriously the concerns, fears and difficulties about the
electoral process that have been raised by politicians
and partners, particularly those related to the use of the
voting machines, the transparency and credibility of
the elections, logistics and inclusiveness.
Regarding the voting machine problem, we dare
to hope that Council members’ recent discussions in
Kinshasa with the President of the Independent National
Electoral Commission gave them a better understanding
of this tool, which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will be using for the first time. However, I want
to point out that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

had already provided the Council with explanations of
its reasons for advocating the use of this technology,
which are about saving money and time. Regardless
of that, it has been certified that the machine merely
prints out the ballot papers, and besides that, it prints
only the choice made by the voter and nothing else.
That was confirmed by the electoral assessment
mission conducted in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo between 5 and 7 September by the Electoral
Commissions Forum of the countries of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), which
noted that
“the voting machine helps to overcome the real
challenges the country faces in terms of the
logistical organization of the elections, including
cost and timeliness”.
The Forum also commended the Electoral Commission
and encouraged it to continue its efforts to explain the
voting machines and raise awareness about them among
the population and the political stakeholders in order to
prevent any false information in that regard. Moreover,
for greater transparency, the machines were analysed and
approved by experts from the British organization that
was mentioned just now, the Westminster Foundation
for Democracy, which made some recommendations
for measures for practical support. In the same effort
to ensure transparency, the Electoral Commission
is now working in collaboration with more than 130
international experts from MONUSCO as advisers.
With regard to the concerns about the elections’
transparency and credibility, it should be pointed out
that the International Organization of la Francophonie
verified the electoral rolls between 6 and 26 May in
Kinshasa, and the audit concluded that the electoral roll
was by and large entirely inclusive, exhaustive, reliable
and up-to-date. As is clearly noted in paragraph 6 of
the report under consideration (S/2018/882), with the
cleanup of the voter register, the Electoral Commission
has removed from the rolls as many as 5,381,763 voters,
in addition to 472,000 minors who will not be of voting
age by the time of the elections on 23 December. From
an initial figure of 46,057,894, therefore, the provisional
electoral register now contains 40,287,385 voters.
With regard to logistics, we should emphasize
that elections are matters of State sovereignty, and in
that regard, the Congolese Government confirms its
commitment to financing those elections with its own
funds, taking into account the disbursement plan agreed

S/PV. 8370

with the Electoral Commission and specific needs. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has therefore opted not to request any financial and
logistical support from partners. While we remain open
on the issue, we would request support from partners
only if absolutely necessary.
Based on all of this, we would like to reiterate the
determination of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to hold, free, fair and credible elections in a peaceful
atmosphere, using voting machines for simple, rapid
and reliable voting.
In the view of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, some concerns that have been raised should
cease to be of concern, as they no longer have any
substance. That is especially the case with regard to
worries about the elections’ inclusiveness in the wake of
announcements of the ineligibility of some candidates
and about our measures for reducing tensions. As
we have informed the Council more than once, the
Congolese Government has established measures for
building confidence and easing political tensions,
as outlined in the 31 December 2016 agreement. In
accordance with our laws, several prisoners, described
as political prisoners, some of whom had been arrested
for participating in insurrectionist movements, have
been released by the justice system. A number of
political actors who wished to do so have been able to
return to the country, while others have freely chosen
to remain abroad. Several television channels and radio
stations that are in legal proceedings, some of which
belong to the opposition, have reopened. In cases of
individuals who have committed common law offences,
they have been convicted in accordance with the law,
following fair trials. That is the case with the so-called
emblematic prisoners.
In paragraph 28 of resolution 2277 (2016), the
Security Council rightly recalled that
“future reconfigurations of MONUSCO and its
mandate should be determined in consultation with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the basis of the evolution of the situation
on the ground”.
With that in mind, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
considers that MONUSCO’s specific role in support
of security in the ongoing electoral process should be
provided at the formal request of the Government and
based on the priorities assigned to it in that regard. For
its part, the Government has decided to establish a team

18-3162025/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of experts to develop an election security map. It also
decided on security for the presidential candidates.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo also
supports the principle of increasing the operational
capacity of the Intervention Brigade. It continues
to believe that the drawdown of MONUSCO troops
should begin with the troops deemed non-essential and
that the Intervention Brigade contingent should be the
last to leave Congolese territory. The Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo would like to
reaffirm the position of SADC, according to which,
when the forces deployed within MONUSCO are drawn
down, it is important not to affect the capacity of the
Rapid Intervention Brigade.
With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
again expresses its regret to note that the programme
is still not among the strategic priorities of the current
mandate of MONUSCO and, as a result, suffers from a
lack of funding by partners.
Respect for, and the protection of, human rights
and public freedoms are also a clear concern of the
Government during the electoral period. The media
space is open to all. Subject to respect for the laws and
regulations of the country, public demonstrations have
resumed throughout the territory. In that context, we
must underline the successful holding of a meeting of
the political opposition on Boulevard Triomphal in the
municipality of Kasa-Vubu on Saturday, 29 September,
during which no major incident was recorded. Congolese
National Police officers supervised the demonstration
with professionalism. In the interest of transparency, the
Government, with the participation of civil society and
the National Human Rights Commission, established
two joint commissions of inquiry to identify human
rights violations and breaches committed in the context
of public demonstrations.
Regarding the case of the killing of two United
Nations experts, the Government would like to note
that, with the arrest in December 2017 of the alleged
sponsor, Constantin Bulabula, it expects to be
provided with additional elements by the team of the
Special Prosecutor, Robert Petit, and the international
commission of inquiry, in order to enable the Congolese
judiciary to establish responsibility and punish
the perpetrators.
The security situation is generally calm throughout
the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 145 territories
26/28

11/10/2018

are under Government control, despite pockets of
insecurity in some areas of North Kivu and South Kivu.
The Forces armées de la République Démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) continue their operations against
all entrenched groups until their eradication, while,
for its part, the National Police undertakes actions to
fight against all forms of crime in the large cities. For
now, the FARDC continues its offensive to neutralize
the sporadic and asymmetrical terrorist attacks of the
Allied Democratic Forces, as well as those of local
armed groups known as the Mayi-Mayi. We would like
to point out that the FARDC alone is fighting against all
the armed groups without the support of MONUSCO.
Regarding stability in the Great Lakes region, in
my delegation’s view, in order for it to be sustainable,
such stability must be dependent on respect for the
commitments made under the various agreements to
restore peace and security in that region, in particular,
first, the 2006 Pact on Security, Stability and
Development of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and its various protocols;
secondly, the 2013 Addis Ababa Framework agreement;
and, thirdly, the decisions of the eighth meeting of Heads
of State and Government of the signatory countries
of the Framework agreement, held in Brazzaville on
19 October 2017. For its part, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has always done its utmost to implement
all the commitments that it made under those various
agreements, including the recent decisions taken by
the Heads of State of the region at the eighth highlevel meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
of the Framework agreement, which ordered the
simultaneous and unconditional repatriation of fighters
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
and former combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), stationed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, respectively. In addition,
my country calls for due diligence in upholding
their commitments on the part of the other States in the
region, in particular certain neighbouring countries,
with the support of the partners and guarantors of the
Addis Ababa Framework agreement.
With regard to the specific situation of former M-23
combatants, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
regrets that, in Ngoma, Rwanda, on 13 September, the
leadership of the former M-23 combatants, in particular
Pastor Runiga, openly and violently attacked those to
be repatriated to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in front of representatives of the guarantors, namely,
18-31620

11/10/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

SADC, the United Nations and the ICGLR, including
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, thereby obstructing the
implementation of the decisions of the Heads of State
taken on 19 October 2017.
The Government remains mobilized on the issue
of sexual violence and the recruitment of children.
During the first half of this year, following the joint
communiqué of 30 March 2013 signed between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations, the Government implemented a certain number
of measures to prevent and combat sexual violence. Such
measures related to training recruitment officers of the
FARDC, the Congolese National Police and military
judges on proficiency in the operational standards with
regard to age assessment and a plan of action to combat
sexual violence of the FARDC, as well as raising
awareness among the population. In implementation
of the 2014 FARDC plan of action to combat sexual
violence, the FARDC commission organized four
workshops in several cities in the country, including
Goma, Kananga, Tshikapa and Lubumbashi, on the
operational standards for evaluating age and combating
sexual violence. Those training sessions were geared
towards the recruitment officers of the FARDC and
the Congolese National Police. There were a total of
40 participants at each site. The training courses had a
twofold objective, namely, to avoid the recruitment of
anyone under 18 years of age within the FARDC and to
prevent the commission of any act of sexual violence,
by providing recruitment officers with the capacity to
train recruits and other soldiers. The training courses
took place between February and July. A similar
training course will soon take place in other cities,
including Kinshasa and Kalemie.
It should be noted that the Operational Military
Court is preparing to convene the Walikale trial, which
will involve 380 people who were victims of direct or
indirect rape by the militia leaders Séraphin Nzitonda,
known as Lionceau, and Ntabo Taberi, known as Cheka,
as well as their men. With the support of our partners,
the construction of a courtroom and a fortified detention
facility have already been completed. We are waiting
only for the transfer of the defendants to begin the trial.
It should also be noted that the bill on responsibility
for victims of sexual violence was adopted by the
sociocultural committee of the Senate on 14 June,
on the eve of the closure of the March parliamentary

S/PV. 8370

session, and should be adopted by the plenary at the
current session.
The humanitarian situation in the Kasai provinces
following the disturbances of public order and abuses
perpetrated by the Kamuina Nsapu militia has improved
significantly. There are some repercussions from the
meeting on peace, reconciliation and development, held
by the Government in Kasai in September 2017 and
presided over by the Head of State, Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange. That respite allowed for the reopening of the
borders with Angola for a voluntary and peaceful return
of Congolese nationals who had found refuge in that
neighbouring country. Such improvement is affirmed
by the July report of the United Nations Joint Human
Rights Office in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to the Ebola virus haemorrhagic fever,
it must be said that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has experienced two simultaneous epidemics
of that haemorrhagic fever since April. We note that
thanks to national expertise and with the support of
international partners, represented by the World Health
Organization, the African Union, the United Nations
and non-governmental health organizations, the
Government response made it possible to contain and
control the disease and the humanitarian situation of
affected persons.
To date, the chain of transmission in Mandima has
been completely brought under control in less than four
weeks, with 4,207 people vaccinated in Mabalako. All
the new cases reported since the end of August are the
result of resistance in the Ndindi neighbourhood of
Beni. Despite the persistent elevated risk, the situation
in Butembo is under control. The city of Beni, however,
continues to be the main centre of the epidemic so
far, where the situation remains worrisome due to the
security situation. Due to that security emergency, a
new strategy has been adopted to contain the epidemic
in Beni. Nevertheless, if people fully collaborate
with the response teams, we can project an end to the
epidemic by the end of October.
Still on the Ebola epidemic, we note the holding of
a meeting of East African Sates in Entebbe, Uganda,
from 2 to 4 October, with most participants attending
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
Burundi, South Sudan, Tanzania, Kenya and Rwanda.
The goal of the meeting was to improve cross-border
collaboration in monitoring the virus and in preparing
for, and responding to, emergency situations in East

18-3162027/28

S/PV.8370

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/10/2018

Africa. The discussions focussed mainly on the
measures to be taken in order to avoid the spread of
the Ebola pandemic, which is currently raging in
the provinces of North Kivu and Ituri. Participating
countries worked on developing an action plan to bolster
their cross-border monitoring activities, preparation for
emergencies and a response mechanism for combating
the disease by defining clear roles and responsibilities
for the various participants. In order to keep the
people and partners better informed on Ebola-related
developments, the Ministry of Public Health provides a
daily epidemiological update on the virus.

Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the African Union for their essential
role in maintaining peace in our region. I salute and
pay tribute to the memory of all the Blue Helmets
who have lost their lives so that peace can return to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Finally, I thank
the United Nations, and especially the members of
the Security Council for their ongoing attention to the
situation in my country and for visiting my country in
a show of solidarity at this critical time in its history in
order to experience at first-hand the deep-seated reality
taking place ahead of the 23 December elections.

I would be remiss if I did not thank all who have
committed to be at our side in ensuring lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like to
thank in particular the Southern African Development

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.

28/28

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

18-31620
