A/RES/65/1

United Nations

Distr.: General
19 October 2010

General Assembly
Sixty-fifth session
Agenda items 13 and 115

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 September 2010
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/65/L.1)]

65/1. Keeping the promise: united to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals at its sixty-fifth
session:

Keeping the promise: united to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals
1.
We, Heads of State and Government, gathered at United Nations Headquarters
in New York from 20 to 22 September 2010, welcome the progress made since we
last met here in 2005, while expressing deep concern that it falls far short of what is
needed. We reaffirm our resolve to work together for the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples, recalling the development goals and
commitments emanating from the United Nations Millennium Declaration 1 and the
2005 World Summit Outcome. 2
0F

1F

2.
We reaffirm that we continue to be guided by the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and with full respect for international law and its
principles.
3.
We also reaffirm the importance of freedom, peace and security, respect for all
human rights, including the right to development, the rule of law, gender equality
and an overall commitment to just and democratic societies for development.
4.
We underscore the continued relevance of the outcomes of all major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields and the
commitments contained therein, including the Millennium Development Goals,
which have raised awareness and continue to generate real and important
development gains. Together these outcomes and commitments have played a vital
_______________
1
2

10-51260

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.

*1051260*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/1

role in shaping a broad development vision and constitute the overarching
framework for the development activities of the United Nations. We strongly
reiterate our determination to ensure the timely and full implementation of these
outcomes and commitments.
5.
We recognize that progress, including in poverty eradication, is being made
despite setbacks, including setbacks caused by the financial and economic crisis. In
this context, we recognize the deeply inspiring examples of progress made by
countries in all regions of the world through cooperation, partnerships, actions and
solidarity. We are deeply concerned, however, that the number of people living in
extreme poverty and hunger surpasses one billion and that inequalities between and
within countries remain a significant challenge. We are also deeply concerned about
the alarming global levels of maternal and child mortality. We believe that
eradication of poverty and hunger, as well as combating inequality at all levels, is
essential to create a more prosperous and sustainable future for all.
6.
We reiterate our deep concern at the multiple and interrelated crises, including
the financial and economic crisis, volatile energy and food prices and ongoing
concerns over food security, as well as the increasing challenges posed by climate
change and the loss of biodiversity, which have increased vulnerabilities and
inequalities and have adversely affected development gains, in particular in
developing countries. But this will not deter us in our efforts to make the
Millennium Development Goals a reality for all.
7.
We are determined to collectively advance and strengthen the global
partnership for development, as the centrepiece of our cooperation, in the years
ahead. The global partnership has been reaffirmed in the Millennium Declaration,1
the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for
Development, 3 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 4 the 2005 World Summit
Outcome2 and the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome
document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development
to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus. 5
2F

3F

4F

8.
We are committed to making every effort to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015, including through actions, policies and strategies
defined in the present outcome document in support of developing countries, in
particular those countries that are lagging most behind and those Goals that are most
off track, thus improving the lives of the poorest people.
9.
We are convinced that the Millennium Development Goals can be achieved,
including in the poorest countries, with renewed commitment, effective
implementation and intensified collective action by all Member States and other
relevant stakeholders at both the domestic and international levels, using national
development strategies and appropriate policies and approaches that have proved to
be effective, with strengthened institutions at all levels, increased mobilization of
resources for development, increased effectiveness of development cooperation and
an enhanced global partnership for development.
_______________
3

Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
5
Resolution 63/239, annex.

2

A/RES/65/1

10. We reaffirm that national ownership and leadership are indispensable in the
development process. There is no one size fits all. We reiterate that each country has
primary responsibility for its own economic and social development and that the
role of national policies, domestic resources and development strategies cannot be
overemphasized. At the same time, domestic economies are now interwoven with
the global economic system and, therefore, an effective use of trade and investment
opportunities can help countries to fight poverty. Development efforts at the
national level need to be supported by an enabling national and international
environment that complements national actions and strategies.
11. We acknowledge that good governance and the rule of law at the national and
international levels are essential for sustained, inclusive and equitable economic
growth, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and hunger.
12. We recognize that gender equality, the empowerment of women, women’s full
enjoyment of all human rights and the eradication of poverty are essential to
economic and social development, including the achievement of all the Millennium
Development Goals. We reaffirm the need for the full and effective implementation
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. 6 Achieving gender equality and
empowerment of women is both a key development goal and an important means for
achieving all of the Millennium Development Goals. We welcome the establishment
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), and pledge our full support for its operationalization.
5F

13. We acknowledge that peace and security, development and human rights are
the pillars of the United Nations system and the foundations for collective security
and well-being. We recognize that development, peace and security and human
rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. We reaffirm that our common
fundamental values, including freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect for all
human rights, respect for nature and shared responsibility, are essential for
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
14. We are convinced that the United Nations, on the basis of its universal
membership, legitimacy and unique mandate, plays a vital role in the promotion of
international cooperation for development and in supporting the acceleration of the
implementation of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals. We reaffirm the need for a strong United Nations
to meet the challenges of the changing global environment.
15. We recognize that all the Millennium Development Goals are interconnected
and mutually reinforcing. We therefore underline the need to pursue these Goals
through a holistic and comprehensive approach.
16. We acknowledge the diversity of the world and recognize that all cultures and
civilizations contribute to the enrichment of humankind. We emphasize the
importance of culture for development and its contribution to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals.
17. We call on civil society, including non-governmental organizations, voluntary
associations and foundations, the private sector and other relevant stakeholders at
the local, national, regional and global levels, to enhance their role in national
development efforts as well as their contribution to the achievement of the
_______________
6

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

3

A/RES/65/1

Millennium Development Goals by 2015, and we commit ourselves as national
Governments to the inclusion of these stakeholders.
18. We acknowledge the role of national parliaments in furthering the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
A mixed story: successes, uneven progress, challenges and opportunities
19. We recognize that developing countries have made significant efforts towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals and have had major successes in
realizing some of the targets of the Millennium Development Goals. Successes have
been made in combating extreme poverty, improving school enrolment and child
health, reducing child deaths, expanding access to clean water, improving
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, expanding access to HIV/AIDS
prevention, treatment and care, and controlling malaria, tuberculosis and neglected
tropical diseases.
20. We acknowledge that much more needs to be done in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals as progress has been uneven among regions and
between and within countries. Hunger and malnutrition rose again from 2007
through 2009, partially reversing prior gains. There has been slow progress in
reaching full and productive employment and decent work for all, advancing gender
equality and the empowerment of women, achieving environmental sustainability
and providing basic sanitation, and new HIV infections still outpace the number of
people starting treatment. In particular, we express grave concern over the slow
progress being made in reducing maternal mortality and improving maternal and
reproductive health. Progress on other Millennium Development Goals is fragile and
must be sustained to avoid reversal.
21. We underline the central role of the global partnership for development and the
importance of Goal 8 in achieving the Millennium Development Goals. We
recognize that without substantial international support, several of the Goals are
likely to be missed in many developing countries by 2015.
22. We are deeply concerned about the impact of the financial and economic
crisis, the worst since the Great Depression. It has reversed development gains in
many developing countries and threatens to seriously undermine the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
23. We take note of the lessons learned and the successful policies and approaches
in the implementation and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and
recognize that with increased political commitment these could be replicated and
scaled up for accelerating progress, including by:
(a) Strengthening national ownership and leadership of development
strategies;
(b) Adopting forward-looking, macroeconomic policies that promote
sustainable development and lead to sustained, inclusive and equitable economic
growth, increase productive employment opportunities and promote agricultural and
industrial development;
(c) Promoting national food security strategies that strengthen support for
smallholder farmers and contribute to poverty eradication;
(d) Adopting policies and measures oriented towards benefiting the poor and
addressing social and economic inequalities;

4

A/RES/65/1

(e) Supporting participatory, community-led strategies aligned with national
development priorities and strategies;
(f) Promoting universal access to public and social services and providing
social protection floors;
(g)

Improving capacity to deliver quality services equitably;

(h) Implementing social policies and programmes, including appropriate
conditional cash-transfer programmes, and investing in basic services for health,
education, water and sanitation;
(i) Ensuring the full participation of all segments of society, including the
poor and disadvantaged, in decision-making processes;
(j) Respecting, promoting and protecting all human rights, including the
right to development;
(k) Increasing efforts to reduce inequality and eliminate social exclusion and
discrimination;
(l) Enhancing opportunities for women and girls and advancing the
economic, legal and political empowerment of women;
(m) Investing in the health of women and children to drastically reduce the
number of women and children who die from preventable causes;
(n) Working towards transparent and accountable systems of governance at
the national and international levels;
(o) Working towards greater transparency and accountability in international
development cooperation, in both donor and developing countries, focusing on
adequate and predictable financial resources as well as their improved quality and
targeting;
(p) Promoting South-South and triangular cooperation, which complement
North-South cooperation;
(q)

Promoting effective public-private partnerships;

(r) Expanding access to financial services for the poor, especially poor
women, including through adequately funded microfinance plans, programmes and
initiatives supported by development partners;
(s) Strengthening statistical capacity to produce reliable disaggregated data
for better programmes and policy evaluation and formulation.
24. We recognize that the scaling-up of the successful policies and approaches
outlined above will need to be complemented by a strengthened global partnership
for development, as set out in the action agenda below.
25. We take note of the first formal debate organized by the President of the
General Assembly in which different views on the notion of human security were
presented by Member States, as well as the ongoing efforts to define the notion of
human security, and recognize the need to continue the discussion and to achieve an
agreement on the definition of human security in the General Assembly.
26. We recognize that climate change poses serious risks and challenges to all
countries, especially developing countries. We commit ourselves to addressing

5

A/RES/65/1

climate change in accordance with the principles and provisions of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 7 including the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. We maintain
the Framework Convention as the primary international, intergovernmental forum
for negotiating the global response to climate change. Addressing climate change
will be of key importance in safeguarding and advancing progress towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
6F

27. We recognize that attention must be focused on the particular needs of
developing countries and on the large and increasing economic and social
inequalities. Disparities between developed and developing countries and
inequalities between the rich and the poor, and between rural and urban populations,
inter alia, remain persistent and significant and need to be addressed.
28. We recognize that policies and actions must focus on the poor and those living
in the most vulnerable situations, including persons with disabilities, so that they
may benefit from progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
In this respect, there is a particular need to provide more equitable access to
economic opportunities and social services.
29. We recognize the urgency of paying attention to the many developing
countries with specific needs, and the unique challenges they confront in achieving
the Millennium Development Goals.
30. We acknowledge that the least developed countries face significant constraints
and structural impediments in their development efforts. We express grave concern
that the least developed countries are lagging behind in meeting internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. In that
context, we call for continued implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 8 and look forward to
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, to be held
in Istanbul, Turkey, in 2011, which would further invigorate the international
partnership to address the special needs of these countries.
7F

31. We reiterate our recognition of the special needs of and challenges faced by
the landlocked developing countries, caused by their lack of territorial access to the
sea, aggravated by remoteness from world markets and also the concern that the
economic growth and social well-being of landlocked developing countries remain
very vulnerable to external shocks. We stress the need to overcome these
vulnerabilities and build resilience. We call for the full, timely and effective
implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs
of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit
Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries, 9 as
reaffirmed in the Declaration of the high-level meeting of the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly on the midterm review of the Almaty Programme of Action. 10
8F

9F

32. We recognize the unique and particular vulnerabilities of small island
developing States and reaffirm our commitment to take urgent and concrete action
_______________
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.
9
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
10
See resolution 63/2.
8

6

A/RES/65/1

to address those vulnerabilities through the full and effective implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. 11 We also
recognize that the adverse effects of climate change and sea-level rise present
significant risks to the sustainable development of small island developing States.
We note the uneven progress of small island developing States in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals and express concern that progress in some areas
has been lagging. In this regard, we welcome the five-year high-level review of the
Mauritius Strategy to be conducted on 24 and 25 September 2010 to assess progress
made in addressing the vulnerabilities of small island developing States.
10F

33. We recognize that more attention should be given to Africa, especially those
countries most off track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
Progress has been made in some African countries, but the situation in others
remains a grave concern, not least because the continent is among the hardest hit by
the financial and economic crisis. We note that aid to Africa has increased in recent
years; however, it still lags behind the commitments that have been made. We
therefore strongly call for the delivery of those commitments.
34. We recognize also the specific development challenges of middle-income
countries. These countries face unique challenges in their efforts to achieve their
national development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. We also
reiterate that their efforts in that regard should be based on national development
plans that integrate the Millennium Development Goals and should be adequately
supported by the international community, through various forms, taking into
account the needs and the capacity to mobilize domestic resources of these
countries.
35. We acknowledge that disaster risk reduction and increasing resilience to all
types of natural hazards, including geological and hydro-meteorological hazards, in
developing countries, in line with the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015:
Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, 12 can have
multiplier effects and accelerate achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. Reducing vulnerabilities to these hazards is therefore a high priority for
developing countries. We recognize that small island developing States continue to
grapple with natural disasters, some of increased intensity, including as a result of
the effects of climate change, impeding progress towards sustainable development.
1F

The way forward: an action agenda for achieving the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015
36. We resolve to promote and strengthen national ownership and leadership of
development as a key determinant of progress in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, with each country taking the primary responsibility for its own
development. We encourage all countries to continue to design, implement and
monitor development strategies tailored to their specific situations, including
through broad consultations and participation of all relevant stakeholders, as
appropriate for each national context. We call on the United Nations system and

_______________
11

Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
12
A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2.

7

A/RES/65/1

other development actors to support the design and implementation of these
strategies, at the request of Member States.
37. We recognize that the increasing interdependence of national economies in a
globalizing world and the emergence of rules-based regimes for international
economic relations have meant that the space for national economic policy, that is,
the scope for domestic policies, especially in the areas of trade, investment and
international development, is now often framed by international disciplines,
commitments and global market considerations. It is for each Government to
evaluate the trade-off between the benefits of accepting international rules and
commitments and the constraints posed by the loss of policy space.
38. We reaffirm the Monterrey Consensus3 and the Doha Declaration on Financing
for Development5 in their entirety, and their integrity and holistic approach, and
recognize that mobilizing financial resources for development and the effective use
of all those resources are central to the global partnership for development,
including in support of the achievement of the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals.
39. We call for the expeditious delivery of commitments already made by
developed countries in the context of the Monterrey Consensus3 and the Doha
Declaration on Financing for Development.5 Short-term liquidity, long-term
development financing and grants, in accordance with these commitments, will be
utilized to assist developing countries to adequately respond to their development
priorities. In our common pursuit of growth, poverty eradication and sustainable
development, a critical challenge is to ensure the necessary internal conditions for
mobilizing domestic resources, both public and private, sustaining adequate levels
of productive investment and increasing human capacity. Private international
capital flows, particularly foreign direct investment, along with international
financial stability, are vital complements to national and international development
efforts.
40. We stress the need for further reform and modernization of the international
financial institutions to better enable them to respond to and prevent financial and
economic emergencies, effectively promote development and better serve the needs
of Member States. We reaffirm the importance of enhancing the voice and
representation of developing countries in the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, and note the reforms undertaken by the World Bank and the
progress made by the International Monetary Fund in that direction.
41. We call for increased efforts at all levels to enhance policy coherence for
development. We affirm that achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
requires mutually supportive and integrated policies across a wide range of
economic, social and environmental issues for sustainable development. We call on
all countries to formulate and implement policies consistent with the objectives of
sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, poverty eradication and
sustainable development.
42. We reiterate the important role of trade as an engine of growth and
development and its contribution to the attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals. We emphasize the need to resist protectionist tendencies and to rectify any
trade distorting measures already taken that are inconsistent with World Trade
Organization rules, recognizing the right of countries, in particular developing
countries, to fully utilize their flexibilities consistent with their World Trade
Organization commitments and obligations. The early and successful conclusion of
the Doha Round with a balanced, ambitious, comprehensive and development8

A/RES/65/1

oriented outcome would provide much needed impetus to international trade and
contribute to economic growth and development.
43. We stress that promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
is necessary for accelerating progress towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, as well as for promoting sustainable development, but it is not
sufficient: growth should enable everyone, in particular the poor, to participate in
and benefit from economic opportunities and should lead to job creation and income
opportunities and be complemented by effective social policies.
44. We commit ourselves to redoubling our efforts to reduce maternal and child
mortality and improve the health of women and children, including through
strengthened national health systems, efforts to combat HIV/AIDS, improved
nutrition, and access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation, making use of
enhanced global partnerships. We stress that accelerating progress on the
Millennium Development Goals related to health is essential for making headway
also with the other Goals.
45. We reiterate our commitment to ensure that by 2015 children everywhere, boys
and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary education.
46. We emphasize the importance of addressing energy issues, including access to
affordable energy, energy efficiency and sustainability of energy sources and use, as
part of global efforts for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and
the promotion of sustainable development.
47. We recognize the importance of developing economic and social infrastructure
and productive capacities for sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
and sustainable development, particularly in developing countries, bearing in mind
the need to enhance employment and income opportunities for all, with a special
focus on the poor.
48. We stress the need to create full and productive employment and decent work
for all and further resolve to promote the Global Jobs Pact as a general framework
within which each country can formulate policy packages specific to its situation
and national priorities in order to promote a job intensive recovery and sustainable
development. We call on Member States to take effective measures for promoting
social inclusion and integration and incorporate these into their national
development strategies.
49. We resolve to take further effective measures and actions, in conformity with
international law, to remove obstacles and constraints, strengthen support and meet
the special needs of the regions and countries struggling to achieve economic and
social development, including the least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries, small island developing States, middle-income countries, Africa, and
people living in areas affected by complex humanitarian emergencies and in areas
affected by terrorism. In addition, we acknowledge the need to take concerted
actions, in conformity with international law, to remove the obstacles to the full
realization of the rights of peoples living under foreign occupation to promote the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
50. We recognize the specific development challenges related to peacebuilding and
early recovery in countries affected by conflict and the effect of these challenges on
their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. We request donor
countries to provide adequate, timely and predictable development assistance in
support of these efforts, tailored to country-specific needs and situations, at the
request of the recipient country. We are determined to strengthen international
9

A/RES/65/1

partnerships to address these needs, demonstrate progress and enable improved
international support.
51. We consider that promoting universal access to social services and providing
social protection floors can make an important contribution to consolidating and
achieving further development gains. Social protection systems that address and
reduce inequality and social exclusion are essential for protecting the gains towards
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
52. We stress that fighting corruption at both the national and international levels
is a priority and that corruption is a serious barrier to effective resource mobilization
and allocation and diverts resources away from activities that are vital for poverty
eradication, the fight against hunger and sustainable development. We are
determined to take urgent and decisive steps to continue to combat corruption in all
of its manifestations, which requires strong institutions at all levels, and urge all
States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United
Nations Convention against Corruption 13 and to begin its implementation.
12F

53. We recognize that the respect for and promotion and protection of human
rights is an integral part of effective work towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.
54. We acknowledge the importance of gender equality and empowerment of
women to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Women are agents of
development. We call for action to ensure the equal access of women and girls to
education, basic services, health care, economic opportunities and decision-making
at all levels. We stress that investing in women and girls has a multiplier effect on
productivity, efficiency and sustained economic growth. We recognize the need for
gender mainstreaming in the formulation and implementation of development
policies.
55. We reaffirm that States should, in accordance with international law, take
concerted, positive steps to ensure respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms of indigenous people, on the basis of equality and non-discrimination and
recognizing the value and diversity of their distinctive identities, cultures and social
organization.
56. We resolve to work with all stakeholders and strengthen partnerships in
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. The private sector plays a vital role
in development in many countries, including through public-private partnerships
and by generating employment and investment, developing new technologies and
enabling sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth. We call upon the
private sector to further contribute to poverty eradication, including by adapting its
business models to the needs and possibilities of the poor. Foreign direct investment
and trade, as well as public-private partnerships, are important for the scaling-up of
initiatives. In this connection we note the work of the United Nations Global
Compact, in which companies have committed to corporate social responsibility and
action in support of the Millennium Development Goals.
57. We stress the importance of strengthening regional and subregional
cooperation for accelerating national development strategy implementation,
including through regional and subregional development banks and initiatives. We
also emphasize the importance of strengthening regional and subregional
_______________
13

10

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

A/RES/65/1

institutions to provide effective support to regional and national development
strategies.
58. We reaffirm that the United Nations funds, programmes and regional
commissions, and the specialized agencies, in accordance with their respective
mandates, have an important role to play in advancing development and in
protecting development gains, in accordance with national strategies and priorities,
including progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals. We will
continue to take steps for a strong, well-coordinated, coherent and effective United
Nations system in support of the Millennium Development Goals. We emphasize the
principle of national ownership and leadership, support the initiative of some
countries to use, on a voluntary basis, common country programme documents, and
emphasize our support for all countries that wish to continue using the existing
frameworks and processes for country-level programming.
59. We stress the need for adequate quantity and quality of funding for the
operational activities of the United Nations development system as well as the need
to make funding more predictable, effective and efficient. We also reaffirm, in this
context, the importance of accountability, transparency and improved results-based
management and further harmonized results-based reporting on the work of the
United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies.
60. We resolve to enhance efforts to mobilize adequate and predictable financial
and high-quality technical support, as well as to promote the development and
dissemination of appropriate, affordable and sustainable technology and the transfer
of such technologies on mutually agreed terms, which is crucial for the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals.
61. We consider that innovative financing mechanisms can make a positive
contribution in assisting developing countries to mobilize additional resources for
financing for development on a voluntary basis. Such financing should supplement
and not be a substitute for traditional sources of financing. While recognizing the
considerable progress in innovative sources of financing for development, we call
for scaling-up of present initiatives, where appropriate.
62. We welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen and support South-South
cooperation and triangular cooperation. We stress that South-South cooperation is
not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South cooperation. We call
for the effective implementation of the outcome document of the High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation, held in Nairobi from 1 to 3
December 2009. 14
13F

63. We recognize the regional efforts being made to advance the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. In this regard, we welcome the
convening of the fifteenth ordinary session of the Summit of the African Union in
Kampala from 19 to 27 July 2010, with the theme “Maternal, infant and child health
and development in Africa”, the launch of the African Union Campaign on
Accelerated Reduction of Maternal Mortality in Africa; the slogan “Africa cares: no
woman should die while giving life”; the Special Ministerial Meeting to Review the
Millennium Development Goals in Asia and the Pacific: run-up to 2015, held in
Jakarta on 3 and 4 August 2010; the report of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean on progress in Latin America and the Caribbean towards

_______________
14

Resolution 64/222, annex.

11

A/RES/65/1

achieving the Millennium Development Goals; and similar reports produced by
other regional commissions, all of which have contributed positively to the Highlevel Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly, as well as to the achievement of
Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
64. We welcome the increasing efforts to improve the quality of official
development assistance and to increase its development impact, and recognize that
the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, along
with recent initiatives such as the high-level forums on aid effectiveness, which
produced the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the 2008 Accra
Agenda for Action, 15 make important contributions to the efforts of those countries
which have committed to them, including through the adoption of the fundamental
principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization and managing for
results. We also bear in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will
guarantee effective assistance and that the specific situation of each country needs
to be fully considered.
14F

65. We encourage continued efforts in the Development Cooperation Forum, as
the focal point within the United Nations system, to carry out a holistic
consideration of issues related to international development cooperation, with the
participation of all relevant stakeholders.
66. We consider that the cultural dimension is important for development. We
encourage international cooperation in the cultural field, aimed at achieving
development objectives.
67. We recognize that sport, as a tool for education, development and peace, can
promote cooperation, solidarity, tolerance, understanding, social inclusion and
health at the local, national and international levels.
68. We recognize that all countries require adequate, timely, reliable and
disaggregated data, including demographic data, in order to design better
programmes and policies for sustainable development. We commit ourselves to
strengthening our national statistical systems, including for effectively monitoring
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. We also reiterate the need to
increase efforts in support of statistical capacity-building in developing countries.
69. We take note of the Global Pulse initiative to develop more up-to-date and
actionable data as a joint effort among all relevant stakeholders for rapid impact and
vulnerability analysis.
Millennium Development Goal 1 – Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
70. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in order to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 1, including by:
(a) Addressing the root causes of extreme poverty and hunger, while noting
that the eradication of extreme poverty and hunger has a direct impact on the
achievement of all the other Millennium Development Goals;
(b) Adopting forward-looking economic policies that lead to sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development, and which
increase employment opportunities, promote agricultural development and reduce
poverty;
_______________
15

12

A/63/539, annex.

A/RES/65/1

(c) Increasing efforts at all levels to mitigate the social and economic
impacts, particularly on poverty and hunger, of the multiple crises through global
responses that are comprehensive, effective, inclusive and sustainable, taking into
account the needs of developing countries;
(d) Pursuing job-intensive, sustained, inclusive and equitable economic
growth and sustainable development to promote full and productive employment
and decent work for all, including for women, indigenous people, young people,
people with disabilities and rural populations, and promoting small- and mediumsized enterprises through initiatives such as skills enhancement and technical
training programmes, vocational training and entrepreneurial skills development.
Employers and workers’ representatives should be closely associated with these
initiatives;
(e) Improving opportunities for young people to gain access to productive
employment and decent work through increased investment in youth employment,
active labour-market support and public-private partnerships, as well as through the
creation of enabling environments to facilitate the participation of young people in
labour markets, in accordance with international rules and commitments;
(f) Taking appropriate steps to assist one another in the elimination of the
worst forms of child labour, strengthening child protection systems and combating
trafficking in children through, inter alia, enhanced international cooperation and
assistance, including support for social and economic development, poverty
eradication programmes and universal education;
(g) Promoting comprehensive systems of social protection that provide
universal access to essential social services, consistent with national priorities and
circumstances, by establishing a minimum level of social security and health care
for all;
(h) Promoting inclusive financial services, particularly microfinance, and
including affordable and accessible credit, savings, insurance and payments
products for all segments of society, especially women, people in vulnerable
situations and those who would not normally be served, or are underserved, by
traditional financial institutions, as well as for micro-, small- and medium-sized
enterprises;
(i) Promoting the empowerment and participation of rural women as critical
agents for enhancing agricultural and rural development and food security and
ensuring their equal access to productive resources, land, financing, technologies,
training and markets;
(j) Reaffirming the international commitment to eliminating hunger and to
securing access to food for all and reiterating, in this regard, the important role of
relevant organizations, particularly the United Nations system;
(k) Supporting the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food
Security contained in the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security; 16
15F

(l) Strengthening international coordination and governance for food
security, through the Global Partnership for Agriculture, Food Security and
Nutrition, of which the Committee on World Food Security is a central component,

_______________
16

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.

13

A/RES/65/1

and reiterating that it is essential to enhance global governance, building on existing
institutions and fostering effective partnerships;
(m) Promoting efforts to improve capacity-building in sustainable fisheries
management, especially in developing countries, as fish is an important source of
animal protein for millions of people and is an essential component in the fight
against malnutrition and hunger;
(n) Supporting a comprehensive and coordinated response to address the
multiple and complex causes of the global food crisis, including the adoption of
political, economic, social, financial and technical solutions in the short, medium
and long term by national Governments and the international community, including
for mitigating the impact of the high volatility of food prices on developing
countries. The relevant United Nations organizations have an important role to play
in this regard;
(o) Promoting at all levels a strong enabling environment for enhancing
agricultural production, productivity and sustainability in developing countries,
including through public and private investment, land-use planning, efficient water
management, adequate rural infrastructure, including irrigation, and developing
strong agricultural value chains and improving access of farmers to markets and
land and supportive economic policies and institutions at the national and
international levels;
(p) Supporting small-scale producers, including women, to increase
production of a wide spectrum of traditional and other crops and livestock, and
improving their access to markets, credits and inputs, thereby increasing incomeearning opportunities for poor people and their ability to purchase food and improve
their livelihoods;
(q) Increasing the rate of agricultural productivity growth in developing
countries through promotion of the development and dissemination of appropriate,
affordable and sustainable agricultural technology, as well as the transfer of such
technologies on mutually agreed terms, and supporting agricultural research and
innovation, extension services and agricultural education in developing countries;
(r) Increasing the sustainable production and augmenting the availability
and quality of food, including through long-term investment, access of smallholder
farmers to markets, credit and inputs, improved land-use planning, crop
diversification, commercialization, and development of an adequate rural
infrastructure and enhanced market access for developing countries;
(s) Delivering on the commitments made to achieve global food security,
and providing adequate and predictable resources through bilateral and multilateral
channels, including the commitments set out in the Aquila Food Security Initiative;
(t) Addressing environmental challenges to sustainable agricultural
development such as water quality and availability, deforestation and desertification,
land and soil degradation, dust, floods, drought and unpredictable weather patterns
and loss of biodiversity, and promoting the development and dissemination of
appropriate, affordable and sustainable agricultural technologies and the transfer of
such technologies on mutually agreed terms;
(u) Reaffirming the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and
nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right
of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully develop and maintain
his or her physical and mental capacities;
14

A/RES/65/1

(v) Making special efforts to meet the nutritional needs of women, children,
older persons and persons with disabilities, as well as those living in vulnerable
situations, through targeted and effective programming;
(w) Accelerating progress on the challenges faced by indigenous peoples in
the context of food security, and in this regard taking special actions to combat the
root causes of the disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition among
indigenous peoples.
Millennium Development Goal 2 – Achieve universal primary education
71. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in achieving Millennium
Development Goal 2, including by:
(a) Realizing the right of everyone to education and re-emphasizing that
education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and the
sense of its dignity and shall strengthen respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
(b) Making further progress towards the goal of universal primary education
by building on the gains made during the past decade;
(c) Removing barriers, outside and within education systems, so as to
provide equitable educational and learning opportunities for all children, since
knowledge and education are key factors for sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth and for the achievement of all the Millennium Development
Goals, through continued political emphasis on education and by promoting, with
the support of the international community, civil society and the private sector,
appropriate and targeted, evidence-based measures such as abolishing school fees,
providing school meals, ensuring that schools have separate sanitation facilities for
boys and girls and in other ways making primary education for all children
available, accessible and affordable;
(d) Addressing the root causes of the inequalities, disparities and diverse
forms of exclusion and discrimination affecting children, particularly out-of-school
children, including by enhancing enrolment, retention, participation and
achievement of children, by developing and operationalizing an inclusive education
and defining targeted, proactive strategies, policies and programmes, including
cross-sectoral approaches, to promote accessibility and inclusion. In this regard,
additional efforts should be undertaken to work across sectors to reduce drop-out,
repetition and failure rates, especially for the poor, and to eliminate the gender gap
in education;
(e) Ensuring quality education and progression through the school system.
This requires establishing learner-friendly schools and institutions; increasing the
number of teachers and enhancing their quality through comprehensive policies that
address issues of recruitment, training, retention, professional development,
evaluation, employment and teaching conditions as well as the status of teachers
through increased national capacity; and building more classrooms and improving
the material conditions of school buildings and infrastructure as well as the quality
and content of the curriculum, pedagogy and learning and teaching materials,
harnessing the capabilities of information and communications technology and the
assessment of learning outcomes;
(f) Strengthening the sustainability and predictability of funding for national
education systems by ensuring adequate national education budgets to, inter alia,
address infrastructural, human resources, financial and administrative constraints.
15

A/RES/65/1

These systems should be supported by adequate and predictable development
assistance and international cooperation for education, including through new,
voluntary and innovative approaches for education financing that should supplement
and not be a substitute for traditional sources of finance;
(g) Continuing to implement national programmes and measures to eliminate
illiteracy worldwide as part of the commitments made in the Dakar Framework for
Action, adopted in 2000 at the World Education Forum, 17 and in the Millennium
Development Goals. In this regard, we recognize the important contribution of
South-South and triangular cooperation through, inter alia, innovative pedagogical
methods in literacy;
16F

(h) Supporting the efforts of national Governments to strengthen their
capacity to plan and manage education programmes by involving all education
providers in line with national policies and educational systems;
(i) Giving greater focus to the transition from primary education and access
to secondary education, vocational training and non-formal education and entry into
the labour market;
(j) Strengthening efforts to ensure primary education as a fundamental
element of the response to and preparedness for humanitarian emergencies, ensuring
that affected countries are supported, at their request, in their efforts to restore their
education systems by the international community.
Millennium Development Goal 3 – Promote gender equality
and empower women
72. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 3, including by:
(a) Taking action to achieve the goals of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action6 and its twelve critical areas of concern, our commitments in the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development 18 and the obligations and commitments of States parties to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 19 and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child; 20
17F

18F

19F

(b) Ensuring access to education and successful schooling of girls by
removing barriers and expanding support for girls’ education through measures such
as providing free primary education, a safe environment for schooling and financial
assistance such as scholarships and cash transfer programmes; promoting supportive
policies to end discrimination against women and girls in education; and tracking
completion and attendance rates with a view to retaining girls in schools through
secondary levels;
(c) Empowering women, in particular women living in poverty, through,
inter alia, social and economic policies that guarantee them full and equal access to
all levels of quality education and training and vocational training, including
_______________
17

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
18
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
19
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
20
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.

16

A/RES/65/1

technical, managerial and entrepreneurial training, and to affordable and adequate
public and social services;
(d) Ensuring that women benefit from policy measures to generate full and
productive employment and decent work for all, in accordance with commitments
by States to International Labour Organization conventions, including policy
measures to promote, inter alia, access of women and girls, including mothers and
pregnant women, to formal and non-formal education, equal skills development and
employment opportunities, and closing wage gaps between women and men,
recognizing women’s unpaid work, including care work;
(e) Investing in infrastructure and labour-saving technologies, especially in
rural areas, benefiting women and girls by reducing their burden of domestic
activities, affording the opportunity for girls to attend school and women to engage
in self-employment or participate in the labour market;
(f) Taking action to improve the numbers and active participation of women
in all political and economic decision-making processes, including by investing in
women’s leadership in local decision-making structures and processes, encouraging
appropriate legislative action and creating an even playing field for men and women
in political and Government institutions, and intensifying our efforts for the equal
participation of women and men as key stakeholders at all levels in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding processes;
(g) Strengthening comprehensive national laws and policies as well as
programmes to enhance accountability and raise awareness, prevent and combat all
forms of violence against women and girls everywhere, which undermine their full
enjoyment of all human rights, and to ensure that women have access to justice and
protection, and that all perpetrators of such violence are duly investigated,
prosecuted and punished in order to end impunity, in conformity with national
legislation, international humanitarian law and international human rights law;
(h) Improving national-level capacity to monitor and report on progress,
gaps and opportunities through better generation and use of sex- and agedisaggregated data, including with the support of the international community;
(i) Enhancing the impact of development assistance in advancing gender
equality and empowerment of women and girls through targeted activities including
capacity-building, as well as through gender mainstreaming and enhanced dialogue
between donors and partners, involving, as appropriate, civil society and the private
sector, with a view to ensuring adequate funding;
(j) Facilitating access by women to affordable microfinance, in particular
microcredit, which can contribute to poverty eradication, gender equality and the
empowerment of women;
(k) Promoting and protecting women’s equal access to adequate housing,
property and land, including rights to inheritance, and enabling them to secure
access to credit through appropriate constitutional, legislative and administrative
measures;
(l) Promoting women’s economic empowerment and ensuring women’s
access to productive resources. In this regard, strengthening gender responsive
public management, in order to ensure gender equality in resource allocation,
capacity development and benefit sharing in all sectors, including in central and
local level governments.

17

A/RES/65/1

Promoting global public health for all to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals
73. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in promoting global public
health for all, including by:
(a) Realizing the values and principles of primary health care, including
equity, solidarity, social justice, universal access to services, multisectoral action,
transparency, accountability, community participation and empowerment, as the
basis for strengthening health systems, and recall, in this regard, the Declaration of
Alma-Ata; 21
20F

(b) Strengthening the capacity of national health systems to deliver equitable
and quality health-care services and promoting the widest possible access to healthcare services at the point of use, especially to those in vulnerable situations, through
public policies that remove barriers to access to and use of health-care services,
complemented by the support of international programmes, measures and policies
that align with national priorities;
(c) Providing and strengthening comprehensive and affordable communitybased primary health-care services so as to ensure a continuum from health
promotion and disease prevention to care and rehabilitation, while paying particular
attention to poor people and populations, especially in rural and remote areas, with a
view to extending health protection to all those in need;
(d) Improving the quality and effectiveness of health-care services delivery
by providing integrated health-care services through coordinated approaches at the
country level, the increased use of common platforms and the integration of relevant
services of other sectors, including water and sanitation;
(e) Realizing the international commitment to supporting national efforts in
strengthening health systems that deliver equitable health outcomes as a basis for a
comprehensive approach that includes health financing, the training and retention of
the health workforce, procurement and distribution of medicines and vaccines,
infrastructure, information systems and service delivery;
(f) Strengthening basic infrastructure, human and technical resources and
the provision of health facilities so as to improve health systems and ensure the
accessibility, affordability and quality, especially in rural and remote areas, of
health-care services, as well as sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic
sanitation, bearing in mind the commitment to halving, by 2015, the proportion of
the population without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation
as a means of fighting waterborne diseases;
(g) Stressing the importance of multisectoral and inter-ministerial
approaches in formulating and implementing national policies that are crucial for
promoting and protecting health, and reiterating that Governments will play the
central role, in collaboration with civil society organizations, including academia
and the private sector, in implementing national strategies and action plans on social
service delivery and in making progress towards ensuring more equitable health
outcomes;

_______________
21
See Report of the International Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, Kazakhstan,
6–12 September 1978 (Geneva, World Health Organization, 1978).

18

A/RES/65/1

(h) Improving national health governance, including through the
participation of civil society, the private sector and other relevant stakeholders, as
well as strengthening international support, as appropriate, in order to ensure that
national health systems are sustainable, well prepared and capable of responding to
challenges, including crises and pandemics;
(i) Developing appropriate policies and actions to promote health education
and literacy, including among young people, in order to address the lack of
awareness about health and, in some cases, harmful practices which significantly
inhibit women’s and children’s access to health-care services, and to ensure respect
for human rights, promote gender equality and the empowerment of women as
essential means of addressing the health of women and girls, and to address the
stigmatization of people living with and affected by HIV and AIDS;
(j) Supporting the use of national data collection, monitoring and evaluation
systems that can track sex-disaggregated access to health-care services and provide
rapid feedback for improving the effectiveness and quality of health systems;
(k) Strengthening the effectiveness of health systems and proven
interventions to address evolving health challenges such as the increased incidence
of non-communicable diseases, road traffic injuries and fatalities, and
environmental and occupational health hazards;
(l) Reviewing national recruitment, training and retention policies and
developing national health workforce plans, based on lessons learned, that address
the lack of health workers as well as their uneven distribution within countries,
including in remote and rural areas, and throughout the world, which undermines
the health systems of developing countries, in particular the shortage in Africa, and
in this regard recognizing the importance of national and international actions to
promote universal access to health-care services that take into account the
challenges facing developing countries in the retention of skilled health personnel,
in light of the adoption of the World Health Organization Global Code of Practice
on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel, 22 adherence to which is
voluntary;
21F

(m) Further strengthening international cooperation, inter alia, through
exchange of best practices in strengthening health systems, improving access to
medicines, encouraging the development of technology and the transfer of
technology on mutually agreed terms, the production of affordable, safe, effective
and good quality medicines, fostering the production of innovative medicines,
generics, vaccines and other health commodities, the training and retaining of health
personnel and work to ensure that international cooperation and assistance, in
particular external funding, become more predictable, better harmonized and better
aligned with national priorities for capacity-building and channelled to recipient
countries in ways that strengthen national health systems;
(n) Further promoting research and development, knowledge-sharing and the
provision and use of information and communications technology for health,
including by facilitating affordable access by all countries, especially developing
countries;

_______________
22

See World Health Organization, Sixty-third World Health Assembly, Geneva, 17–21 May 2010,
Resolutions and Decisions, Annexes (WHA63/2010/REC/1).

19

A/RES/65/1

(o) Enhancing public-private partnerships for health-care service delivery,
encouraging the development of new and affordable technologies and their
innovative application and developing new and affordable vaccines and medicines
needed, in particular, in developing countries;
(p) Welcoming the Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health, undertaken by a broad coalition of partners, in support of
national plans and strategies, in order to significantly reduce the number of
maternal, newborn and under-five child deaths as a matter of immediate concern by
scaling up a priority package of high-impact interventions and integrating efforts in
sectors such as health, education, gender equality, water and sanitation, poverty
reduction and nutrition;
(q) Welcoming also the various national, regional and international
initiatives on all the Millennium Development Goals, including those undertaken
bilaterally and through South-South cooperation, in support of national plans and
strategies in sectors such as health, education, gender equality, energy, water and
sanitation, poverty reduction and nutrition as a way to reduce the number of
maternal, newborn and under-five child deaths.
Millennium Development Goal 4 – Reduce child mortality
74. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in order to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 4, including by:
(a) Scaling up efforts to achieve integrated management of childhood
illnesses, particularly actions to address and prevent the main causes of child
mortality, including newborn and infant mortality, these being, inter alia,
pneumonia, diarrhoea, malaria and malnutrition.
This can be achieved by
developing, implementing and evaluating appropriate national strategies, policies
and programmes for child survival, preventive pre-natal, para-natal and post-natal
measures, vaccinations and immunization and by working to ensure that medicines,
medical products and technologies are affordable and available. In addition, this can
be achieved by improved nutrition, including nutrition prior to birth, as well as by
strengthening specific health interventions, including emergency obstetric care and
skilled attendance at birth to reduce maternal and child mortality. International
support to national efforts, including financial resources, will continue to be key in
this regard;
(b) Sustaining major successes and scaling up prevention and vaccination
programmes as one of the most efficient tools to reduce child mortality, including
the measles, polio, tuberculosis and tetanus campaigns, by ensuring sufficient
funding, political commitment and conscientious implementation of control
activities, especially in priority countries;
(c) Taking action to improve child nutrition through an integrated package of
essential interventions and services, including, in particular, access to nutritious
food, appropriate supplements, prevention and early management of diarrhoeal
diseases and information and support for exclusive breastfeeding and for the
treatment of severe acute malnutrition;
(d) Maintaining progress with regard to combating malaria and the extension
of the use of insecticide-treated bed nets;

20

A/RES/65/1

(e) Stepping up the fight against pneumonia and diarrhoea through the
greater use of proven highly effective preventive and treatment measures, as well as
new tools, such as new vaccines, which are affordable even in the poorest countries;
(f) Scaling up efforts, including awareness raising, to address the critical
impact of increasing access to safe drinking water, sanitation coverage and hygienic
care, including hand washing with soap, on reducing the death rate among children
as a result of diarrhoeal diseases;
(g) Working to ensure that the next generation is born HIV-free by
providing, on an urgent basis, extended and sustainable coverage and improved
quality of services to prevent mother-to-child transmission as well as increasing
access to paediatric HIV treatment services.
Millennium Development Goal 5 – Improve maternal health
75. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in order to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 5, including by:
(a) Taking steps to realize the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, including sexual and
reproductive health;
(b) Addressing reproductive, maternal and child health, including newborn
health, in a comprehensive manner, inter alia, through the provision of family
planning, prenatal care, skilled attendance at birth, emergency obstetric and
newborn care and methods for the prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted
diseases and infections, such as HIV, within strengthened health systems that
provide accessible and affordable integrated health-care services and include
community-based preventive and clinical care;
(c) Building on effective, multisectoral and integrated approaches. We
emphasize the need for the provision of universal access to reproductive health by
2015, including integrating family planning, sexual health and health-care services
in national strategies and programmes;
(d) Taking action at all levels to address the interlinked root causes of
maternal mortality and morbidity, such as poverty, malnutrition, harmful practices,
lack of accessible and appropriate health-care services, information and education
and gender inequality, and paying particular attention to eliminating all forms of
violence against women and girls;
(e) Ensuring that all women, men and young people have information about,
access to and choice of the widest possible range of safe, effective, affordable and
acceptable methods of family planning;
(f) Expanding the provision of comprehensive obstetric care and
strengthening the role of skilled health-care providers, including midwives and
nurses, through their training and retention in order to fully utilize their potential as
trusted providers of maternal health-care services, as well as expanding family
planning within local communities and expanding and upgrading formal and
informal training in sexual and reproductive health care and family planning for all
health-care providers, health educators and managers, including training in
interpersonal communications and counselling.

21

A/RES/65/1

Millennium Development Goal 6 – Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria
and other diseases
76. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in order to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 6, including by:
(a) Redoubling efforts to achieve universal access to HIV/AIDS prevention,
treatment, care and support services as an essential step in achieving Millennium
Development Goal 6 and as a contribution to reaching the other Millennium
Development Goals;
(b) Significantly intensifying prevention efforts and increasing access to
treatment by scaling up strategically aligned programmes aimed at reducing the
vulnerability of persons more likely to be infected with HIV, combining biomedical,
behavioural and social and structural interventions, and through the empowerment
of women and adolescent girls so as to increase their capacity to protect themselves
from the risk of HIV infection and through the promotion and protection of all
human rights. Prevention programmes should take into account local circumstances,
ethics and cultural values, including information, education and communication in
languages most understood by local communities and should be respectful of
cultures, with the aim of reducing risk-taking behaviours and encouraging
responsible sexual behaviour, including abstinence and fidelity; expanded access to
essential commodities, including male and female condoms and sterile injecting
equipment; harm-reduction efforts related to drug use; expanded access to voluntary
and confidential counselling and testing; safe blood supplies; and early and effective
treatment of sexually transmitted infections, and should promote policies that ensure
effective prevention and accelerate research and development into new tools for
prevention, including microbicides and vaccines;
(c) Dealing with HIV/AIDS from a developmental perspective, which
requires a national network of sound and workable institutions and multisectoral
prevention, treatment, care and support strategies, addressing the stigmatization of
and discrimination against people living with HIV and promoting their social
integration, rehabilitation and greater involvement in HIV response, as well as
strengthening national efforts at HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support
and strengthening efforts to eliminate the mother-to-child transmission of HIV;
(d) Building new strategic partnerships to strengthen and leverage the
linkages between HIV and other health- and development-related initiatives,
expanding, to the greatest extent possible and with the support of international
cooperation and partnerships, national capacity to deliver comprehensive HIV/AIDS
programmes, as well as new and more effective antiretroviral treatments, in ways
that strengthen existing national health and social systems, as well as using HIV
platforms as a foundation for the expansion of service delivery. In this regard,
expediting action to integrate HIV information and services into programmes for
primary health care, sexual and reproductive health, including voluntary family
planning and mother and child health, treatment for tuberculosis, hepatitis C and
sexually transmitted infections and care for children affected, orphaned or made
vulnerable by HIV/AIDS, as well as nutrition and formal and informal education;
(e) Planning for long-term sustainability, including addressing the expected
increase in demand for second and third line drug regimens to treat HIV, malaria
and tuberculosis;

22

A/RES/65/1

(f) Strengthening support to affected countries in order to respond to HIV
co-infection with tuberculosis, as well as multi-drug resistant and extensively drug
resistant tuberculosis, including through earlier detection of all forms of
tuberculosis;
(g) Sustaining national efforts and programmes, with the support of the
international community, to address the challenges posed by malaria by
strengthening effective prevention, diagnosis and treatment strategies, including by
ensuring the accessibility to and availability of affordable, quality and effective
medicines, generics, including artemisinin-combination therapy, as well as progress
in the use of long-lasting, safe insecticide-treated bed nets to combat malaria and
strengthening ongoing research for the prompt development of malaria vaccines;
(h) Renewing efforts to prevent and treat neglected tropical diseases,
prevention and treatment services for malaria and tuberculosis, including by
improving national health information systems, strengthening international
cooperation, accelerating further research and development, developing innovative
vaccines and medicines and adopting comprehensive prevention strategies;
(i) Undertaking concerted action and a coordinated response at the national,
regional and global levels in order to adequately address the developmental and
other challenges posed by non-communicable diseases, namely cardiovascular
diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes, working towards a
successful high-level meeting of the General Assembly in 2011;
(j) Increasing efforts to achieve universal access to HIV prevention,
treatment, care and support, strengthening the fight against malaria, tuberculosis and
other diseases, including by providing adequate funding for the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and through the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system and other multilateral and bilateral
channels, strengthening innovative financing mechanisms, as appropriate, and
contributing to the long-term sustainability of the response.
Millennium Development Goal 7 – Ensure environmental sustainability
77. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in order to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 7, including by:
(a) Pursuing sustainable development, in accordance with the principles
contained in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 23 including the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, and taking into account the
respective capabilities of countries, with a view to effectively implementing the
outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development and addressing new and
emerging challenges;
2F

(b) Pursuing environmental sustainability through nationally owned
comprehensive and coherent planning frameworks and the adoption of national
legislation, in accordance with national circumstances and the appropriate
implementation capacity; supporting developing countries in this regard in building
capacity and providing financial resources; and promoting the development and

_______________
23
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.

23

A/RES/65/1

dissemination of appropriate, affordable and sustainable technology and the transfer
of such technologies on mutually agreed terms;
(c) Supporting the implementation of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 24 through joint action of the international
community in addressing the causes and poverty impacts of desertification and land
degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, consistent with articles 1, 2
and 3 of the Convention, taking into account the ten-year strategic plan and
framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008-2018), 25 and
supporting the exchange of best practices and lessons learned, including from
regional cooperation, and the mobilization of adequate and predictable financial
resources;
23F

24F

(d) Strengthening political commitment and action at all levels to effectively
implement the global objectives on forest and the sustainable forest management of
all types of forests in order to reduce the loss of forest cover and improve the
livelihoods of those that depend on forests through the development of a
comprehensive and more effective approach to financing activities, 26 involvement of
local and indigenous communities and other relevant stakeholders, promoting good
governance at the national and international levels, and enhancing international
cooperation to address the threats posed by illicit activities;
25F

(e) Continuing to pursue more efficient and coherent implementation of the
three objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity 27 and addressing
implementation gaps, where appropriate, including through the fulfilment of
commitments significantly reducing the rate of loss of biodiversity, including by
preserving and maintaining knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and
local communities; and continuing ongoing efforts towards elaborating and
negotiating an international regime on access and benefit sharing. We look forward
to the successful outcome of the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on Biological Diversity, to be held in Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29
October 2010;
26F

(f) Supporting the implementation of national policies and strategies to
combine, as appropriate, the increased use of new and renewable energy sources and
low emission technologies, the more efficient use of energy, greater reliance on
advanced energy technologies, including cleaner fossil fuel technologies, and the
sustainable use of traditional energy resources, as well as promoting access to
modern, reliable, affordable and sustainable energy services and enhancing national
capacities to meet the growing energy demand, as appropriate, supported by
international cooperation in this field and by the promotion of the development and
dissemination of appropriate, affordable and sustainable energy technologies and the
transfer of such technologies on mutually agreed terms;
(g) Maintaining that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change7 is the primary international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the
global response to climate change, calling upon States to take urgent global action to
_______________
24

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
A/C.2/62/7, annex.
26
In accordance with the mandate set out in the resolution adopted by the United Nations Forum on Forests
(E/2009/118-E/CN.18/SS/2009/2, sect. I.B, para. 3).
27
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
25

24

A/RES/65/1

address climate change in accordance with the principles identified in the
Convention, including the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capabilities, and looking forward to a successful and ambitious
outcome of the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention
and the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the
Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, to be held in Cancun, Mexico, from 29 November to
10 December 2010;
(h) Continuing to increase sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation by prioritizing integrated water and sanitation strategies, which
include the restoration, upgrading and maintenance of infrastructure, including
water pipelines and sewage networks, as well as promoting integrated water
management in national planning and exploring innovative ways of improving the
tracking and monitoring of water quality;
(i) Promoting integrated waste management systems, in partnership with all
relevant stakeholders and with international financial and technological support, as
appropriate;
(j) Redoubling efforts to close the sanitation gap through scaled-up groundlevel action, supported by strong political will and increased community
participation, in accordance with national development strategies, promoting the
mobilization and provision of adequate financial and technological resources,
technical know-how and capacity-building for developing countries in order to
increase the coverage of basic sanitation, especially for the poor, and noting in this
regard the global effort to realize “Sustainable sanitation: the five-year drive to
2015”;
(k) Working towards cities without slums, beyond current targets, by
reducing slum populations and improving the lives of slum-dwellers, with adequate
support of the international community, by prioritizing national urban planning
strategies with the participation of all stakeholders, by promoting equal access for
people living in slums to public services, including health, education, energy, water
and sanitation and adequate shelter, and by promoting sustainable urban and rural
development;
(l) Taking measures to ensure the sustainable management of marine
biodiversity and ecosystems, including fish stocks, which contribute to food security
and hunger and poverty eradication efforts, including through ecosystem approaches
to ocean management, and to address the adverse effects of climate change on the
marine environment and marine biodiversity;
(m) Supporting the efforts of countries to preserve fragile mountain
ecosystems as an important source of fresh water and as repositories of rich
biological diversity, with a view to achieving sustainable development and
eradicating poverty;
(n) Promoting sustainable consumption and production patterns, in
accordance with the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”);4
(o) Fostering a greater level of coordination among national and local
institutions responsible for economic and social development and environmental
protection, including with respect to the promotion of investments relevant for
sustainable development;
(p) Working towards a successful United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development in 2012.
25

A/RES/65/1

Millennium Development Goal 8 – Develop a global partnership
for development
78. We commit ourselves to accelerating progress in order to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 8, including by:
(a) Accelerating efforts to deliver on and fully implement existing
Millennium Development Goal 8 commitments by enhancing the global partnership
for development to ensure the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
by 2015;
(b) Supporting the implementation of national development strategies by
developing countries to meet the Millennium Development Goals by 2015,
including through external financial and technical support, to further promote
economic growth and to respond to the increased challenges posed by the impact of
the multiple crises, as well as long-term structural obstacles;
(c) Recognizing that the commitments made by developed and developing
countries in relation to the Millennium Development Goals require mutual
accountability;
(d) Strengthening the central role of the United Nations in enhancing global
partnerships for development, with a view to creating a supportive global
environment for the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals;
(e) Enhancing financing for development in the areas of domestic resource
mobilization, foreign direct investment, international trade, international financial
and technical cooperation for development, and debt and systemic issues by meeting
our commitments made in the Monterrey Consensus3 and reaffirmed in the Doha
Declaration on Financing for Development5 and all other relevant outcomes of
major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related
fields, thus expanding fiscal capacity for financing the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals;
(f) The fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments is
crucial, including the commitments by many developed countries to achieve the
target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance to
developing countries by 2015 and to reach the level of at least 0.5 per cent of gross
national product for official development assistance by 2010, as well as a target of
0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance to
least developed countries. To reach their agreed timetables, donor countries should
take all necessary and appropriate measures to raise the rate of aid disbursements to
meet their existing commitments. We urge those developed countries that have not
yet done so to make additional concrete efforts towards the target of 0.7 per cent of
gross national product for official development assistance to developing countries,
including the specific target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national product for
official development assistance to least developed countries in line with the Brussels
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 20012010,8 in accordance with their commitments. To build on progress achieved in
ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively, we stress the
importance of democratic governance, improved transparency and accountability,
and managing for results. We strongly encourage all donors to establish, as soon as
possible, rolling indicative timetables that illustrate how they aim to reach their
goals, in accordance with their respective budget allocation process. We stress the
importance of mobilizing greater domestic support in developed countries towards

26

A/RES/65/1

the fulfilment of their commitments, including by raising public awareness, and by
providing data on aid effectiveness and demonstrating tangible results;
(g) Making rapid progress to fulfil the Gleneagles and other donors’
substantial commitments to increase aid through a variety of means. We are
concerned that at the current rate the commitment of doubling aid to Africa by 2010
will not be reached;
(h) Exploring new innovative finance mechanisms and strengthening and
scaling up existing ones, where appropriate, given their potential to contribute to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Such voluntary mechanisms
should be effective and should aim to mobilize resources that are stable and
predictable, they should supplement and not be a substitute for traditional sources of
finance and should be disbursed in accordance with the priorities of developing
countries and not unduly burden them. We note the ongoing work in this regard,
including by the Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development as well
as by the Task Force on International Financial Transactions for Development and
the Task Force on Innovative Financing for Education;
(i) Enhancing and strengthening domestic resource mobilization and fiscal
space, including, where appropriate, through modernized tax systems, more efficient
tax collection, broadening the tax base and effectively combating tax evasion and
capital flight. While each country is responsible for its tax system, it is important to
support national efforts in these areas by strengthening technical assistance and
enhancing international cooperation and participation in addressing international tax
matters. We look forward to the upcoming report by the Secretary-General
examining the strengthening of institutional arrangements to promote international
cooperation in tax matters;
(j) Implementing measures to curtail illicit financial flows at all levels,
enhancing disclosure practices and promoting transparency in financial information.
In this regard, strengthening national and multinational efforts to address this issue
is crucial, including support to developing countries and technical assistance to
enhance their capacities. Additional measures should be implemented to prevent the
transfer abroad of stolen assets and to assist in the recovery and return of such
assets, in particular to their countries of origin, consistent with the United Nations
Convention against Corruption;13
(k) Fully supporting and further developing a universal, rules-based, open,
non-discriminatory, equitable and transparent multilateral trading system, inter alia,
by working expeditiously towards a balanced and ambitious, comprehensive and
development-oriented outcome of the Doha Development Agenda 28 of multilateral
trade negotiations, in order to bring benefits to all and contribute to enhancing the
integration of developing countries into the system, while recognizing the
importance of making progress in key areas of the Doha Development Agenda of
special interest to developing countries, and reaffirming the importance of special
and differential treatment referred to therein;
27F

(l) Emphasizing the critical importance of rejecting protectionism and not
turning inward in times of financial uncertainty, mindful of the importance of trade
for economic growth and development and for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015;

_______________
28

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.

27

A/RES/65/1

(m) Implementing duty-free and quota-free market access for all least
developed countries in conformity with the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration
adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005; 29
28F

(n) Further implementing aid for trade, including through the Enhanced
Integrated Framework for Trade-related Technical Assistance to Least Developed
Countries, to help strengthen and enhance the trade capacity and international
competitiveness of developing countries so as to ensure equitable benefits from
increased trading opportunities and to foster economic growth;
(o) Strengthening regional integration and trade as it is crucial for significant
development benefits, growth and jobs and for generating resources to sustain
progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
(p) Fulfilling, in the Doha Development Agenda,28 the 2005 pledge of
members of the World Trade Organization to ensure the parallel elimination in
agriculture of all forms of export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures
with equivalent effect to be completed by the end of 2013;
(q) Assisting developing countries in ensuring long-term debt sustainability
through coordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt
restructuring, as appropriate, while noting also that developing countries can seek to
negotiate, as a last resort, on a case-by-case basis and through existing frameworks,
agreements on temporary debt standstills between debtors and creditors in order to
help mitigate the adverse impacts of the crisis and stabilize negative macroeconomic
developments;
(r) Considering enhanced approaches to sovereign debt restructuring
mechanisms based on existing frameworks and principles, the broad participation of
creditors and debtors, the comparable treatment of all creditors and an important
role for the Bretton Woods institutions, and in this regard welcoming and calling
upon all countries to contribute to the ongoing discussion in the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank and other forums on the need for, and
feasibility of, a more structured framework for international cooperation in this area;
(s) Increasing partnerships with businesses to achieve positive development
outcomes by mobilizing private sector resources that contribute to the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals;
(t) Reaffirming the right to use, to the full, the provisions contained in the
World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), 30 the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health, 31 the decision of the General Council of the World
Trade Organization of 30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the
Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, 32 and, when formal
acceptance procedures are completed, the amendment to article 31 of the
Agreement, 33 which provide flexibilities for the protection of public health, and, in
particular, to promote access to medicines for all, and encourage the provision of
29F

30F

31F

32F

_______________
29

World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).
31
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
32
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/540 and Corr.1. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
33
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/641. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
30

28

A/RES/65/1

assistance to developing countries in this regard. We also call for a broad and timely
acceptance of the amendment to article 31 of the Agreement, as proposed by the
General Council of the World Trade Organization in its decision of 6 December
2005;33
(u) Promoting the strategic role of science and technology, including
information technology and innovation in areas relevant for the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, in particular agricultural productivity, water
management and sanitation, energy security and public health. The capacity for
technological innovation needs to be greatly enhanced in developing countries, and
there is an urgent need for the international community to facilitate the availability
of environmentally sound technologies and corresponding know-how by promoting
the development and dissemination of appropriate, affordable and sustainable
technology, and the transfer of such technologies on mutually agreed terms, in order
to strengthen national innovation and research and development capacity;
(v) Strengthening public-private partnerships in order to close the large gaps
that remain in access to and affordability of information and communications
technology across countries and income groups, including by upgrading the quality
and quantity of existing telecommunication infrastructure, particularly in the least
developed countries, to support more modern information and communications
technology applications and greatly increase connectivity, access and investment in
innovation and development and the effective use of innovative information and
communications technology applications and e-governance tools; and in this regard
encouraging further operationalizing of the voluntary Digital Solidarity Fund;
(w) Strengthening cooperation between originating and receiving countries to
lower the transaction costs of remittances, especially promoting conditions for
cheaper, faster and safer transfers of remittances, which can contribute to national
efforts for development.
Staying engaged to achieve the Millennium Development Goals
79. We request the General Assembly to continue to review, on an annual basis,
the progress made towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
including in the implementation of the present outcome document. We request the
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session to organize a special
event in 2013 to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.
80. We reaffirm the role that the Charter of the United Nations and the General
Assembly have vested in the Economic and Social Council as a principal body for
coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and recommendations on issues of
economic and social development and for the follow-up to the Millennium
Development Goals, particularly through the annual ministerial review and the
Development Cooperation Forum. We look forward to the upcoming review of the
strengthening of the Council during the current session of the Assembly.
81. We request the Secretary-General to report annually on progress in the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals until 2015 and to make
recommendations in his annual reports, as appropriate, for further steps to advance
the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015.
9th plenary meeting
22 September 2010

29
