A/71/616–S/2016/768

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
7 September 2016
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-first year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security*
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2274 (2016), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my report of 10 June 2016 ( A/70/924-S/2016/532). It
also provides a summary of key political and security developments and regional
and international events relating to Afghanistan.

II. Relevant developments
3.
Increased tensions between the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, and
the Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, persistent security challenges and rising
pressure from political opposition groups contributed to growing volatility. The
Parliament confirmed two key appointments, for Minister of Defence and Director
of National Security, ensuring a full roster of security-related cabinet officials for
the first time since its establishment almost two years ago. Afghanistan secured
international funding for the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces through
2020. The security forces were heavily tested across the country amid ongoing
clashes with the Taliban which generated civilian casualties at the highest level
since the United Nations began systematic documentation in 2009 and fresh
displacements. Meanwhile, the prospects for a possible peace process with the
* Third reissue for technical reasons (14 December 2016); previously issued under the symbol
A/70/1033-S/2016/768.

16-14928* (E)

141216

*1614928*

A/71/616
S/2016/768

Taliban remained limited. The Government continued its preparations for the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on 5 October 2016, including the
Afghan National Peace and Development Framework. Tangible gains were achieved
in implementing the anti-corruption agenda.

A.

Political developments
4.
Tensions within the Government increased significantly during the reporting
period. On 11 August, the Chief Executive publicly voiced criticisms of what he
viewed as insufficient consultations by the President on key appointments and as
incomplete implementation of the agreement establishing the National Unity
Government. The appointments included that of the former Independent Election
Commission Chair, Ahmad Yusuf Nuristani, as Ambassador to Spain, and that of the
Presidential Senior Adviser on Strategic Communications, Nader Naderi, as head of
the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission, announced
on 9 July and 9 August, respectively. The two leaders met on 17 August in order for
the concerns of the Chief Executive to be heard. Further meetings are expected.
5.
Before the political rift between the President and the Chief Executive, the
Government faced increasingly public challenges from political opposition leaders
claiming that the agreement establishing the National Unity Government would
expire in September 2016, two years after its signing on 21 September 2014 and
absent electoral reforms, parliamentary and district council elections and the
convening of a loya jirga to adopt constitutional amendments. They included the
former President, Hamid Karzai, and a prominent member of the opposition
Afghanistan Protection and Stability Council, Omar Daudzai, who both stressed the
need for a loya jirga.
6.
There were a number of public protests during the reporting period that drew
the participation of opposition figures. On 22 July, a demonstration in Khost
Province involved a reported 7,000 protestors, who called for the dissolution of the
Government and the holding of a loya jirga to appoint a new one. On 23 July, ethnic
Hazara demonstrated in the city of Kabul against the routing of an electricity
infrastructure project. When the march was targeted by two suicide bombers, killing
73 civilians and injuring 293, the subsequent condolence ceremony on 25 July drew
former President Karzai and several other former govern ment officials. The site
became an assembly point for those protesting against the Government. On 29 July,
the leaders of the demonstration of 23 July issued a statement, pledging to hold
further protests should their demands not be met by the Government.
7.
There were protests from 27 July to 6 August in Faryab, Kandahar and
Nangarhar provinces on issues relating to government performance, lack of security
and official appointments. On 1 August, ethnic Tajik activists threatened to hold
protests and stage a ceremonial reburial on 1 September of a Tajik leader who was
briefly in power in 1929. The activists received support from the Chief Executive;
the former Minister of the Interior, Zarar Ahmad Moqbel Osmani; and the acting
Governor of Balkh Province, Mohammad Atta Nur.
8.
Armed groups claiming association with government officials who have strong
powerbases in the north, particularly those affiliated with the Junbish -i Milli and
Jamiat-e Islami political parties, continued to contribute to insecurity. On 26 June,
following accusations of human rights abuses in Faryab Province by militias

2/16

16-14928

A/71/616
S/2016/768

claiming loyalty to the Junbish-i Milli party, President Ghani ordered an
investigation and instructed the Junbish leader, the First Vice -President, Abdul
Rashid Dostum, to halt his military operations and return to the city of Kabul.
9.
Progress was made in senior appointments. On 20 June, the lower house of the
National Assembly confirmed Masoom Stanekzai as Director of the National
Directorate of Security and Abdullah Khan Habibi as Minister of Defence,
providing the current Government with a full roster of security -focused cabinet
officials for the first time. Important positions remain occupied by officials serving
in an acting capacity, including the Minister of Mines and Petroleum, the head of
the Independent Directorate for Local Governance and the governors of Balkh and
Nuristan provinces.
10. President Ghani appointed several Presidential advisers in response to calls for
more inclusive appointments. On 23 June, President Ghani appointed Farooq
Wardak, former Minister for Education under former President Karzai, as Senior
Adviser on Provincial Affairs, and on 28 July, Mohammad Almas Zahid, a
parliamentarian from Parwan Province, as Senior Adviser on National Solida rity
Affairs. On 2 August, Abu Hussain Yasir, leader of the People’s Islamic Movement
of Afghanistan political party, a predominantly Shia grouping, was appointed
Presidential Adviser on security issues; while on 9 August, Hamidullah Farooqi,
former Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation under former President Karzai, was
appointed Chancellor of Kabul University. On 14 August, Ustad Abdul Halim,
affiliated with the Afghan Protection and Stability Council, led by Abdul Rasul
Sayyaf, was appointed as Presidential Adviser on tribal affairs.
11. There was incremental progress towards the electoral reforms that are to
precede future elections, as provided for in the agreement establishing the National
Unity Government. After a joint commission of the National Assembly failed to
resolve disagreements over a decree concerning electoral management bodies which
had been rejected on 13 June by the Lower House and approved on 28 June by the
Upper House, the legislative body entered its summer recess on 21 July. With the
status of the decree in question, the President and the Chief Executive met with
members of the international community on 14 July and reiterated their commitment
to implement electoral reforms and hold parliamentary and district council
elections. In a letter of 31 July, the Independent Commission for Overseeing the
Implementation of the Constitution advised that the Government could issue a new
decree without sending it to the National Assembly during the last year of the
legislative term. The Government continued working on a draft decree whose
issuance would enable some electoral reforms and preparations to move forward.
12. Prospects for talks between the Government and the Taliban remained very
limited during the reporting period, as the new Taliban leader, Mullah Haibatullah
Akhundzada, concentrated efforts on consolidating his authority and on combat
operations. There were no reports of significant dissent in the Taliban movement
following the leadership change. In a speech marking the end of Rama dan on 6 July,
the President called on the Taliban to join a peace and reconciliation process. On
14 July, an Afghan presidential spokesperson stated that there were no plans for a
sixth meeting of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace a nd
Reconciliation Process, comprising Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the United
States of America. Meanwhile, a Taliban delegation visited Chengdu, China, on 21
and 22 July.

16-14928

3/16

A/71/616
S/2016/768

13. Peace talks between the Afghan Government and Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin
stalled, reportedly on such issues as the timeline for the withdrawal of foreign
forces and guarantees of security and political representation for the group. In his
Eid message on 3 July, the Hezb-i-Islami leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, stated that
his fighters were instructed to act against Afghan security forces only in
self-defence.
14. The High Peace Council made progress in developing its new structure and
strategy, which it presented to the international community on 1 August.
Consultation on the draft Afghanistan Peace and Reconciliation Strategy was
undertaken with civil society representatives, including women’s organizations, in
furtherance of the Government’s implementation of the Afghan national plan for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security. Donors agreed to extend the interim funding for the Council through
the end of September.
15. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) facilitated
several events in support of local peace initiatives during the reporting period. On
20 July in the city of Pul-e-Khumri in Baghlan Province, approximately
225 representatives from provincial government and civil society, as well as
religious scholars from the districts, participated in a peace j irga convened by
provincial authorities and supported by UNAMA. Participants resolved to work
towards peace in their districts. On 9 August, UNAMA hosted a regional conference
on the role of youth in the peace process, attended by 40 district youth
representatives of Samangan, Balkh, Sari Pul and Jawzjan provinces. Participants
adopted a declaration calling on the Government and the international community to
involve youth in the peace process and to hold a national youth conference to
discuss peace initiatives.

B.

Security
16. The security situation remained highly volatile as intensive Taliban operations
continued. Since the movement launched its spring offensive on 12 April, armed
clashes have occurred at consistently high levels. During the reporti ng period, the
Taliban focused their operations on challenging government control in key districts
of Baghlan, Kunduz and Takhar provinces in the north-eastern region, Faryab and
Jawzjan provinces in the northern region and Helmand, Kandahar and Uruzgan
provinces in the southern region, including attempts to capture district
administrative centres and cut key supply routes.
17. Between May and July, the number of armed clashes increased by 14.7 per
cent as compared with the three previous months, and was 24 per cent higher than
during the same period in 2015. After a slight decline around the Ramadan period,
from 7 June to 6 July, the Taliban offensive regained momentum after 19 July, with
the brief capture of the district administrative centres of Khanashin and Sangin
(Helmand Province), Qush Tepa (Jawzjan Province), Dahanai Ghuri (Baghlan
Province), Dasht-e Archi, Khanabad and Qala-i-Zal (Kunduz Province) and Khwaja
Ghar (Takhar Province) and continuing pressure on the provincial capital of
Helmand, Lashkar Gah. Although the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
regained control of most district centres, these locations remained under significant
pressure, particularly in the south and north-east.

4/16

16-14928

A/71/616
S/2016/768

18. Between 20 May and 15 August, the United Nations recorded 5,996 security
incidents across the country, representing a 4.7 per cent increase as compared with
the same period in 2015 and a 3.6 per cent decrease against the same period in 2014.
Consistent with previous trends, armed clashes accounted for the majority of
security incidents, at 62.6 per cent, followed by those involving improvised
explosive devices, at 17.3 per cent. The southern, south -eastern and eastern regions
continued to account for the majority of security inci dents in the country, with
68.1 per cent of the total incidents recorded during the period. Anti -Government
elements also continued their asymmetric attacks, to exert influence through
abductions, intimidation and assassinations. In total, from 20 May to 15 August,
268 assassinations, including 40 failed attempts, were recorded, representin g a
6.2 per cent decrease against the same period in 2015. In addition, 109 abductions
were recorded across the country during the reporting period, including 15 mass
abductions. Suicide attacks decreased from 26 to 17 as compared with the same
period in 2015. High-profile attacks in Kabul continued, including the attack of
23 July against Hazara protesters, for which Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) claimed responsibility. The Taliban condemned the
attack. On 1 August, the Taliban claimed responsibility for a complex attack against
an international compound housing foreign contractors. The three attackers and a
police officer were killed.
19. At the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Summit in Warsaw, Poland,
on 8 and 9 July, NATO members and Resolute Support Mission contributors
formalized agreement on the continued presence of the Mission in Afghanistan
beyond 2016 under its current structure. At the Summit, t he President and the Chief
Executive undertook a commitment that the Government would assume financial
responsibility for its security forces by 2024 and continue implementation of its
reform agenda, including combating corruption and the protection of civ ilians.
NATO members, as well as Japan and the Republic of Korea, affirmed their
commitment to continuing financial contributions to the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces until the end of 2020. The Summit outcome was welcomed by
Afghan political leaders. On 6 July, the President of the United States, Barack
Obama, announced his decision to maintain 8,400 United States troops in the
country into January 2017. This superseded an earlier plan to reduce this figure to
5,500 by the end of 2016. In June, President Obama authorized revised rules of
engagement, allowing United States troops to provide more direct support to the
Afghan security forces and broaden the use of air strikes, including against the
Taliban.
20. The Afghan security forces made some progress in further increasing their air
capacity, and operations in Kunduz demonstrated greater tactical flexibility, even
though significant shortcomings persisted in the areas of command and control,
leadership and logistics. Reports have pointed to increasing casualties among
security forces since June, particularly those killed in action. Questions about
sustainability continued to be raised, in the light of the high attrition rates.
Recruitment remained on target, but re-enlistment and retention remain low and
need to be increased to compensate for the losses incurred through casualties and
desertion. In July, Afghan National Army troop levels and Afghan National Police
numbers reached 86.6 per cent and 94 per cent, respectively, of projected levels.
Despite ongoing efforts to strengthen the operational capacity of the Afghan security

16-14928

5/16

A/71/616
S/2016/768

forces, they continued to rely on special forces and international military forces for
reinforcement.
21. In addition to the conflict between Afghan security forces and the Taliban,
violence continued with other armed anti-Government groups on Afghan territory,
including ISIL-KP. Since my last report, the Afghan security forces have increased
ground and air operations, supported by international military assets, against I SILKP in Nangarhar Province. Reportedly, these operations have resulted in significant
casualties among ISIL-KP fighters, including the death of its leader, Hafiz Saeed
Khan, on 26 July, and a further reduced presence of the group in the province. Some
of the dislodged ISIL-KP fighters were reported to have gone to Kunar Province.
22. Notwithstanding the consolidation of Haibatullah Akhundzada’s leadership of
the Taliban, armed clashes resumed in Shindand District of Herat Province in early
July between two local commanders affiliated with Akhundzada and Mullah Rasool,
reportedly resulting in the killing of several Taliban members, and continued
throughout early August.
23. During the reporting period, 14 recorded incidents were either directly or
indirectly against the United Nations. These included six cases of intimidation and
seven crime-related incidents which mainly affected Afghan staff members.

C.

Regional cooperation
24. Since my previous report, limited prospects for peace talks with the Taliban,
the status of Afghan refugees in Pakistan and border tensions have continued to
affect relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Pakistani authorities
remained committed to the implementation of their procedures at the Torkham
crossing point, as of 1 June allowing only Afghans with visas to cross. From 12 to
14 June, border forces exchanged fire at Torkham after Pakistan began installing a
gate in what both countries consider their territory. In total, four border force
personnel were killed and 40 wounded, and the crossing point was closed. After
diplomatic exchanges, the two countries announced a ceasefire on 15 June and
agreed on 24 June to establish a high-level coordination mechanism to prevent
cross-border clashes, which met in the city of Kabul on 26 July. When Pakistan
completed construction at the Torkham crossing point on 1 August, the Government
of Afghanistan denounced the works. Tensions increased again on 19 August, when
the Pakistani authorities closed the Chaman crossing point i n Kandahar Province, on
the grounds that Afghan border forces had failed to prevent attacks against the gate
by Afghan protesters. Meanwhile, political opposition figures and protestors
increased pressure on the Government of Afghanistan regarding its poli cy towards
Pakistan.
25. Regional engagement on infrastructure and connectivity projects continued
during the reporting period. On 4 June, President Ghani and the Prime Minister of
India, Narendra Modi, inaugurated the Indian-financed Salma Dam and committed
to turning the city of Herat into a regional transport hub. The Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Turkmenistan, Rashid Meredov, made visits to Afghanistan to discuss the
planned Herat-Torghundi railway and to announce funding for the Aqina -Andkhoy
railway. On 2 and 3 July, the President of Afghanistan visited the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and met with King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud and the Deputy Crown
Prince and Minister of Defence, Mohammad bin Salman Al Saud.

6/16

16-14928

A/71/616
S/2016/768

26. Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran increased their engagement
during the reporting period, following their trilateral agreement of 23 May with
India, centred on the Iranian port of Chabahar. The Islamic Republic of Iran hosted
a meeting of governors of border provinces of Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic
of Iran in Mashhad on 25 and 26 July to discuss security and new trade
opportunities involving the port. The Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Hekmat
Karzai, visited Tehran on 3 August for discussions on trade, infrastructure an d the
presence of Afghan nationals in the Islamic Republic of Iran. The National Security
Adviser, Hanif Atmar, visited the Islamic Republic of Iran on 6 and 7 August to
discuss border security and countering violent extremism. After a four -year interval,
the fifth Afghanistan-Islamic Republic of Iran Joint Economic Commission was
held on 10 August in Tehran.
27. Security and economic cooperation featured in discussions between
Afghanistan, Central Asian countries, China and the Russian Federation. At the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit in Tashkent, on 23 and 24 June, Heads
of State emphasized the importance for the region of peace and stability in
Afghanistan. President Ghani called on countries in the region to join Afghanistan
in fighting terrorism and to agree on regional cooperation mechanisms. The
National Security Adviser visited the Russian Federation from 25 to 27 July to
discuss cooperation against the threat of terrorism and security assistance. He also
visited Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan on 10 and 12 August to discuss security issues.
28. China initiated a Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination Mechanism to
counter terrorism involving Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan. At the inaugural
meeting of 3 August, hosted by China, the countries agreed to increase coordination
and information-sharing, including on border management.

III. Human rights
29. On 25 July, UNAMA released its midyear report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict in Afghanistan covering the period from 1 January to 30 June.
UNAMA documented 5,166 civilian casualties (1,601 deaths and 3,565 injured),
reflecting a 4 per cent increase as compared with the same period in 2015. This
represents the highest number of civilian casualties recorded by UNAMA in a
midyear report since 2009. The casualty figures include 507 women (130 deaths and
377 injured), an 11 per cent decrease as compared with the same period in 2015.
Child casualties increased significantly, by 18 per cent, to 1,509 (388 deaths and
1,121 injured), primarily as a result of ground engagements and unexploded
ordnance. The Mission attributed 60 per cent of all civilian casualties to
anti-Government elements, 23 per cent to pro-Government forces (of which 20 per
cent to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, 2 per cent to
pro-Government armed groups and 1 per cent to international military forces) and
13 per cent to crossfire between anti-Government elements and pro-Government
forces which could not be attributed to a single party. Four per cent of civilian
casualties were attributed to explosive remnants of war. Ground engagements
remained the leading cause of civilian casualties, accounting for 1,972 casualties
(459 deaths and 1,423 injured), followed by complex and suicide attacks and
improvised explosive devices. In response to the report, the Office of the President
issued a statement emphasizing its commitment to the protection of civilians and

16-14928

7/16

A/71/616
S/2016/768

stating that the Government had finalized its national policy on civilian casualty
mitigation, which would soon enter into force.
30. Large-scale attacks by Taliban and anti-Government elements in civilianpopulated areas and attacks directed at civilians continued. On 20 June, the Taliban
claimed responsibility for a suicide attack targeting a ve hicle transporting private
security contractors in the city of Kabul, killing 15 civilians and injuring 7 others.
On 30 June, a suicide attack against a convoy carrying Afghan National Police
cadets in the city of Kabul killed 34 civilians and injured 79. The Taliban claimed
responsibility.
31. Between 1 April and 30 June, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting documented and verified 399 incidents that resulted in the killing of
213 children (150 boys, 60 girls and three undetermined) and the injury of
600 others (395 boys, 203 girls and two undetermined). Ground engagements were
the leading cause of child casualties, with 436 casualties (54 per cent of all
casualties), followed by improvised explosive devices, with 123 child casualties
(15 per cent of all casualties). Explosive remnants of war were the third most
frequent cause of child casualties, with 95 casualties (12 per cent of all child
casualties). Aerial attacks led to 51 child casualties (6 per cent of all casualties),
including 42 attributed to the Afghan National Army and 9 to international military
forces. The task force attributed the remaining 108 child casualties to a number of
tactics, including targeted killings and suicide and complex attacks.
32. The task force attributed the largest number of child casualties (39 per cent),
including 212 casualties attributed to the Taliban, to anti -Government elements,
followed by pro-Government forces (36 per cent of child casualties). Four child
casualties were attributed to Pakistan military forces owing to cross-border shelling.
The remaining 203 casualties could not be attributed to any party to the conflict. Of
the remaining violations, the United Nations verified seven incidents targeting
education facilities; eight targeting health facilities; one incident of abduction
involving one boy; and four incidents of denial of humanitarian access. During the
reporting period, the United Nations received reports of the widespread use of
children in combat by the Taliban in Badakhshan Province. As a consequence, 100
to 120 households reportedly left the area, citing fear of the Taliban recruiting their
children as one of the reasons for moving. From June to August, the Ministry of the
Interior opened six new child protection units in police recru itment centres in
Bamyan, Sari Pul, Jawzjan, Samangan, Kunar and Laghman provinces, bringing the
total number of such units to 13 countrywide.
33. During the reporting period, the ministries of the Interior and Education and
the National Directorate of Security issued directives to strengthen the protection of
children. On 18 June, the Ministry of the Interior issued a directive prohibiting
media exposure of children arrested on national security charges. On 4 June and
4 July, the Ministry of Education sent two directives to all security-related
ministries highlighting the commitment of Afghanistan to the Safe Schools
Declaration and requesting security forces to stop using schools for military
purposes. On 2 July, the National Directorate of Security issue d a directive stopping
the transfer to and facilitating the release of children from adult detention facilities,
including the maximum security Detention Facility in Parwan Province, near the
city of Kabul.

8/16

16-14928

A/71/616
S/2016/768

34. The Government continued its efforts to address violence against women and
girls. On 11 June, the Government approved the strategy and the action plan on the
elimination of violence against women for the period 2016 -2020. On 26 July, the
Head of the Department of Women’s Affairs in the city of Ghazn i was attacked by
unknown assailants.
35. On 17 July, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
published its annual report on child marriage, documenting 235 cases of girls
married between March 2015 and March 2016. This represents a 4 per cent increase
as compared with the previous year. The report proposed a range of corrective
actions in line with the existing legal framework for the protection of girls.
36. During the reporting period, UNAMA documented the executions of two
women accused of “moral crimes” by anti-Government elements in Samangan and
Sari Pul provinces in northern Afghanistan on 16 July and 1 August, respectively. In
Takhar Province in June, attempts by anti-Government elements to implement
stoning sentences on one woman were averted after an intervention by elders. Since
the beginning of 2016, UNAMA has documented seven instances of parallel justice
punishments, resulting in the execution of four women and the physical punishment
of three women by anti-Government elements.
37. The United Nations continued to raise awareness of women’s rights and
provide direct support services to women. From 20 July to 10 August, the United
Nations organized round tables on women’s rights in Baghlan, Herat, Khost, Paktika
and Zabul provinces, which reached over 300 Afghans, including 180 women, and
televised debates. The United Nations continued to support 11 women’s protection
centres and 5 family guidance centres for survivors of domestic violence in
13 provinces. The Under-Secretary-General/Executive Director of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, visited the city of Kabul from 18 to 21 July and met with the
President and the Chief Executive.
38. On 15 June, the upper house of the National Assembly confirmed the prior
rejection by the lower house of the presidential decree of 2 September 2015 on
preventive detention, citing the rights to due process and liberty secured by the
Constitution. Other parts of the presidential decree wer e approved, including
provisions extending pretrial detention periods for individuals arrested on security related offences.
39. In response to a request by the Ministry of Justice, UNAMA completed its
countrywide assessment of juvenile rehabilitation centres in relation to the United
Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (the Havana
Rules). While there has been progress in the last decade, it was indicated in the
report that further improvements were required, such as increasing the number of
State juvenile rehabilitation centres.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and the coordination
of development assistance
40. Afghanistan continued to face challenges resulting from, inter alia, the 2014
transition and slow economic growth. At the above-mentioned NATO Summit held
in Warsaw in July, Donors renewed commitments to the security sector, but World

16-14928

9/16

A/71/616
S/2016/768

Bank and International Monetary Fund analyses have underscored consistently since
2012 that Afghan security expenditures will become unsustainable over time, absent
increased revenues from economic growth and expenditure consolidation,
particularly in the security sector.
41. On 20 July, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund approved
a three-year extended credit facility arrangement for Afghanistan valued at
$45 million. The economic programme under the facility is aimed to help catalyse
additional donor support and to support national policies for economic growth. After
Parliament ratified the accession treaty on 22 June, Afghanistan gained full
membership of the World Trade Organization on 29 July.
42. Government preparations for the Brussels Conference on Af ghanistan
continued, with a second draft of the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework released to development partners for comments on 30 July. Their
feedback focused on issues including macroeconomic projections, sectoral priorities
and the importance of addressing population displacement in government
development plans. The Government has committed itself to tabling a completed
draft of the framework at a special meeting of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board on 4 September.
43. In August, the Government began a preliminary presentation of sectoral
development plans, including the Citizen’s Charter model for service delivery,
agriculture, urban development, women’s economic empowerment and
infrastructure, to donor representatives in advance of the Brussels Conference.
Discussions also began on the Government’s proposals for refreshing deliverables
under the Self Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework for 2017 -2018,
with both Government and development partners aiming to ens ure that deliverables
are clearly linked to the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework.
On 31 July, civil society networks launched a series of national and subnational
consultations to map concerns and inform a position paper for the Brussel s
Conference.
44. The Government increased efforts to implement its anti-corruption agenda. On
30 June, the Government issued a presidential decree establishing a specialized
court to deal with corruption cases, the Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre. On
28 July, the President chaired the first meeting of the High Council on Governance,
Justice and Anti-Corruption. At the meeting, the High Council approved the
Supreme Court’s recommendations relating to the national jurisdiction of the
Centre’s courts, which will extend to major corruption cases committed in all
provinces involving senior officials or substantial monetary losses of a minimum of
5 million afghanis (approximately $73,000).
45. Developments were reported in the land reform process. On 12 July, the Chief
Executive Officer of the Afghanistan Land Authority announced that the approval
process for private investors leasing State-owned land had been streamlined from
52 administrative steps to 9. As a result, processing time went from several m onths
to several weeks, and land lease revenues increased from $140,000 to $3.4 million.
The UNAMA report, “Water Rights: An Assessment of Afghanistan’s Legal
Framework Governing Water for Agriculture” containing recommendations for
dispute resolution mechanisms, was shared with the Ministry of Energy and Water
and the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock.

10/16

16-14928

A/71/616
S/2016/768

46. The revision of the subnational governance policy, one of the Government’s
short-term commitments under the Self Reliance through Mutua l Accountability
Framework, continued. During the reporting period, the Independent Directorate of
Local Governance organized a series of provincial consultations on the revised draft
of the subnational governance policy in 30 of the 34 provinces. This is to be
followed by discussions with line ministries, civil society and international partners
before submission of the revised draft to the President and Cabinet for approval.
The Government also continued to implement its public service reform agenda. The
President appointed six municipal mayors in August through a competitive process,
bringing the total number of competitively appointed mayors to 21 out of 33 in 2016
or 154 in total.
47. The Government continued its efforts to professionalize the Afghan N ational
Police. Ministry of the Interior officials worked during the reporting period to
strengthen the Ministry’s strategic plan, with international support, including that of
UNAMA. On 31 July, the International Police Coordination Board approved the
outline for a detailed action plan to address key gaps in the areas of police
leadership, training, command and control, and monitoring and evaluation of
programme implementation. The United Nations continued to provide technical
support to promote a gender-sensitive security sector reform. In May and June,
UNAMA met with 314 female Afghan National Police members, representing some
10 per cent of the female police corps, as well as Afghan National Police officials in
19 of the 34 provinces, to assess progress. Gaps were identified in the protection of
female police officers, particularly with regard to workplace harassment and the
implementation of gender policies at the district level. On 11 July, the Ministry of
the Interior established a complaint mechanism to prevent and respond to sexual
harassment against women police. To increase the number of women police officers,
the Ministry provided training to 91 women Afghan National Police members in
Turkey.

V. Humanitarian assistance
48. The humanitarian situation remained of concern, with significant new conflict induced internal displacements exacerbated by continuing access challenges. The
vulnerability of rural communities was further exacerbated by continued
displacements, persistently high levels of malnutrition and limited access to health
care.
49. As at 14 August, the United Nations had recorded 211,246 newly internally
displaced persons since January 2016 in 29 of the 34 provinces, a 6.6 per cent
decrease as compared with the same period in 2015. At least 48,068 people have
been newly displaced since the beginning of June. Over half of the new
displacements were reported in the three provinces of Badakhshan, Helmand and
Takhar. In Nangarhar Province, 3,306 people have been displaced in the last two
months as a result of escalating air operations by government and international
forces against ISIL-KP. In Helmand Province, increased clashes around the
provincial capital of Lashkar Gah have resulted in the displacement of over 15,000
people to date. The United Nations and non-governmental organizations provided
humanitarian assistance, including cash, food and non -food items, to the displaced
populations. Access constraints and difficulties in determining accurate
displacement figures continue to hinder the humanitarian response.

16-14928

11/16

A/71/616
S/2016/768

50. Displaced populations remain extremely vulnerable, particularly communities
which have been displaced for prolonged periods or repeatedly. Food insecurity,
limited access to basic services, particularly health care and adeq uate water and
sanitation, further exacerbate health and malnutrition concerns. Recent assessments
of displaced populations across Afghanistan found emergency levels of severe acute
malnutrition among children under 5 years of age. Some of the provinces th at
reported the highest levels of displacements, including Helmand and Uruzgan, were
already experiencing difficulties in meeting the existing needs of 170,000 children
identified as requiring treatment for malnutrition due to limited service coverage.
51. The number of refugees returning through the United Nations voluntary
repatriation programme has increased substantially since July, after remaining very
low between January and June. As at 30 June, 7,804 refugees had been repatriated,
including 6,875 from Pakistan and 852 from the Islamic Republic of Iran. The
figures for returnees, particularly those from Pakistan, have increased by 450 per
cent in the first six weeks since 1 July. By 15 August, a total of 42,472 Afghans had
returned from Pakistan under the voluntary repatriation programme since 2002,
while 1,560 had returned from the Islamic Republic of Iran and 100 from other
countries. The increase is attributed to enhanced reintegration support by the United
Nations, including an increase in the individual repatriation grant from $150 to
$350, as well as uncertainties over the status of Afghan refugees in Pakistan beyond
the end of 2016 and reduced acceptance by host communities and local authorities.
52. Deportation and returns of undocumented Afghans from Pakistan have also
increased substantially since 1 July as compared with the first six months of the
year, whereas they remained steady from the Islamic Republic of Iran. This follows
a 25 per cent decrease in the deportation and returns of undocumen ted Afghans from
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran between 1 January and 30 June as
compared with the same period in 2015. The 253,041 undocumented Afghans
included 138,768 spontaneous returns (116,123 from the Islamic Republic of Iran
and 22,645 from Pakistan) and 114,273 deportations (99,649 from the Islamic
Republic of Iran and 14,624 from Pakistan). Numbers have peaked since July, with
a total of 29,135 returns and deportations from Pakistan in July and 35,000 in the
first two weeks of August. Returnees cited increased policing and uncertainty over
their status in Pakistan, including a fear of eviction, as the main reasons for leaving.
53. On 29 June, the Government of Pakistan extended the validity of Afghan
refugees’ proof of registration cards until the end of 2016, one day before they were
to expire. At a Tripartite Commission meeting in Islamabad on 19 July, the
Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan and the United Nations extended the
tripartite agreement governing the repatriation of Afgh an citizens in Pakistan. The
three parties reiterated their commitment to finding sustainable solutions for Afghan
refugees residing in Pakistan and their support for voluntary repatriation in
conditions of safety and dignity.
54. Afghan migration to Europe continued at a slower pace as compared with
2015. Since the beginning of the year, 44,699 Afghans have arrived in Europe by
sea, representing 17 per cent of arrivals, down from the June figure of 21 per cent.
The International Organization for Migration assisted 4,527 voluntary returnees, of
whom 79 per cent were men, from Europe between January and July, compared with
764 in the same period in 2015. Almost half the returnees had come from Germany,
even though increasing numbers from Greece and Turkey we re reported. Most

12/16

16-14928

A/71/616
S/2016/768

returned to Herat and Balkh provinces and the city of Kabul. Returnee numbers
continued to increase during the second quarter of the year, with 2,639 returnees
assisted, compared with 1,400 during the first quarter.
55. Efforts to eradicate polio, which remains endemic in Afghanistan, faced
renewed access and security challenges. One new polio case was identified during
the reporting period in Kunar Province, bringing the total number of new polio
cases in Afghanistan in 2016 to six. The number of children who could not be
vaccinated increased to 320,000 during the reporting period, up from 200,000
during the previous period. This includes an estimated 157,857 children in Kunduz
Province, where active fighting was under way, and 76,284 in Nangarhar Province,
where anti-Government elements prevented access. Quality monitoring of the
vaccination campaigns in Farah, Helmand and Kandahar provinces remained limited
because of insecurity, while threats of bans on vaccination campaigns continue in
several key provinces, including Kandahar and Helmand.
56. Humanitarian access constraints continue to be recorded under the United
Nations global monitoring frameworks, primarily associated with insecurity in the
eastern, southern and northern parts of the country. In total, 45 incidents against
non-governmental organizations, the United Nations and other international
organizations were registered between 1 May and 31 July, compared with 75 for the
first four months of the year. Five aid workers were killed and five injured during
the period compared with five killed and ten injured during the previous period.
Abductions for the year to date reflect 2015 trends, with 93 aid workers abducted
during 2016. The period from 1 May to 31 July showed a sharp reduction, with
12 aid workers abducted compared with 81 during the first four months of 2016.
57. Mine action partners, coordinated by the United Nations, cleared
39 minefields, one battlefield and three firing ranges between 1 May and 31 July,
with the result that 12 communities were declared mine-free. It is estimated that
4,005 minefields, 330 battlefield and 62 firing ranges remain, affecting 1,589
communities, along with a continued threat from pressure -plate improvised
explosive devices.
58. As at 10 August, overall humanitarian funding for Afghanistan stood at
$277 million, of which $122 million was designated for activities envisaged in the
2016 Afghanistan Humanitarian Response Plan and $157 million for the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. As at 10 August, the 2016
Plan was 31 per cent funded. The common humanitarian fund in Afghanistan has
received $44.2 million to date in 2016, with funding focused on emergency health
care, assistance to displaced families and humanitarian assessme nts. On 30 July, the
United Nations humanitarian country team endorsed the strategic objectives
developed by its Gender in Humanitarian Action Task Force on minimum standards
of gender mainstreaming.

VI. Counter-narcotics
59. During the reporting period, the summer poppy crop harvest ended, with initial
indications of an increase both in areas under cultivation and in opium production.
In Helmand Province, the Taliban offensive increased significantly following the
completion of the poppy harvest. Opium also continued to be a valuable source of
insurgent funding. Eradication efforts in Afghanistan during the growing season

16-14928

13/16

A/71/616
S/2016/768

were the lowest reported in the last decade, due to security challenges, particularly
in Helmand Province. Eight members of the Afghan security forces were killed and
seven injured in the course of eradication operations.
60. Between 24 May and 17 August, Afghan law enforcement authorities
conducted 325 counter-narcotics operations, resulting in the seizure of 375 kg of
heroin, 267 kg of morphine, 2,163 kg of opium, 6.41 kg of methamphetamine,
487 kg of hashish, 2,341 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 1,628 litres of liquid
precursor chemicals. In addition, 403 suspects were arrested and 63 vehicles,
53 weapons and 56 mobile telephones seized. One member of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces was killed and one wounded in the course of those
operations.
61. From 19 to 20 July, law enforcement officials from Afghanistan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, the Central Asian Regional Information and
Coordination Centre, the International Narcotics Control Board and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime met in Tashkent for the ninth session of the
Regional Intelligence Working Group on Precursors to revie w recent developments
on precursor trafficking and identify next steps. Participants emphasized the need
for strengthened information-sharing through regional bodies, including the
Coordination Centre. Participants also discussed extending membership to ot her
regional bodies, including the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. They also agreed to further measures aimed at
identifying and intercepting consignments of chemicals smuggled into the region for
use in the illicit manufacture of heroin.

VII. Mission support
62. UNAMA completed the construction of its new premises in the city of
Kunduz, including residential facilities and works to ensure compliance with
minimum operating security standards. Redeployment of international staff to the
city of Kunduz commenced on 8 August. Between 1 June and 31 July, UNAMA
conducted 180 road and 140 air missions, as well as 350 reverse outreach missions
during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
63. In recent months, the Government has focused on addressing security and
economic challenges, including steps toward countering corruption, as well as
preparations for the critical forthcoming Brussels conference on Afghanistan .
However, the political rifts in recent weeks have strained the unity of the
Government. United, strong leadership will be essential in addressing the complex
security, economic and development challenges that face the nation. I call on the
country’s leaders to demonstrate a spirit of cooperation and achieve meaningful
agreement on the path forward, for the benefit of the people of Afghanistan.
64. A number of prominent Afghans have publicly voiced concern about the
course being taken by the Government. I encourage them to adopt a more
constructive engagement in this regard, in order to enhance and support the capacity

14/16

16-14928

A/71/616
S/2016/768

of the Government to implement effective reforms. I call upon all leaders to rise
above their political differences and act in the interest s of the nation.
65. This constructive approach is crucial in the face of an intensifying conflict.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains complex, with persistently high levels
of armed clashes and suicide attacks, including the attack of 23 July against a
demonstration by ethnic Hazaras, claimed by ISIL-KP, which was the deadliest
single incident recorded by the United Nations in Afghanistan since 2001. The
increasing rates of civilian deaths and injuries, together with ongoing displacement,
entail the continuous erosion of the human rights of women, men and children, in
particular the rights to life and physical integrity, access to education and freedom
of movement. I once again urge all parties to take action to mitigate the impact of
conflict upon the population. The Taliban must uphold international humanitarian
law. After the announcement of its national policy on civilian casualty mitigation
and the accompanying action plan, it will be important for the Government to move
forward with the implementation of the plan.
66. Despite progress in the development of a normative framework, insecurity and
entrenched discrimination continued to block the full enjoyment of rights,
particularly by women, resulting in violence and restrictions on their rol e in public
life. The targeted attack against the Head of the Department of Women’s Affairs in
the city of Ghazni on 26 July by unknown assailants demonstrated the significant
threats faced by prominent women working in public life.
67. The scope and intensity of the conflict and the need to provide key enablers to
the Afghan security forces were recognized in the decisions at the above -mentioned
NATO Summit to extend the presence of the Resolute Support Mission and on
financing for the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. The finalization of
appointments for all security-related ministries is a welcome development.
Continued efforts will be required to address the sustainability of the security sector
and to address major issues of capacity, morale and internal cohesion. I continue to
be concerned by any move to utilize irregular armed forces. A lack of accountability
and oversight can do more harm than good, and risks undermining government
legitimacy and the rule of law.
68. In advance of the forthcoming Brussels Conference, the Government has taken
steps to strengthen institutions to counter corruption, which is crucial for the
confidence of the Afghan population and donors. The first meeting of the High
Council on Governance, Justice and Anti-Corruption and the establishment of the
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre were important first steps toward greater
accountability and increasing public trust. This is a systematic and complex
undertaking which must follow due process. In the field of elections, there is a need
to accelerate progress on reforms and preparations for upcoming electoral cycles.
69. The decision by the upper house of the National Assembly to reject the
preventive detention article in the presidential decree of 2 September 2015 i s a
welcome development. It is hoped that the Government will also amend the
provisions of the decree relating to the extension of the pretrial detention period to
ensure compliance with the Constitution and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights.
70. Security and political stability will be a prerequisite for economic growth, in
particular to expand opportunities in the agricultural sector. Economic growth will

16-14928

15/16

A/71/616
S/2016/768

also depend on the implementation of a legal and regulatory framework that
encourages investment, private sector engagement and access to basic services. The
consultations with civil society and the development of plans on the Citizen’s
Charter model in advance of the Brussels Conference are encouraging, in
recognition of the crucial role of communities in achieving development outcomes.
The meaningful participation of Afghan women in both preparing and implementing
the Brussels agenda will be essential to its full realization.
71. 2016 has witnessed large numbers of people displaced as a result of conflict. I
remain concerned about the capacity of the Government of Afghanistan to ensure
their safety and welfare. If their needs are to be fully assessed and met, greater
access, security and funding will be required. I urge all countri es in the region and
beyond to ensure that the return process for Afghan refugees is voluntary, safe and
dignified, taking into consideration the current context of Afghanistan.
72. In the longer term, the support of countries in the region is essential fo r
economic growth in Afghanistan, as well as for addressing issues of peace and
security. The multiple infrastructure initiatives under way will boost prospects for
trade and exchange and reflect common interests in future prosperity. Regional
frameworks for ensuring stability and advancing dialogue have an important role to
play. The reporting period has seen particular challenges in the relationship between
Pakistan and Afghanistan. I urge the leadership of both countries to work together to
overcome the difficulties and rebuild confidence. I support outreach under the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process to build collaboration in countering the threat of
transnational terrorism, whose defeat requires a coordinated, regional approach.
73. The overriding imperative remains peace. I regret that the Taliban did not
accept the call by the President in his Ramadan statement to join a peace process.
The United Nations continues to engage with all parties and stands ready to provide
support. Creating conditions conducive for peace will require a determined and
unified Afghan leadership. I encourage Member States to facilitate stability in
Afghanistan, including the exercise of such influence as may be possible on the
Taliban, to help lay the groundwork for direct talks with the Government.
74. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication under
challenging conditions to fulfil our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

16/16

16-14928
