THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ

Mindful as well that all Member States are obliged to
refrain in their international relations from the threat of
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State,
Recalling that under Article 24 of the Charter the
Security Council has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Deeply concerned about the developing situation
between Iran and Iraq,
I. Calls upon Iran and Iraq to refrain immediately
from any further use of force and to settle their dispute
by peaceful means and in confotmity with principle-; ,if
justice and international law;
2. Urges them to accept any appropriate offer or
mediation or conciliation or to resort to regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means of their
own choice that would facilitate the fulfilment of their
obligations under the Charter of the United Natiom:
3. C<1lls upon all other States to exerc1!-,e ,he utmost restraint and to refrain from any act which mav
lead to a further escalation and widening of the cOl{tlict;
4. Supports the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the offer of his good offices for the rcsolutwn nf
this situation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report I o the
Security Council within forty-eight hours.

Decisions

On 23 September 1980, the President of the Council
issued the following statement:
"Members of the Security Council have today exchanged views in informal consultations on the extremely serious situation prevailing between Iran
and Iraq. They have taken note of the sharp deterioration in relations and of the escalation in armed
activity leading to loss of life and heavy material
damage.
"Members of the Council are deeply concerned
that this conflict can prove increasingly serious and
could pose a grave threat to international peace and
security.
"The members of the Council welcome and fully
support the appeal of the Secretary-General, addressed to both parties on 22 September 1980 as
well as the offer that he has made of his good offices
to resolve the present conflict.
"The members of the Council have asked me to
appeal, on their behalf, to the Governments of Iran
and Iraq, as a first step towards a solution of the
conflict, to desist from all armed activity and all acts
that may worsen the present dangerous situation and
to settle their dispute by peaceful means."ss

Ado{ltetl 11n1111imo11.,h· "' r/,,
2!4Xth meering

At its 2247th meeting, on 26 September I 980, the
Cou!'~il decid~d to invite the representative of Iraq to
part1c1pate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled "The situation between Iran and Iraq."

Decisions

At its 2250th meeting, on 15 October 1980. the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Cuba
and Iran to participate, without vote. in the discussion
of the question.

At i!s 22~8th meeting, on 28 September 1980, the
Counc1! ~ec1ded _to invite the representative of Japan
to part1c1pate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

On 5 November 1980, the President of the Council
issued the following statement:
"Du~ing recent d~ys, members of the Security
Council have continued intensive consultations
abo~t the situation between Iran and Iraq. Their aim
contmues to be to bring an early end to the hostilities
and to bring about a peaceful settlement of tl:1e di-;pute in accordance with the purposes and principle-;
of the Charter of the United Nations.
··Members of the Council are deeply concernetl
that hostil_ities continue, with resulting loss of life
and matenal da~age. They continue to urge that all
concerned be gmded by Member States· obligations
under the Charter to settle their international disputes b~ peaceful means and in such a manne 1 that
mternat1onal peace and security and justice ;n e rwt

Resolution 479 (1980)
of 28 September 1980

The Security Council,
Having begun consideration of the item entitled
.. The situation between Iran and Iraq".
Mindful that all Member States have undertaken
under the Charter of the United Nations, the obligatio~
to se~tle their international disputes by peaceful means
and m such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered,
., S/14190.

23
