S/PV.8038

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8038th meeting

Wednesday, 30 August 2017, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Cheng Lie
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Melki
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Ilnytskyi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-27253 (E)
*1727253*

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and your team for
all the hard work throughout the course of this month
in effectively and successfully steering the activities
of the Security Council. I speak on behalf of the three
African members of the Council, and would like to
focus on the African issues that we have dealt with
under your presidency.
The briefing that the Council received on 10 August
(see S/PV.8022) from Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed on her recent visit to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of Congo — accompanied
by the Executive Director of UN-Women, the United
Nations Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security — was very important in drawing attention
to the plight of women and girls in conflict situations.
That joint United Nations-African Union high-level
mission, which was the first of its kind, also served to
highlight the cooperation and partnership between the
two organizations in advancing the women and peace
and security agenda in Africa. We believe that agenda
should be welcomed and encouraged.
We also attach importance to the oral briefing
that we received on 15 August 2017 (see S/PV.8024)
on the activities undertaken over the past two months
since the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017) in order
to operationalize the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force. The funding gap will be a major challenge, as it
hampers the full operationalization of the Joint Force.
We believe that there is an urgent need to mobilize
international support for the Force. No doubt, the
multi-faceted challenges facing the Sahel region can
be effectively addressed only through a comprehensive
2/17

30/08/2017

strategy that encompasses security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, the rapid and effective implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as
called for in resolution 2359 (2017), is absolutely critical.
We hope that countries of the region, in cooperation
with bilateral and multilateral partners, will redouble
their efforts in implementing the Strategy.
In the light of the current situation in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, we appreciate the briefing (see
S/PV.8026) we received from the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) on the activities of the Committee. We
commend the work that the Committee and its Group of
Experts have been doing in trying to address the many
difficult and complex challenges facing the Democratic
Republic of Congo and to promote peace and stability
in the country.
In that regard, the continuous efforts being made to
consult with the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the countries of the region, including
in the context of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, as well as to forge greater synergy
and cooperation with other regional and international
partners, is commendable. The presence of the families
of Ms. Zaida Catalán and Mr. Michael Sharp, the two
members of the Group of Experts who were mercilessly
killed while on duty, was the highlight of the meeting.
The Council’s support and follow-up for the efforts to
bring the perpetrators of that heinous crime to justice
are absolutely important.
In that regard, the briefing on the report of the
Board of Inquiry that was tasked with establishing the
facts in relation to the tragic killing of Zaida Catalán
and Michael Sharp was very useful. We hope that its
recommendations will be looked at seriously so as to
avoid similar tragic incidents in the future. We wish
to reiterate that everything should be done and no
stone should be left unturned to get to the bottom of
who the criminals might be and how that dastardly
and unspeakable crime was committed. We must also
stress how critical it is to work in partnership with
the Government to achieve the desired result, and we
express our confidence that the Government will do
whatever it takes to help bring the killers to justice.
The security and humanitarian situation in South
Sudan remains a source of concern, and the briefing
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

we received on 24 August was not encouraging (see
S/PV.8030). All parties should cease hostilities and stop
obstructions to humanitarian operations. It is important
that the Council supported the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) high-level
Revitalization Forum as the clearest path towards peace
in South Sudan, urged all parties to fully participate
in the Forum and called on IGAD to convene it
expeditiously.
The continued political impasse in Guinea-Bissau
and the lack of progress on the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement is another source of concern.
We welcome the recent visit by the Chair of Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012) and by the Peacebuilding Commission
country-specific configuration on Guinea-Bissau,
including their series of engagements with various
stakeholders. There is an urgent need to overcome
the impasse to create conditions for the holding of
legislative and presidential elections in 2018 and 2019,
respectively.
The centrality of the Conakry Agreement to
sustain peace, security and development in GuineaBissau cannot be overemphasized. We reiterate our
call for all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to respect
and comply with the Conakry Agreement in addressing
the differences in the challenges facing the country.
We believe that the concerted efforts by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the European Union and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau also
remain indispensable in finding a durable solution to
the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. We also underline
the significant role played by the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau in ensuring the stability of the country.
We urge all international partners to continue to
extend the necessary support to address the financial
difficulties faced by the Mission in continuing to
implement its mandate.
The holding of a peaceful and credible election
will mark a significant milestone for Liberia in
its democratic transition to peacebuilding and
peacebuilding endeavours. The briefing we received
on the preparations for the upcoming presidential and
legislative elections in Liberia, in line with resolution
2333 (2016), was useful for closely following the
developments in the country. We note the start of the
election campaign process and stress the need for

S/PV. 8038

Liberian political parties to remain committed to the
Farmington River Declaration, which they signed on
4 June, in order to facilitate the conducting of peaceful
and violence-free elections to pave the way for a
successful democratic transition.
We commend the extensive engagement and followup of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring the
smooth transition of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) and developing the capacity of the
Government of Liberia. Moreover, we encourage the
cooperation among UNMIL, ECOWAS, the Manor
River Union, the African Union and other relevant
organizations in supporting the transition. We also
urge international partners to continue to extend the
necessary support to Liberia at such important juncture
in its transition.
With regard to the situation in Libya, we welcome
the appointment of Special Representative of SecretaryGeneral, Ghassan Salamé. We appreciate his briefing
(see S/PV.8032) on his recent initial consultations with
all Libyan stakeholders. We also commend the work
done by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) under the leadership
of Ambassador Olof Skoog, as well as the by Panel of
Experts on the monitoring and implementation of the
sanctions regime.
The need to reinvigorate an inclusive political
process under the auspices of the United Nations to
address the contentious issues in the Libyan Political
Agreement is very well recognized. While it is the
primary responsibility of the Libyan actors to achieve
an inclusive and comprehensive political solution, the
continued and coordinated efforts of the neighbouring
countries and regional organizations and the United
Nations remain critical to achieving durable peace
and stability. In that regard, we support the continued
endeavours of the African Union high-level political
committee to foster national reconciliation in Libya.
We also look forward to the upcoming African Union
high-level committee and the quartet meetings in
Brazzaville and New York, respectively, which would
help to further enhance and harmonize international
assistance for the people of Libya.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): First, allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on a successful presidency during
the month of August. I would like to touch upon two
issues today, namely, North Korea and the revision of
presidential note S/2010/507.

17-272533/17

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

First, with regard to North Korea, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2371 (2017) on 5 August
in response to the two ballistic-missile launches with
intercontinental range in July. All Members of the
United Nations must demonstrate renewed commitment
to rigorously and thoroughly implementing the existing
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2371
(2017). In addition, just yesterday, the Security Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/16) that
strongly condemns the most recent missile launch by
North Korea, which flew over Japan. The statement
demonstrates the unity of the Security Council and
sends a strong and clear message that North Korea
should immediately cease such provocative actions. We
urge North Korea to abide by this international call.
Secondly, on the revision of presidential note
507, as the Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions, I
would like to take this opportunity to announce that
the Council has just agreed on a revision of the note by
consensus. The Security Council held an open debate on
the working methods of the Council in July of last year,
during Japan’s presidency, (see S/PV.7740), and listened
closely to the voices of not only Council members, but
also the broader United Nations membership in order
to identify areas that would benefit from adjustments.
Having collected some useful ideas and proposals
from that debate, we explored them in the Working Group
in the process of reviewing and updating presidential
note 507 over the subsequent months. As I said a few
hours ago, the Council agreed on a revised note 507 after
undertaking a series of textual negotiations starting in
May. Thanks to the contributions of the members of
the Working Group, I believe that the agreed revision
represents a comprehensive and balanced text that can
serve as a useful handbook on the agreed measures or
best practices on working methods of the Council. Let
me highlight a few points on the main revisions in some
detail in order to address the interests of the broader
membership.
In terms of the overall structure and content, the
revised note consolidates, streamlines and restructures
presidential note 507, of 2010, and all 13 other standalone presidential notes, including the most recent
one (S/2016/619), concerning preparing newly
elected members, as well as the selection process and
preparation of Chairs of subsidiary bodies.
4/17

30/08/2017

In addition, among others, the revised note includes
the following new elements.
On the monthly programme of work, incoming
presidencies are encouraged to discuss the programme
with other Council members well in advance of their
respective presidencies.
On informal consultations, the note refers to
additional measures, such as encouraging briefers to be
succinct and direct, making more effective use of “Other
matters” to raise issues of concern by signalling the
intention at least one day in advance, and encouraging
presidencies to suggest elements to the press at the end
of consultations.
On the drafting process of outcome documents of the
Council, the note refers to co-penholdership, including
taking into account the expertise and/or contributions
of Council members on the subject, encouraging
at least one round of face-to-face discussions with
all members of the Council in an inclusive manner,
providing sufficient time for consideration before the
silence procedure, and making the documents focused,
succinct and action-oriented.
On dialogue with non-Council members and bodies,
the note refers for the first time to the importance
of annual joint consultative meetings and informal
dialogues with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as to consideration of joint
missions of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to address
conflict situations in Africa.
The note also refers to the Council members’
intention to regularly request, deliberate on and draw
upon the specific, strategic and targeted advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
On Security Council missions, the note refers to
additional elements concerning their value, as well as
aspects related to preparation, itineraries and followup.
I believe that the revised product is full of
very useful ideas for enhancing the effectiveness,
efficiency, inclusivity and transparency of the Council,
if implemented appropriately, especially during our
respective presidencies. While the codification of
best practices is a useful exercise, it is not an end in
itself. What is most important is implementation and
the actual practice of the Council. It is my hope that
this revised note will be utilized as an important basis
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

for continuing to make further improvements in the
working methods through the daily work of the Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): As we
consider the Security Council’s work in August, I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your Mission on a
successful presidency.
I turn first to the issue of North Korea, which, in
a sense, has bookended the month. We saw a strong
example of Security Council unity in early August,
and then an alarming reminder of the North Korean
threat just this week. The Council came together on
the first Saturday of August (see S/PV.8019) for the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2371 (2017), which
sends a stark message to the North Korean dictatorship:
they will pay a price for the aggression and arrogance
of continuing their prohibited nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes. With our action, the Council also
reminded all United Nations States Memabers that they
must rigorously enforce this newest resolution, which
includes the single-largest economic sanctions package
ever levelled against the North Korean regime, as well
as all previous Security Council resolutions.
With its behaviour in recent days, however, North
Korea’s leaders have made it crystal clear that they are
not yet ready to abandon their dangerous path. Twelve
members of the Council alone are within reach of their
missiles, and I would remind my colleagues that North
Korean has proven it is not beholden to friendships and
alliances. Even as we rightly celebrate the adoption of
resolution 2371 (2017), we must recognize that North
Korea will persist in its behaviour, as evidenced by
Monday’s highly provocative launch over Japan.
Last night, the Council once again unanimously
condemned North Korea by adopting presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/16). There should be no doubt
in anyone’s mind that the Council will not acquiesce,
but will continue to increase pressure on the regime and
seek to change North Korea’s path.
Turning to the issue of sanctions more generally, I
commend your Mission, Mr. President, for its work this
month in holding a briefing (see S/PV.8018) to consider
the design and effectiveness of United Nations sanctions.
We also held meetings on the sanctions regimes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.8026),
Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.8031) and Libya (see
S/PV.8032). Taken together, those meetings show that,
when the Council speaks with one voice to implement
and enforce sanctions, we demonstrate our capacity to

S/PV. 8038

promote and protect international peace and security.
When we do not speak with one voice we undermine
both the effectiveness of sanctions as a tool and the
credibility of the Security Council. However, Council
unity is not an end goal. When the Council is unwilling
or unable to enforce or enact sanctions, the United
States will take action, including unilateral sanctions,
to defend ourselves, our allies or our values. I urge
Council members to boost their efforts to effectively
use this important tool.
I also thank you, Mr. President, for holding in open
Chamber the briefing by the Chair of the Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which allowed the families of Michael Sharp and
Zaida Catalán to participate. I encourage my colleagues
on the Council to support the Secretary-General in his
efforts to immediately establish, under his authority,
an independent investigation into the deaths of those
two experts.
Yesterday’s open debate considered the issue
of peacekeeping operations in the larger context of
sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033), and we welcomed the
opportunity to discuss how that fits into a broader vision
for peacekeeping reform. Looking ahead, we will have
another opportunity to consider peacekeeping reform
at Ethiopia’s Council meeting next month during highlevel week. I understand that a draft resolution will be
adopted at that meeting, and I urge Council members
to produce a strong text that reinforces peacekeeping
effectiveness and efficiency and allows us to better
assess performance. While we support the efforts of the
African Union (AU) to increase financial self-reliance,
I would remind my colleagues that the AU must take
more steps on that front before we are ready to enshrine
any decisions in a resolution.
I also wish to highlight the Council’s upcoming visit
next week to Addis Ababa for consultations with the
AU Peace and Security Council. That annual dialogue
affords the Security Council an important opportunity
to demonstrate our commitment to the AU and to
further United Nations-African Union cooperation. In
that regard, I thank you, Mr. President, for your steady
and professional leadership of the Council this month.
Finally, I also wish to commend our Japanese
colleague for his Mission’s excellent work on the
revision of the note by the President contained in
document S/2010/507, which was adopted earlier

17-272535/17

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

today. The revision goes a long way to improving the
Council’s working methods and contributes to the
Council’s effectiveness, efficiency and transparency. I
congratulate Japan for its tireless and successful efforts
on this important matter.
In conclusion, we offer our support to Ethiopia as its
delegation takes up the gavel in the month of September.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council’s agenda this month
was quite full. I would like to thank you personally,
Mr. President, as well as your entire delegation, for the
effective and skilful way in which you discharged your
duties as President. Your presidency was so good that
we did not notice the month’s passing.
We would like to note that the Egyptian initiatives
were very topical. I refer in particular to the Security
Council meeting on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons (see S/PV. 8017) and the resolution we adopted
to that end (resolution 2370 (2017)). Our discussion
of this topic showed yet again that it is necessary to
adopt more stringent weapons-control mechanisms, as
weapons still manage to fill the arsenals of a number of
terrorist organizations almost without hindrance.
The discussion on general issues of sanctions once
again allowed us to outline the issues in this area. Despite
certain differences of opinion, the majority of members
of the Council spoke in favour of further improving our
sanctions tools in order to make them more effective and
ensure that the humanitarian cost is as low as possible.
It is also important that it has been stated very loudly
and clearly that unilateral interpretations of sanctions
are unacceptable, as is the adoption of supplementary
unilateral restrictions. When it comes to reaffirming
that there is no alternative the political settlement of
conflicts, the open debate on the role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in undertaking peacebuilding
tasks and sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033) was quite
useful.
We also saw in August another resolution on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (resolution
2371 (2017)), which introduced unprecedented, strict
economic restrictions on that country. We are convinced
that the possibility of exerting further sanctions
pressure on Pyongyang has now been exhausted. We
cannot support the idea of economically suffocating
North Korea and its people. We need to concentrate
on the political track. There is no alternative to the
political settlement of all of the issues in the Korean
6/17

30/08/2017

peninsula. This point was reiterated in the presidential
statement of 29 August 2017 (S/PRST/2017/16).
Our discussions of Middle East issues showed that
the time is more right now than ever to take practical
measures to overcome the impasse in the IsraeliPalestinian cluster of issues, which is key to resolving
many other issues in the region. In the Syrian conflict,
after de-escalation areas were created, we have noticed
positive developments there. In those areas and in other
local truce areas, we are witnessing a return to normal
life. Demining is being carried out, transport links are
being restored, the economic infrastructure is being
rebuilt, people are returning to their homes — all of
which enables us to concentrate on fighting terrorism.
We think that it is important to reinforce those trends,
which meet the preconditions necessary for moving
forward in the intra-Syrian dialogue in Geneva. We
supported the Egyptian presidency’s proposal to
optimize Council meetings on Syrian issues.
We note that there is positive and constructive
interaction among all Lebanese political forces,
through which the country managed to break out of its
prior political stagnation. We think that all of the issues
on the country’s national agenda, including those issues
related to security, need in future to be addressed in a
legal framework through dialogue among all the forces
in the country. We support the work being carried out
by United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
As to the critical situation in Yemen, in particular
the humanitarian aspects, additional measures by the
United Nations are needed in order to make sure that
there is unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas
of the country. We need to exert pressure on all sides
to the conflict. It is only through an immediate, allencompassing ceasefire without preconditions that a
resumption of the political processes will be possible.
The resolution of the crisis in Yemen should be found
in the political sphere.
Also, in keeping with tradition, we discussed
African issues. The meetings on that topic confirmed
that African problems should have African solutions.
Furthermore, the idea that violating a State’s sovereignty
or interfering in its internal affairs is unacceptable
remains axiomatic.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank our
Egyptian colleagues and to wish every success to the
delegation of Ethiopia, which will take up the gavel in
September.
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and Egypt, for your and your Mission’s
able stewardship in the month of August, which was
less quiet than expected, and for deciding to convene a
formal wrap-up session.
I will focus on two overarching horizontal issues
that were featured prominently during the month,
namely, non-proliferation and terrorism.
On non-proliferation, at the beginning of August,
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2371
(2017), sending once again an unequivocal message of
unity from the international community. By strongly
condemning North Korea’s increasing provocations,
we showed our determination to confront this new level
of threat to international peace and security by taking
further action. The resolution, adopted on 5 August,
provides for the broadest, most comprehensive set of
sanctions applied by the Security Council in decades.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), we are committed to ensuring
the full and effective implementation of all relevant
measures. We are continuing efforts in that regard by
reaching out to the entire United Nations membership
to ensure that the latest measures are understood and
applied quickly and comprehensively. I would also
like to recall that we are also committed to ensuring,
as reaffirmed in resolution 2371 (2017) itself, that the
sanctions regime should not have a negative effect on
the humanitarian situation in the country and that the
sanctions remain a tool in a broader strategy aimed at
the peaceful political resolution of the issue.
In any case, the most recent ballistic missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, which Italy condemns in the strongest terms,
confirmed the need for the Council to remain alert on
this very sensitive issue. The swift adoption yesterday
of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/16, following
consultations, confirms once again the Council’s unity
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea file.
On terrorism, the recent attack in Barcelona, Spain,
in which citizens from more than 30 countries were
affected — including Italy — reminds us of the global
nature of this scourge. The Egyptian presidency rightly
made counter-terrorism a priority during this month,
as only collective solutions can tackle this challenge.
Early in the month, the Council adopted resolution
2370 (2017), on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons. It is a substantial step forward, in our

S/PV. 8038

view, in the international community’s commitment
to combating the illegal trafficking in weapons,
which represents a threat to peace and security and
undermines the stability of State institutions. We look
forward to meeting the new Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
September to discuss how the United Nations and the
international community can comprehensively tackle
terrorism and violent extremism.
I also want to briefly highlight that this month the
Council received the first briefing by the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and
head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé (see S/PV.8032). Significantly,
Mr. Salamé delivered his briefing via video-conference
from Tripoli, thereby showing his commitment to work
as much as possible in Libya. The Council confirmed its
full support of Mr. Salamé and his first initiatives in that
role, thereby injecting new momentum into the political
process and the central mediation role of the United
Nations. During the briefing, a number of delegations,
including Italy, also raised the issue of migration and
the need to address it using a comprehensive approach.
To conclude, I would like to refer to the Council’s
working methods. Under the able leadership of Japan,
and as Ambassador Koro Bessho just reminded us,
the Council has completed the revision of Note by
the President S/2010/507, on working methods. The
new note represents a significant step forward in the
constant improvement of the working methods, the
transparency and the accountability of this organ. Of
course, as Ambassador Bessho also mentioned, daily
practice of what has been agreed will make the true
difference, as I mentioned during the meeting on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon meeting (see S/PV.8037). In that
respect, allow me to draw members’ attention to the
need for negotiations among Council members — in
particular when renewing peacekeeping mandates — to
be conducted in the most inclusive and transparent way
possible, and for the need to give due consideration to
the positions of troop-contributing countries and of the
countries hosting peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, Mr. President, congratulations again
on your presidency. We look forward to a busy and
productive month of September under the presidency
of Ambassador Tekeda Alemu and the Ethiopian team.

17-272537/17

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Bolivia congratulates you and your entire
team, Mr. President, on the efficient and professional
conduct of the work of the Security Council during
the month of August. We had a very busy month, in
particular this last week, however, it was also a very
productive month in which the Security Council dealt
with very important issues for international peace
and security.
Among the month’s topics that we wish to highlight
is the open briefing on sanctions, held on 3 August
(see S/PV.8018), during which members of the Security
Council were able to express their views on that
vitally important issue, which has implications for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The need for sanctions, their implementation, their
effectiveness and even when they should be lifted were
some of the points that Council members discussed
during the meeting. For our part, we reiterate that
sanctions should not be an end in itself, but rather a
means to an end. Sanctions are one of the Council’s
tools for the maintenance of peace and security, and
should be among the last to be used. In that connection,
we categorically reject the imposition of unilateral
sanctions. Such actions not only constitute a flagrant
violation of international law, but also undermine the
efforts and work of multilateral bodies such as ours — as
they extend domestic jurisdiction and legislation from
one State to another, thereby violating the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Still on the issue of sanctions, this month the
Council adopted new sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We believe that they should
serve as an instrument to achieve dialogue among
the parties, with the ultimate goal of denuclearizing
of the Korean peninsula. The Security Council has
demonstrated great unity during this month in adopting
resolution 2371 (2017) and, yesterday, presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/16. That unity must serve to
achieve a peaceful political solution to the conflict.
We must support all efforts that have been presented
by some Council members to that end. A military
conflict cannot be one of the options, as it would have
unimaginable consequences.
We are living through the worst humanitarian
crisis since 1945. This month the Council addressed
the current situation in various countries in crisis, such
as Yemen (see S/PV.8027), where, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
8/17

30/08/2017

Refugees and the World Food Programme, more than
20 million people require humanitarian assistance,
17 million people are food insecure, more than 2 million
are internally displaced and 280,000 are refugees.
Similarly, South Sudan, a country that the Council
often discusses, also faces a complicated humanitarian
situation, since almost 50 per cent of the population
requires humanitarian assistance.
We would also like to note the initiative of Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and of the
Egyptian delegation in convening the open briefing on
sexual violence on 10 August (see S/PV.8022). The field
visit by the Deputy Secretary-General is very important
for laying the foundation for collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union in order to
promote the participation of women in peace processes.
Gender equality is critical to building sustainable peace
processes. We hope that such visits can be replicated in
other regions in coordination with other regional and
subregional organizations.
We would also like to underline the thematic
continuity of the Council in recent months under various
presidencies. For example, in June, we held an open
briefing on cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (see S/PV.7971); in July, under
the Chinese presidency, we held an open debate on
improving African capabilities in the area of peace and
security (see S/PV.8006); and just yesterday, we held
an open debate on peacekeeping and peacebuilding (see
S/PV.8033). Next month we will hold an open debate
on peacekeeping operations. We hope that this thematic
continuity will enrich the debate between the United
Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union during next week’s joint
consultative meeting between the two bodies.
Finally, Bolivia would also like to join others in
commending His Excellency Ambassador Koro Bessho
of Japan for his work in revising note by the President
S/2010/507. We also express our full support to the
Permanent Mission of Ethiopia, which will assume the
presidency of the Council in September. We pledge our
full support to its team and are confident that they will
do excellent work.
Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): We appreciate this
opportunity to discuss, in open Chamber, the work
of the Security Council in August. Since Ukraine
presided over the Security Council during the month of
February, this is only the second time this year that the
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV. 8038

Security Council has held such a briefing. We welcome
the return of formal wrap-up sessions and hope that
future presidencies will revive this practice, which is
in keeping with the implementation presidential note
(S/2010/507).

the proper implementation of sanctions. The use of
additional measures and organizations’ own specific
instruments to better respond to breaches of the peace
and other grave violations of international law is an
essential part of the international toolbox in that area.

We also thank you personally, Mr. President,
and commend the Egyptian delegation for fulfilling
the responsibilities of the presidency throughout
the month in a transparent and professional manner.
Despite the fact that August is usually a rather slow
month, this year it was quite packed. We had several
important discussions and adopted a number of truly
landmark resolutions.

In August, the Council adopted resolution 2371
(2017), an important resolution that introduced
additional sanctions against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It was a difficult, but nonetheless
unavoidable step, since the Council has a duty to ensure
accountability for actions that violate established
international norms and principles. North Korea’s
behaviour in advancing its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes is nothing other than one of the most
vivid examples of blatant violations of the international
law. Besides engaging in misguided and reckless
efforts to establish its own nuclear arsenal instead
of improving the living conditions of its people, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea spares no effort
to find new ways to circumvent established restrictions
and prohibitions. The gravity of the situation was
highlighted by the recent ballistic missile launch by
North Korea, and we welcomed yesterday’s unanimous
and firm reaction of the Council, which culminated in
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/16.

At the outset of the Egyptian presidency, the
Council adopted resolution 2370 (2017), on preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons. Considering the
spread of terrorism around the world today, as well as the
significant involvement of certain States in supporting
terrorist activities abroad, we commend the Egyptian
delegation for coming forward with that initiative, which
was very timely. We expect that, having unanimously
adopted the resolution, all Council members have
already begun to respect their obligation not to support
and supply terrorists with weapons. Failure to do so will
undoubtedly have grave consequences, and violators
will pay a price for their transgressions. In that regard,
it is critical that the Council follow closely how the
resolution is being implemented, thereby making yet
another tangible contribution to international efforts to
combat that scourge.
Another subject that we discussed in early August
was sanctions. It is no secret that there is a plethora of
views on the subject — from rejecting the legitimacy
of such a tool to overblown expectations that through
sanctions anything can be achieved. The truth probably
lies somewhere in the middle. Ukraine is convinced that
sanctions can and do work, when and if implemented
in good faith by all members of the international
community. We have to remember that sanctions’
effectiveness depends on their thorough implementation
by all stakeholders without exception. The chain is only
as strong as its weakest link. Therefore, it is a joint moral
duty of all responsible members of the United Nations
family to work towards preventing the obstruction and
evasion of existing sanctions regimes. Otherwise, the
whole international endeavour will be undermined, and
the very idea of sanctions will be gradually discredited.
In that regard, specialized and regional international
organizations can play an important role in ensuring

The international community must work diligently
to thwart and penalize any attempt to undermine the
existing legally binding arrangements in the nuclear
sphere. Without a resolute stance on that issue, there
is little hope for the eventual eradication of the global
threat of weapons of mass destruction. As one of the
champions of the global non-proliferation regime,
Ukraine will continue to contribute to international
efforts to achieve the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, which is essential to removing the risk of
unnecessary provocations and curbing the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s misguided nuclear and
missile ambitions.
Returning to the agenda item of our meeting
today, I welcome the agreement of Council members
on the revised and updated version of presidential note
(S/2010/507) on working methods. Our congratulations
go to the delegation of Japan and all the members of the
Council for their constructive efforts in preparing and
negotiating the text. The presidential note adopted today
will serve as an important guideline for the Council to
make its work more efficient and transparent.

17-272539/17

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

In conclusion, I congratulate you, Sir, on your
successful presidency. To to our Ethiopian colleagues,
who have a rare privilege and responsibility of the
greatest importance in directing the Council’s work
in September, with Heads of State and Government
meeting in New York, I would like to convey our
full support.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your team
on having conducted the work of the Security Council
so efficiently during this month. At the same time, we
predict a successful presidency for Ethiopia for the
month of September and express our full support in
its endeavour.

30/08/2017

and symbolism of this type of visit, which besides
signifying the paramount importance of the women
and peace and security agenda, encourages the visited
countries to move forward in the protection of women,
who in conflict situations are exceptionally vulnerable,
as well as to include them in Government bodies and
allow for their participation in post-conflict situations
and peace processes. Supporting them has proved to
be fundamental. Uruguay would also like to point out
that briefings should be held more frequently to provide
information on the situation of women in connection
with the main conflicts on our agenda, including
inviting representatives of civil society so that they can
familiarize us with their point of view.

Another agenda item that I would like to bring
Moreover, we thank you, Mr. President, for up involves Syria. Under-Secretary-General for
organizing this formal wrap-up session following a Humanitarian Affairs Stephen O’Brien briefed the
month of very intensive work. Uruguay appreciates​​ Council this morning on the current situation in Syria
and recognizes the importance of these formal wrap-up (see S/PV.8036). Once again, we are facing a gloomy
meetings, which allow for the positions of all Council humanitarian landscape affecting the Syrian people
members to be officially recorded and promote the with unprecedented cruelty. Although violence in
transparency and accountability of this organ. As the country has been significantly reduced thanks to
everyone knows, Uruguay also encourages the holding the Astana agreements and the most recent ceasefire
of informal and interactive meetings of the Security agreements in the south-west of the country, the
Council with States that are not members of this organ, humanitarian situation has not improved. That tragic
thereby allowing us to enrich our work with their truth demands our effective action. We continue to
contributions and improve our work. Concerning the impassively watch the destruction of a people — the
Council meetings held this past month, I would like interminable losses of valuable human lives, millions
to focus my attention on those in which humanitarian of people deprived of food and the most essential
concerns were the priority issue and to which Uruguay services, hundreds of thousands of orphans and hungry
attaches exceptional importance.
children, women suffering from sexual violence,
One such issue of special significance was chemical attacks on the civilian population, hospitals
addressed at the Council meeting of 10 August, on and schools destroyed by constant shelling and the lack
peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.8022). At that of humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-reach
meeting, Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed areas where millions of people live.
briefed the Council on her recent visit to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, during which
she was joined by the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. That high-level mission
focused exclusively on women and peace and security,
and development, while according particular attention
to the women and girls most affected by conflict.
Uruguay considers it essential to promote the
equality, the empowerment and the well-being of
women if peace is to be established and sustained
in areas of conflict, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000) and, more recently, with resolution 2242
(2015). It is crucial to emphasize the importance
10/17

Concerning children, we reiterate that the violence
and deprivation they have been facing will seriously
affect their physical and psychological development. It
is unfortunate that the Council has not found a more or
less durable way to alleviate that difficult situation. We
are reminded that we must not abandon our efforts to
find optiond for resolving that humanitarian tragedy.
With respect to Yemen, which has been
characterized as the greatest humanitarian crisis in the
world, we thank this month’s presidency for convening
an informational briefing (see S/PV.8027), followed by
consultations on the situation in that country, which in
most cases is addressed only under the latter format.
On that occasion, it was emphasized that millions of
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Yemenis today face a triple tragedy: the spectre of
famine, the greatest outbreak of cholera in a year, and
the failures and injustice generated by a brutal conflict
that the world has allowed to continue but which is
completely avoidable. Added to that are the blockades
of sea, land and air ports to civilian traffic, preventing
access into the country of essential imports, including
food, fuel and medical supplies and their distribution
throughout the territory. Civilians continue to pay
the price of a long conflict and military clashes are
spreading across several provinces of the country.
We are also grateful to the Senegalese delegation for
organizing, on 21 August, an Arria Formula meeting on
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We know that this
type of informal meeting also enhances the visibility of
the issue.
In conclusion, Uruguay believes that the Council
has another fundamental responsibility, which is
to not allow grievous crimes committed against a
defenceless civilian population to remain unpunished.
It is inadmissible to promote a climate of impunity. The
Security Council must continue to refer cases to the
International Criminal Court, as appropriate, to ensure
that perpetrators are held accountable for their crimes.
Finally, I wish to express my appreciation and to
congratulate the representative of Japan for having
lucidly led the negotiations on presidential note
S/2010/507, in order to improve our working methods.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your team on the professional and
efficient manner in which you have conducted the
Council’s work over this past month. It has been a busy
month and, looking back, there are four items from
the programme of work that I would like to briefly
reflect upon.
First, we were very pleased that the Council, on
9 August, was able to unanimously agree an ambitious
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/14) on the risk of
famine in Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan and northeastern Nigeria. The statistics regarding the humanitarian
situation in those countries are alarming and completely
unacceptable. Sweden decided to propose a presidential
statement to build on the consensus from the Arria
Formula meeting on famines, which was organized
by eight Council members in June. We did so as we
considered that there was a need for a unified, concrete
and comprehensive statement by the Council in support
of the efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian

S/PV. 8038

partners, and the leadership of the Secretary-General.
We also believed that it was important that the Council
highlight the need to do more to prevent the conflicts
that are driving many of these humanitarian crises, as
well as the need for more humanitarian funding and
unhindered humanitarian access. I thank all Council
members for their constructive cooperation on the
presidential statement. We now look forward to the
Secretary-General’s briefing to the Security Council
in October, and to more regular reporting on the links
between famine and conflict.
Secondly, turning to some of the country-specific
items on the agenda, our meeting (S/PV.8026) on the
final report (S/2017/672/Rev.1) of the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo extended
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2293 (2016)
was of particular importance to us. From a Swedish
standpoint, that meeting came to centre on the
unacceptable murder of the two experts, Zaida Catalán
and Michael Sharp. I would like to thank Council
members for their solidarity with the families attending
that meeting. Now that the United Nations Board of
Inquiry into the murders has delivered its findings and
recommendations, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
determination to pursue a further investigation. We
owe it not only to the families, but also to ourselves and
the Organization to make sure that those responsible
for these reprehensible murders are brought to justice.
We count on continuing support in that endeavour.
Thirdly, following the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s launch of a long-range intercontinental
ballistic missile on 28 July, and the resulting heightened
tensions in the region, the North Korean nuclear issue
has taken up much of our attention this month. We
came together once again yesterday (see S/PV.8034)
in response to another missile launch, this time over
Japan. While those recent launches — demonstrating
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s continued
non-compliance and disregard for Security Council
resolutions — remain of serious concern, it was
important that the Council was able to act quickly, by
adopting resolution 2371 (2017) earlier in the month
and yesterday’s presidential statement S/PRST/2017/16.
This demonstrates that the Council stands united and
determined to deal with the growing threat posed by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
and missile programmes. However, sanctions alone will
not resolve the situation on the Korean Peninsula, but

17-2725311/17

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

must be accompanied by creative diplomacy, dialogue
and confidence-building measures.
Fourthly and finally, this morning we heard from
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Under-SecretaryGeneral Stephen O’Brien on the situation in Syria
(S/PV.8036), which remains deeply troubling.
As co-penholders for the humanitarian track,
Sweden stands ready to initiate meaningful Council
action that could complement existing Council products,
with the aim of improving the situation for Syrians on
the ground. The reduction of hostilities seen in parts of
Syria needs to be consolidated and civilians protected.
Humanitarian access must now be expanded. Finally,
we regret that the Council remains unable to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
The crimes of the past six years cannot go unpunished.
Before concluding, allow me to pay tribute to Japan
for its diligent work and excellent stewardship on the
revision of presidential note S/2010/507 on the Council’s
working methods, which was agreed today. The note
is an invaluable tool for enhancing the transparency
and efficiency of the Council, while ensuring the
consistency and predictability of the Council’s work.
Let me conclude by once again thanking you,
Mr. President, and the Egyptian delegation for your
work this month and wishing the Ethiopian delegation
every success for its presidency in September.
Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): I would like at
the outset to join all Council members in congratulating
the Egyptian presidency on its extraordinary work
during the recent month. Mr. President, you have
organized the Council’s work with rigour, transparency
and effectiveness, while at the same time allowing the
necessary flexibility to adapt our programme of work,
on the one hand, to the many breaking news events
at the international level, as illustrated by the recent
events in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and Myanmar, and on the other hand, to address the
concerns of individual Council members, for example
with respect to the Central African Republic. Moreover,
you have steered the Council’s work based on a clear
understanding of our shared priorities in matters related
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
and an acute awareness of the Council’s responsibility.
We warmly thank you.
I would like to underscore a number of issues
that were of particular importance for France in this
12/17

30/08/2017

month’s full and variegated agenda. Yesterday’s open
debate on peacekeeping and sustaining peace (see
S/PV.8033) allowed for further reflection on the means
with which the United Nations can be more effective
on the ground. Accordingly, sustaining peace will be
contingent on our work in several areas, including
disarmament, reform of the security sector, justice and
the settlement of local conflicts. It is incumbent upon
the Security Council to best mold that work to tailored
mandates. Sustainable peace also depends on the those
involved in peacekeeping operations to be able to react
to challenges in a coordinated manner among the Host
State, regional organizations, bilateral partners, and
economic and development actors. The convergence of
such actors is therefore essential.
Concerning the Council’s work in connection with
Africa, the meeting (see S/PV.8022) that brought us
together with the Deputy Secretary-General, whose
commitment we commend, demonstrated how the
United Nations can promote the role of women in
promoting peace and security on the ground. We
welcome the importance accorded to that subject,
which will be the topic of an annual open debate during
our presidency in October.
As early as the second day of your presidency
(see S/PV.8016), Sir, we adopted a firm presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/13) on Burundi, which
focused the unity of the Council on that crisis and
showed our determined support for the East African
Community, President Mkapa’s road map and the work
of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy to Burundi,
and particularly recalled the absolute need to respect
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi to ensure its stability. France sincerely hopes
that Burundi will take advantage of this opportunity
so as to re-establish an eased relationship with the
international community, launch a political process
that will allow for the peaceful holding of the elections
and end human rights violations.
On 15 August, the Security Council held a briefing
(see S/PV.8024) on the joint force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force in accordance with
resolution 2359 (2017), adopted in June. Following the
terrorist attacks on Burkina Faso that also targeted
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the previous day, that
meeting allowed us once again to underscore the
transnational nature of the terrorist threat facing the
Sahel and to move forward the work of the G-5 Sahel
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

so as to ensure the joint force’s deployment on the
ground according to the agreed timeline. We welcome
the fact that much has already been done in a very short
time. With regard to that issue, our conviction remains
more than ever that the international community has a
moral and political responsibility to help African States
to come together to combat terrorism through means
complementary to those of peacekeeping operations.
Along with a large majority of Council members,
France continues to believe that United Nations support
for the G-5 Sahel joint force is essential.
The Council also held an important meeting (see
S/PV.8026) on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the presence of the families of the two members
of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo extended pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2293 (2016) who were killed in March. Their
work, mandated by us, had been outstanding. It is
important that the Council pay tribute to their memory.
Henceforth, every effort must be made in shedding
light on those murders. We reiterate our call that the
Secretary-General assemble as quickly as possible, as
is within his authority, a special mechanism of inquiry
enabling the appropriate judicial authorities to carry
out an effective follow-up.
Concerning the Middle East, the Council has also
been very active. Despite a divergence in approaches,
through the unanimous adoption of resolution 2373
(2017), only moments ago, we renewed the ambitious
and robust mandate of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon for one year. That was an essential step
towards maintaining the stability of southern Lebanon
and the entire region.
Concerning Libya, the first briefing (see S/PV.8032)
by the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, allowed us
to follow up the new impetus that has been infused
in United Nations mediation efforts. The unity of the
Council will be decisive in our ensuring together a stable
future and a safe and prosperous environment in Libya
in line with international and regional initiatives and
those of neighbouring countries. In July, our Permanent
Representative presented to members of Council the
outcomes of the Celle-Saint-Cloud meeting, which
strives to work coherently towards those same ends.
The Council will play an active role in following up the
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
Libyan stakeholders themselves.

S/PV. 8038

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya will
be the key component of that process, and it will be
necessary to ensure that the Mission be provided with
the resources necessary to fulfil its mandate. I would
like to also commend the work of Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya and its Swedish chairmanship,
which, in particular included on its sanctions list two
vessels for trafficking in petroleum.
With regard to Yemen, the briefing (see S/PV.8027)
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and the subsequent Arria Formula meeting
on humanitarian issues stressed the need to enable
unimpeded humanitarian access and to stop the
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
On that occasion, the Council was also able to call for
relaunching the political process — given that there
can only be a political solution to the situation in
Yemen — and to commend the commitment of Special
Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed who is pursuing his
work despite constraints.
Concerning Syria, a majority among us has
repeatedly called for safe, full, immediate and
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance for all
those in circumstances that remain catastrophic. We
met this morning (see S/PV.8036) to discuss the issue
of Syria, and France recalled its efforts to supporting
the United Nations-led process towards achieving a
democratic and negotiated transition in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). That is the only option, which will
allow for the lasting return of peace and for effectively
combating terrorism, which is our first priority. We are
seeing convergences today. We will spare no effort, in
particular from now to the week of high-level meetings
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session
so as to find a way out of that crisis.
Lastly, this synopsis would not be complete
without mentioning North Korea on which the Council
showed its responsiveness and firmness yesterday (see
S/PV.8034).
In concluding, I would like to join all those who
have commended the outstanding work of Japan on
presidential note (S/2010/507) from which we will
all benefit as members of the Council in the future.
Concerning all of these issues, as well as many others,
the work that remains to be done is immense, but you,
Sir, over the past month, have made a considerable

17-2725313/17

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

contribution to that work in sparing neither your resolve
or efforts. And we thank you for that.
Mr. Cheng Lie (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of this meeting by the Egyptian
presidency and appreciates the Egyptian delegation’s
successful leadership of the Security Council, marked
by its positive achievements, for the month of August.
With regard to the Council’s work this month, I
would like to focus on the following three issues.
First, concerning peace and security, the Council
convened an open debate on peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033).
Member States exchanged views in a comprehensive
manner on United Nations-led efforts related to
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. China calls for firmly upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, developing a new type of international relations
featuring win-win cooperation at its core, fostering a
new, shared, comprehensive and cooperative security
vision, and maximizing the role of the United Nations as
the core mechanism for maintaining collective security.
In recent years, the African Union (AU) has
vigorously promoted solidarity and unity among African
countries in the search of peace and development with
substantive progress. China hopes that the United
Nations and AU will fully implement the Joint United
Nations-AU Framework for Enhancing Partnership on
Peace and Security to enhance cooperation in areas,
such as conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction.
Secondly concerning hotspots in Africa, the
Security Council considered such issues as Somalia
(see S/PV.8035), the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(see S/PV.8026) and the Sahel region (see S/PV.8024),
listened to the relevant briefings and adopted resolution
2372 (2017) on the extension of the mandate of African
Union Mission in Somalia. Such efforts help better
inform the international community of developments
on the ground so that the United Nations and the world
community, in general, can lend further assistance
to the relevant countries. China wishes to express
its appreciation.
The international community should stay the course
of political settlements of hotspot issues, encourage all
relevant parties to find peaceful settlements to disputes
through dialogue and negotiations, improve the security
14/17

30/08/2017

situation, and ensure cooperation among various parties
within the United Nations system and between the
United Nations and regional organizations to generate
synergies. China always pursues an Africa policy
featuring sincerity, practicality, affinities, good faith,
justice and shared interests, and stands ready to work
with the international community to foster a peaceful,
secure and stable international environment — the
main contributions to peace, stability and development
in Africa.
With regard to counter-terrorism, this month the
Council convened an open meeting (see S/PV.8017)
on preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons
and unanimously adopted resolution 2370 (2017).
China hopes that this resolution will encourage the
international community to enhance cooperation, adopt
an integrated approach and collectively cut off the
channels through which terrorist organizations acquire
weapons, thereby maintaining international and
regional peace and security. Terrorism is the common
enemy of mankind.
The international community needs to stick to
a single standard, maximize the leading role of the
United Nations and the Security Council and abide
by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Member States need to play a role
and assume their primary responsibilities in the area
of preventing terrorist organizations from acquiring
weapons, strengthen effective coordination and
conduct international and regional counter-terrorism
cooperation to form collaborative synergy to prevent
terrorist organizations from acquiring weapons.
In conclusion I wish to express my best wishes
in advance for a successful presidency for the month
of September.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation commends
the Egyptian presidency for its outstanding leadership
with wide coverage of issues on the Council agenda. At
today’s wrap-up session, we would like to comment on
some important items.
First of all, on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, we express our solidarity with Japan.
Ballistic missiles flew over its territory two days
ago, endangering all air and sea vessels, as well as
the neighbouring territories. Japan and Kazakhstan
have been among the countries most affected by the
devastating consequences of nuclear tests and weapons.
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We therefore understand the insight and experience of
the Government and the people of Japan.
It is worrisome to see today, when we are celebrating
together the International Day against Nuclear Tests
at United Nations Headquarters, the increasing threat
of nuclear weapons. The position of Kazakhstan on
non-proliferation and the situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is well known and remains
consistent. I will just summarize it in a few words: first,
condemnation; second, halting of all tests and launches;
third, full implementation of United Nations sanctions
and directives; fourth, pressure; fifth, no military
option, and exercise of restraint; sixth, dialogue and
confidence-building measures; seventh, resumption
of the six-party talks without delay; eighth, “double
freeze” as a possible beginning; and ninth, unity and
credibility of the Council.
I shall now turn to the Middle East.
First of all, on Iraq, we in the international
community need to be concerned about the proposed
referendum on the independence of the Kurdistan
region and the Kurd areas outside the administration
of the region. We believe it would have negative
consequences that could cause further instability.
As regards Syria, the fifth meeting of the Astana
process met in our capital on 4 and 5 July. We saw all the
stakeholders gathered, including Jordan and the United
States, together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura. Representatives
of the United States and Jordan also participated as
observers. We are deeply grateful to all sides for
their important contributions. Hopefully, the pending
August meeting will be conducted in mid-September.
We did hold a technical expert meeting at end of August
to finalize the September meeting.
The tireless work of participants in the Astana
Process is resulting in gradual but significant progress.
Each round of talks yields complete results, which have
a positive impact on the lives of hundreds of thousands
of Syrians. The scale and intensity of the conflict have
reduced noticeably, and efforts are continuing to create
conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian
aid to the Syrian people in need. We express our deep
appreciation and gratitude to the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. O’Brien, for his noble, tireless and most
effective work in the United Nations, inter alia on the
Syrian file for the good of all Syrians, and cordially wish
him success and all the very best in his future career

S/PV. 8038

and life. We also support the practice of joint Council
meetings on political and humanitarian developments
in Syria and look forward to their continuation.
On Yemen, we are thankful to the Swedish mission
for initiating consultations on the situation in Yemen on
18 August (S/PV.8027) and to the Senegalese mission
for organizing an Arria Formula meeting on the vital
role of the United Nations humanitarian assistance
partners in the crisis in Yemen, held on 21 August.
Due to the devastating humanitarian situation and the
world’s worst cholera outbreak we are of the view that
the situation in Yemen should remain on the agenda of
the Security Council.
On Libya, we were pleased to hear the first briefing
in the Security Council of the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, on the situation in Libya (S/PV.8032). We
express our full support for the activities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General aimed at
bringing lasting peace to Libya, and welcome his
energetic engagement with different actors of Libyan
society as well as the international community.
On counter-terrorism, my Permanent Representative,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), along with the experts of the Monitoring
Team, is currently on a mission to Singapore and
Malaysia to gather data on the activities of terrorist
groups in the countries where they are now shifting
their focus — mainly in South-East Asia, as they have
been almost completely driven out of Syria. We intend
to cover more countries in the latter part of the year.
Throughout this month, the Council has held two
remarkable meetings. The first was the briefing by the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, on
her mission to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (S/PV.8022), which highlighted the
importance of focusing on women in all aspects of the
work of the Security Council and the United Nations.
The significant value of the deliberations demonstrated
the importance of having gender as an overarching
aspect of all phases of peace and security.
Yesterday, we held another exceptional open
debate on sustaining peace as a fundamental element
of all peacekeeping work (S/PV.8033). Greater focus on

17-2725315/17

S/PV.8038

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

that would certainly make our efforts more efficient,
relevant, timely and more cost-effective, as more is spent
on peacekeeping than on early efforts and prevention.
Finally, we also covered several peacekeeping
operations mandates. We thank you, Sir, for your vision
in streamlining operations and highlighting critical
factors for strengthening the Council and enabling it to
better fulfil and enhance its mandate.
In conclusion, we thank Japan for its exemplary
work on the revised presidential note (S/2010/507),
which was adopted in order to improve our working
methods. We also express our full support to Ethiopia,
the next President of the Council, and wish that
delegation all success in that important position.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by offering thanks and congratulations
to you, Mr. President, and to all of your team for a
very successful month. I would like to join others in
praising your effective presidency and leadership
and inclusive management of the Council’s business
throughout August.
Quite often, August has a reputation of being a
quiet month, but it has not been quiet at all. This month,
there has been absolutely no let up in the activity of the
Security Council. And, of course, the most important
issue that we have all faced has been North Korea. So,
I want to begin with that and how we respond to the
repeated violations of Security Council resolutions.
Also, like others, I am very glad that we were able to
send a strong united message, first of all on 5 August
(S/PV.8019), with the new package of sanctions, and
secondly, yesterday evening, with presidential statement
S/PRST/201/16, condemning the latest atrocities from
North Korea. The threat that North Korea poses, not
just to its region, but now to the whole world, means that
we must remain united and make sure that we respond
with clarity and unequivocal condemnation every time
there are such violations.
I also want to use this meeting very briefly to focus
on three other points that we have tackled this month.
The first is to pay tribute to the men and women
around the world who carry out the decisions of the
Security Council, often in the most dangerous locations.
This month, the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo reported to us on its most recent
findings (S/PV.8026). Sadly, it was not a routine briefing
because it was in the course of seeking evidence for
16/17

30/08/2017

that report (S/2017/672/Rev.1) that Zaida Catalán and
Michael Sharp were so tragically killed. We were also
briefed on the results of the United Nations Board of
Inquiry report on their murder, and we look forward
to seeing its recommendations implemented in full.
The Security Council and the wider United Nations
have a responsibility to those that work on our behalf.
It is essential that we see a swift, full and transparent
investigation into who was responsible for their murders
and that the perpetrators be held to account. We call
on the Secretary-General to establish a mechanism for
further investigation without delay.
My second point is about the links that we have seen
this month between conflict and humanitarian crises.
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption this
month of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/14, on the
devastating famines in South Sudan, Yemen, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria. It is vital that the parties
to each of these conflicts respect their obligations to
protect civilians and ensure the security of humanitarian
operations and personnel. The Security Council must
keep up the momentum over the next few months. We
look forward to a discussion of these crises during the
high-level week and to a briefing from the SecretaryGeneral in October on the deliberate actions that are
increasing humanitarian need and the barriers to an
effective response.
We were also briefed this month on the growing
humanitarian crisis caused by the conflict in the Central
African Republic and the dangers that humanitarian
workers are facing when trying to deliver aid. The
meeting in high-level week on the forthcoming mandate
renewal will provide opportunities to reconsider our
approach to the Central African Republic.
Finally, the Council has continued its discussion
of peacekeeping. I would like to thank Egypt for
scheduling yesterday’s open debate on the contribution
that peacekeeping can make to sustaining peace (see
S/PV.8033). The decisions to close the Missions in
Haiti, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire have reminded us
of the importance of ensuring that peacebuilding is
considered throughout the life cycle of a mission, which
means ensuring that there is a whole-of-United Nations
approach from the beginning and that a mission’s
strategic objectives are clearly set out at its inception.
I am pleased that this morning we were able to
put this into practice and confirm our support for a
set of clear strategic objectives in Somalia, when we
17-27253

30/08/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

unanimously renewed the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) (see S/PV.8035).
In response to the joint Africa Union-United Nations
review, this marks an important shift in emphasis for
the Mission, with AMISOM focusing on the transition
of tasks to the Somali security forces and a gradual and
phased reduction in AMISOM troop numbers.
I once again offer my thanks, Mr. President, for
the work over the month, and I wish the very best to
Ethiopia for next month, and I thank Japan for all its
hard work on working methods.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Security Council for the
month of August, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Egypt to the members
of the Council, especially to my colleagues, the
permanent representatives, to their respective staff and
to the Secretariat of the Council, for all the support they
have given to us.
I would also like to thank my colleagues in the
Egyptian delegation for their great efforts during our
presidency of the Council for this month, without which

S/PV. 8038

we would not have been able to achieve as much as we
did. Indeed it has been a busy month and one in which
we rallied to consensus on several important issues
within our purview, most importantly the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (resolution 2373 (2017)) and our presidential
statement of yesterday regarding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (S/PRST/2017/16).
We also held a number of discussions that
have contributed to our continued efforts aimed at
improving the work of the Council with a view to
meeting any challenges to international peace and
security, in particular our efforts to counter terrorism,
develop sanctions regimes and ensure the contribution
of peacekeeping operations to sustaining peace. We
could not have done any of this alone and without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every
delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat
as well as all relevant Conference Services officers,
interpreters and translators. I would therefore like to
sincerely thank all of them.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council when I wish the delegation of Ethiopia
good luck in the month of September.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

17-2725317/17
