and 33 shall extend to adopted children or step- f cles 30 et 33 s'appliquent auss1 a des enfants
children.
adoptifs ou aux enfants du conjoint.
Annex B

Annexe B

STAFF REGULATIONS

STATUT DU PERSONNEL

II. APPOINTMENT, PROBATION AND PROMOTION

II. NOMINATIONS, STAGES ET PROMOTIONS

Regulation 12A
The appointment of any member of the staff for
a probationary period or on a short-term contract,
which shall include any temporary contract, may
be subject to such conditions as the SecretaryGeneral may deem desirable.

Article 12A
L'engagement de tout membre du personnel
pour une periode de stage ou sur la base d'un
contrat a court terme, ee qui s'applique a tous Jes
contrats temporaires, peut etre soumis awe conditions que le Secretaire general estime opportunes.

Regulation 21
The Secretary-General may terminate the appointment of a member of the staff in accordance
with the terms of his appointment if made under
the provisions of regulation 12A, or if the necessities of the service require the abolition of the
post or a reduction of the staff, or if the services
of the individual concerned prove unsatisfactory.

Article 21
Le Secretaire general peut resilier !'engagement
d'un membre du personnel awe termes de son engagement si celui-ci a ete etabli conformement awe
dispositions de !'article 12A, ou si les necessites du
service exigent la suppression de son poste ou une
reduction de personnel, ou si Jes services de l'interesse ne donnent pas satisfaction.

162 (II). United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Scheme

162 (II). Caisse commune des pensions du
personnel de l'Organisatio_n des Nations Unies
L'Assemblee generate
Prend acte des dispositions administrativcs
reglementant la Caisse commune des pensions du
personnel ( document A/397) ;
Decide de maintenir sans changement, pendant
une periode d'un an, et sur une base provisoire, le
regime provisoire de la Caisse commune des pensions;

The General Assembly
Takes note of the administrative rules relating
to the Provisional Joint Staff Pension Scheme
(document A/397);
Decides that the Provisional Joint Staff Pension Scheme now in effect shall continue unchanged, and on a provisional basis, for a further
period of one year;
Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to study the report of the Secretary-General, the implications of
the proposals of the United Nations Staff Benefit
Committee and any new proposals made by the
Joint St:1ff Benefit Committee, the communication from !\fr. A. J. Altrneyer of the United Nations St:-.ff Bendit Committee, and communications from delegations rcl.iting to the Pension
Scheme, as well as tbe record of discussions in the
Fifth Committee during the second part of the
first session and the se(·<m<l session of the: General
Assembly, and to circulate a report to the l\fembers of the United Nations before the next regular session of the General Assembly;

Declares that a permanent pension scheme
should be promulgated, if possible in 1948.
Hundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

Invite le Comitc consultatif pour lcs questions
administratives et bu<lgctaircs a etudier le rapport
du Secretaire general, lcs incidences des propositions du Comite des pen~!ons du personnel des
l',ati01is Unics et de toutc proposition nouvelle
:ormu!Ce par le C,,m:tc mixte des retraitcs du perrn:rnd, la ,:omr:nmication emanant de 1\1. A. J.
Altmcyer du Comitc de, pensions du personnel
ck-; Nati,m< Unies, et Jes communications cma11ant des delegations. relatives au projet de pensions, ainsi q ue lcs co:11ptcs rend us des discussions
qni ont eu li::u dcvant la Cinquicme Commission
pendant la scconde partie de la premicre session
et pendant la deuxicmc i-ession de l'Assemhlee
gcnfrale; et de distribuer aux Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unirs un rapport avant la
prochaine S('.,<ion ordi:i;iirc de I' A<semblee generale;
Declare qu'il v a lien de mettre en vigueur un
regime permanent de pensions, si possible en 1948.
C·n t-vingt et uni,lrne seance pl!:niere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

cm.

163 CII). Provisional Financial Regulations
of the United Nations
The General Assembly resolves

163

1. That the following Provisional Financial
Regulations be adopted in place of those adopted
by the General Assembly at the second part of its
first session under resolution HO ( T; ; 1

1. D'adopter le reglement financier provisoire
ci-aprcs en remplacement du reglement financier
que l'A,,semblcc gcncrale a adoptc pendant la
scronde partie de sa premierc session, aux termcs
de la resolution 80 (I) ;

'See Resolutions adopted by the General Asjembly during the second part of its first session, page 144.

1
Voir Jes Resolutions adoptees par l' Assemblee ginerale
pendant la scconde partie de sa premiere session, page 144.

Reglement financier provisoire de
l'Orgcmisation des Nations Unies
L'Assembl!:e generate decide

68

2. That, notwithstanding the terms of regulation 20 of the Provisional Financial Regulations,
the Secretary-General be empowered to accept, at
his discretion, and after consultation with the
Chairman of the Committee on Contributions, a
portion of the contributions of Member States for
the financial year 1948, in currencies other than
United States dollars.
Hundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

2. D'habiliter le Secretaire gen~ral, nonobstant
les termes de !'article 20 du reglement financier
provisoire, a accepter, lorsqu'il le jugera a prqpos
et apres avoir consulte le President du Comite des
contributions, qu'une partie de la contribution
d'un Etat Membre pour l'exercice financier 1948
soit versee clans une monnaie autre que le dollar
americain.
Cent-vingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

Annex

Annexe

PROVISIONAL FINANCIAL REGULATIONS

REGLEMENT FINANCIER PROVISOIRE

SCOPE AND APPLlCATION

PORTEE ET MISE EN VIGUEUR

Regulation 1
These regulations are established in accordance
with the provisions of rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure and shall be cited as the Provisional Financial Regulations. They shall become
effective as from the date of their approval by
the General Assembly.

Article premier
Le present reglement est etabli conformement
aux dispositions de !'article 37 du reglement interieur provisoire et est intitule Reglement financier
provisoire. II prend effet a compter de la date de
son approbation par I' Assemblee generale.

Regulation 2
These regulations shall govern the financial administration of the United Nations, including the
International Court of Justice.

Article 2
Le present reglement regit la gestion financierc
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, y compris la
Cour internationale de Justice.

Regulation 3
These regulations shall apply to the financial
administration of the specialized agencies to the
extent provided in Agreements entered into between the specialized agencies and the United
Nations.

Article 3
Le present reglement s'applique a la gestion finaucierc des institutions specialisees clans la mesure
pd:vue dans les Accords conclus entre ces institutions et !'Organisation des Nations Unies.

THE FINANCIAL YEAR

EXERCICE FINANCIER

Regulation 4
The financial year shall be the calendar year,
1 January to 31 December.

Article 4
L'exercice financier coincide avec l'annee civile;
ii va du lcr janvier au 31 decembre.

THE BUDGET

BUDGET

Regulation 5
The Secretary-General shall submit to the regular annual session of the General Assembly estimates for the following financial year. He may
also submit such supplementary estimates as may
be deemed necessary for the current financial
year.
The estimates of the International Court of
Justice shall be prepared by the Court, in consultation with the Secretary-General, and shall be
submitted to the General Assembly by the Secretary-General, together with such observations
as he may deem desirable.

Article 5
Le Scerctairc general presente a la session annur lie ordinaire de I' Assemblee generale Jes previsions de depenses pour l'exercice financier suivant. II peut egalemt>nt presenter toutes previsions
de depenses supplementaircs qu'il juge necessaires
pour i'exercice courant.
Les previsions de dt'.·penses de la Cour intcrnationale de Justice sont etablies par la Cour en
consultation avcc le Sccrctaire general et presentfrs a I' Assernblee generale par cc dernier, en
meme temps que les observations qu'il juge opportuncs.

Regulation 6
The estimates submitted to the General Assembly shall be divided into parts, sections and
chap1r·rs, and shall be accompanied by:
(a) A detailed statement of the estimated , xpenditure provided for under each chapter and
each item of a chapter;
( b) A statement of the estimated miscellaneous
or other income under appropriate headings;
( c) An explanatory statement with regard to
the expenditures proposed in connexion with any
new activity or any extension of an existing activity;
( d) A statement of the estimated expenditure
of the current financial year, and the expenditure
of the last completed financial year;
( e) An information annex containing the
budgets or proposed budgets of the specialized

Article 6
Les previsions de depenses presentees a l' Assemhlec generale sont divisees en titres, chapitres et
artic lcs c-t accompagnees:
a) D'un etat detaille des depenses prevues a
chacun des articles et a chacun des postes des
articles;
b) D'un etat des previsions de recettes diverses
et autres, reparties sous des rubriques appropriecs;
c) D'un expose explicatif pour Jes depenses proposees se rapportant a tout nouveau domaine d'activite ou a toute extension d'un domaine d'activite
existant;
d) D'un etat de previsions de deper,••" pour
l'exercice courant et des depenses tln ,:1," "., ,-.::r exercice financier dos;
e) D'une annexe explicative contenant les budgets ou Jes propositions budgetaires des institutions

69

agencies, or such summaries therrof as the Serretary-General may deem appropriate and useful.

specialisees OU leur resume, selon que le Secretaire
general le jugera utile et opportun.

Regulation 7
The estimates shall be submitted tc the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (hereinafter referred to as the "Advisory Committee") at least twelve weeks before
the opening of the annm.i session of the General
Assembly. They shall be examined by the Advisory
Committee, which shall prepare a report thereon.
The estimates, together with the Committee's report, shall be transmitted to all Members at least
five weeks before the opening of the regular session of the General Asscmbly.

Article 7
Les previsions de depenses sont presentees au
Comite consultatif pour Jes questions administratives et budgetaires ( designe ci-apres sous le nom
de "Comite consultatif') douze semaines au moins
avant l'ouverture de la session annuelle de l'Asscmblee generale. Le Comite eonsultatif Jes examine et prepare un rapport a leur sujet. Les prevision de depenses sont transmises en meme temps
quc le rapport du Comite consultatif a tous Jes
Etats Membres cinq semaines au moins avant l'ouverture de la session annuelle ordinaire de l'Assemblec generale.

Regulation 8
Supplementary estimates shall be submitted to
the Advisory Committee for examination and ffport.

Article 8
Les previsions de depenses supplementaires sont
presentees au Comite consultatif qui Jes examine
et presente un rapport a leur sujet.

Regulation 9
The estimates, and the reports of the Advisory
Committee thereon, shall bc submitted to the
General Assembly and referrt'd to the Administrative and Budgetary Committee of the General
Assembly for consideration and report to the Assembly.

Article 9

Regulation JO
All appropriations ~hall require a two-thirds
majority of the General Assembly in accordance
with the provisions of Article 18, paragraph 2, of
the Charter of the United Nations.

Les previsions de depenses et les rapports du
Comite consultatif sont pres,ntes a I' Assemblee
generalc et renvoyes a la Commission des questions
administratives et budgetaircs de I' Assemblee generale qui Jes examine et presente un rapport a I' Assemblee.
Article JO
Toutes Jes ouverturcs de credits sont votecs a la
majorite des deux tiers de l'Assemblee generale,
conformement aux dispositons de I' Article 18, paragraphe 2, de la Charte des Nations Unies.

R,:gulation 11
Tht' adoption of the budget shall constitute an
authorization to the Secrctary-G,~neral to incur
obligations and make expenditurc:s for the purposes for which appropriations have been vnt(·d
and up to the amounts so voted.
Th,· appropriations shall h(• availablt" for obligation, in JTS[)('Ct of good, supplied and .servicrs
rcnclned rn th(· financial war to which the appropriations relate.
The Sc<Tetarv-G<·m-ral shall makl' allotment, in
writing from the appropriations as voted by the
Genna] Asscmblv and under such furthn suhheadin)!s as may appt·;u appropriat(' and necessary,
before· obligations an· incurrr·d tlwn·urnlt-r.

Article 11
L'adoption du budget constitue une autorisation
pour le Secretaire general de prendre des engagements et d'effectuer des depenses aux fins pour lesquellcs les credits ont ete votes, jusqu'a concur•
rcncc du montant de ces credits.
Les credits servent a couvrir lcs engagements
n·latifs a des fournitures procurees et a des services
n·ndus au cours de l'exercicc financier auqucl lcs
credits sc rapportent.
L(' Secretaire general repartit par ecrit les credits
votes par I' Asscmblee generale, en utilisant le cas
echeant toute division nouvelle en sous-rubriqucs
qu'il juge eonvenablc et neces5aire, avant d'<·ngager
des dep<'mes imputables sur ccs credit~.

TRANSFERS \VlTl!J;\J APPROl'RL\TJOXS

V!REMENT DE CRJ'.DITS

Rr,!11/ation 12
Transfrrs by the Sccn-tary-Gcrn·ral within thl'
total amount appropriated under the estirnat('S
may be made to di(' ('Xtt'llt permitted bv the terms
of tht· budget resolution adopted hy the Gnwral
Assembly.

Article 12
Le Secretairc general peut effectuer des virements de credits ne depassant pas le montant total
des credits uuvcrts, dans la mesure prevuc par lcs
dispositions de la resolution budgetairc adoptec par
l'Assemblee generale.

AVAILAmL!TY OF APPROPRIATIONS AT THE CLOSE

CREDITS DISPONIBLES A LA FIN DE L'EXERCICE

OF TlJE FINANCIAL YEAR

FINANCIER

Regulation 13
Appropriations sh~II remain available to the extent that they are reyuin-d to meet the outstanding
obligations as at 31 Dt-c(·mber represented by goods
supplit'd and services rendered up to and i~cluding that date.

Article 13
Les credits rcstent disponibles clans la mcsurc
nfressaire pour couvrir lcs depenses engagees dont
le paicment n'est pas encore effectue le 31 deccmbrc et gui concerncnt des fournitures procurccs et
des services rendus jusqu'a cctte date incluse.

Rc.::ulation 14
The balance of appropriations shall be surrendered in accordance with tht" provisions of regulation 17. Outstanding obligations not represented
by goods supplied or services rendered up to and

Article 14
Le soldc des credits est annule conformement
aux dispositions de !'article 17. Les depenses engagecs dont le paiement n'est pas encore effectue
et qui ne coneernent pas des fourniturcs procurees

70

including 31 December shall be a charge to the
appropriations of the succeeding year.

ou des services rendus au plus tard le 31 decembre
sont imputees sur les credits de l'exercice suivant.

PROVISION OF FUNDS

CONSTITUTION DES FONDS

Article 15
Regulation 15
Les depenses prevues au budget, compte tenu des
The appropriations, subject to the adjustments
to be effected in accordance with the provisions ajustements qui sont effectues conformement aux
of regulation 17, shall be financed by contributions dispositions de !'article 17, sont couvertes par les
from Members according to the scale of assess- contributions des Etats Membres, dont le montant
ments determined by the General Assembly. Pend- est fixc par le bareme de repartition ctabli par I' Asing the receipt of such contributions, the appro- semblee generale. En attendant le versement de ces
priations may be financed from the Working contributions, Jes depenses budgetaircs peuvent etre
couvertes par le fonds de roulcment.
Capital Fund.
Article 16
Regulation 16
The General Assembly shall determine the
L' Assemblee generale fixe le montant du fonds
amount of the Working Capital Fund and any de roulement et de ses subdivisions.
sub-divisions thereof.
Article 17
Regulation 17
In the assessment of the contributions of MemDes ajustements sont apportes au montant des
bers, there shall be adjustments to the amount of contributions des Etats Membrcs a concurrence du
the appropriations approved by the General As- montant des credits votes par I' Assemblee generale
sembly for the following financial year in respect pour I'exercice financier suivant, en fonction:
of:
(a) Supplementary appropriations for which
a) Des credits supplementaires pour lesquels la
contributions have not previously been assessed on part de contribution de chaque Etat Membre n'a
the Members;
pas ete determinee precedemment;
( b) Estimated miscellaneous income for the
b) Des recettes accessoires prevues pour l'exerfinancial year to which the appropriations relate;
cice financier auquel ces credits se rapportent;
( c) Miscellaneous income of former years for
C) Des revenus divers des annees precedentes
which credit has not previously been taken into dont le produit n'a pas encore ete pris en compte
account, and deficiencies in estimated income et des deficits clans Jes revenus dont le produit
whirh was previously taken into account;
prevu a ete pris en compte par anticipation;
( d) Contributions resulting from the admission
d) Des contributions resultant de !'admission de
of new Members under thr provisions of regula- nouveaux Membres, conformement aux disposition 19;
tions de !'article 19;
( e) Any balance of the appropriations of the
e) De tous soldes de credits restant disponibles
last completed financial year surrendered under sur le dernier exercice financier dos, et annules
regulation 14.
comme prevu a !'article 14.
Article 18
Lorsque I' Assemblee generale a adopte le budget
et fixe le montant du fonds de roulement et de ses
subdivision, le Secretaire general doit:

Regulation 18
After the General Assembly has adopted the
budget and determined the amount of the working
capital fund and its sub-divisions, the SecretaryGeneral shall:
( n) Transmit all rdcvant documents to Members;
( b) Inform Members of their commitments in
respect of annual contributions and of advances
to the working capital fund;

Regulation 19
New Members shall bc> required to make a contribution for the year in which they are first admitted and an advance to the working capital
fund, at rates to be determined by the General
Assembly.
Regulation 20
Annual contributions and advances to the working capital fund shall be assessed and paid in the
currency of the State in which the United Nations
has its headquarters.
Regulation 21
Payments made by a Member shall be applied
first as a credit to the working capital fund and
then to the contributions due in the order in which
the Member was assessed.

a) Transmettrc aux Etats Membre5 tous Jes
documents utiles;
b) Faire connaitre aux Etats Membres le montant de leurs engagements en ce qui concerne leur
contribution annuelle et leurs avances au fonds de
roulement;
c) Les inviter a remettre le montant de leurs
contributions et de leurs avances au fonds de
roulemcnt.
Article 19
Les nouveaux Membres sont tenus de verser une
contribution pour l'annee au cours de laquelle ils
sont admis ainsi qu'une avance au fonds de roulement, suivant des taux qui seront fixes par l' Assemblee generale.
Article 20
Les contributions annuelles et Jes avanccs faite.,
au fonds de roulement sont ealculees <"t payees dans
la rnonnaie de l'Etat sur le territoirc duquel
!'Organisation a son siege.
Article 21
Les versements effectues par un Etat Membre
sont d'abord portes a son credit au fonds de roulement, puis viennent en deduction des contributions
qui lui incombent en vertu d~ la repartition.

Regulation 22
States which are not Members of the United
Nations, but which become parties to the Statute

Article 22
Les Etats non membres de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies mais qui deviennent parties au

( c) Request thc>m to ITmit their contributions
and any advances to the working capital fund.

71

of the International Court of Justice, shall contribute to the expenses of the Court in amounts
as may be determined by the General Assembly.
Such amounts shall be taken to account as miscellaneous income.

Statut de la Cour internationale de Justice contribuent aux depenses de la Cour clans la mesure que
fixe I'Assemblee generale. Les sommes ainsi ~ues
sont considerees comme revenus divers.

CUSTODY OF FUNDS

DEPOT DES FONDS

Regulation 23
The Secretary-General shall designate the bank
or banks in which the funds of the Organization
shall be kept.

Article 23
Le Secretaire general designe la banque OU les
banques clans lesquelles seront deposes les fonds de
!'Organisation.

INTERNAL CONTROL

CONTROLE INTERIEUR

Regulation 24
The Secretary-General shall:
(a) Establish detailed financial rules and procedures in order to ensure effective financial administration and the exercise of economy;

Article 24
Le Secretaire general:
a) Fixe le detail des regles et des methodes a
observer en matiere de finances de maniere
assurer une gestion financiere efficace et economique;
b) Fait tenir une comptabilite de toutes les
acquisitions de capital, ainsi que de tout materiel
neuf ou en service;
c) Presente aux commissaires aux comptes, en
meme temps que la comptabilite proprement dite,
un etat arrete au 31 decembre de l'exercice financier en cours du materiel existant, ainsi que de
l'actif et du passif de !'Organisation a cette meme
date, et un etat des pertes de fonds, reserves et
autres avoirs, dont le montant est annule par
application de l'article 27;
d) Prescrit que tout paiement doit etre effectue
sur la base de pieces comptables et autres documents attestant que les services ou Jes marchandises qui font l'objet du paiement ont bien ete
re~us et n'ont pas ete regles auparavant;
e) Designe les fonctionnaires autorises a recevoir des fonds, a engager des depenses et a effectuer des paiements au nom de !'Organisation;
t) Etablit un systeme de controle financier interieur permettant d'exercer une surveillance permanente ou une revision d'ensemble effective des
transactions financieres en vue:
i) De constater la regularite des operations d'encaissement, de sortie et de depot des fonds et
autres ressources financieres de I'Organisation;
ii) De- verifier la conformite de toutes Jes depenscs avec les ouvertures de credit et les
autres dispositions financieres votees par l' Assemblee generale;
iii) De prevcnir toute utilisation abusive des ressources de !'Organisation.

a

( b) Cause an accurate record to be kept of all
capital acquisitions and all supplies purchased and
used;
( c) Render to the auditors with the accounts a
statement as at 31 December of the financial year
concerned, showing the supplies in hand and the
assets and liabilities of the Organization, together
with a statement of losses of cash, stores and other
assets written off under regulation 27;
( d) Cause all payments to be made on the
basis of supporting vouchers and other documents
which ensure that the services or commodities have
been received and that payment bas not previously
been made;
( e) Designate the officials who may receive
monies, incur obligations and make payments on
behalf of the United Nations;
(!) Maintain an internal financial control which
shall provide for an effective current examination
or review of financial transactions in order:

To ensure the regularity of the receipt, disposal and custody of al! funds and other
financial resources of the Organization;
(ii) To ensure the conformity of all expenditures
with the appropriations or other financial
provisions voted by the General Assembly;

(i)

(iii) To obviate any uneconomic use of the resources of the Organization.

Regulation 25
No contract, agreement or undertaking of any
nature, involving a charge against the United Nations exceeding $US100 shall be entered into,
or have any force or effect, unless:
(a) Credits are reserved in the accounts to discharge any obligation which may come in course
of payment in the financial year under such contract, agreement or undertaking;
( b) The charge is a proper one against the
United Nations; and
( c) Proof has been provided that the service
is for the benefit of the United Nations and the
cost thereof is fair and reasonable.
The Board of Auditors shall draw the attention
of the General Assembly to any case where, in the
opinion of the Board, any charge has been improperly made or was in any way irregular.

72

Article 25
Aucun contrat, accord ou engagement de nature
quelconquc entrainant pour !'Organisation des depenses excedant 100 dollars americains ne peut
etre signe, mis en vigueur ou recevoir son effet,
sans que:
a) Des fonds soient reserves pour regler toutes
depenses dont l'echeance peut survenir au cours
de l'exercice financii:-r du fait de cc contrat, de cet
accord ou de cet engagement;
b) Le paiement reclame concerne bien I'Organisation des Nations Unics, et que
c) La preuvc soit fournie que !'Organisation des
Nations Unies est bicn la beneficiaire des services
et que le prix de ccux-ci est juste et raisonnable.
Le Comite des commissaires aux comptes signale a !'attention de I' Assemblee generale tous les
cas ou, a son avis, une depense ne se justifie pas ou
presente un caractere quelconque d'irregularite.

Article 26
Le Secretaire general peut accorder a titre gracieux les indemnites qu'il juge necessaires dans
l'interet de !'Organisation, pourvu qu'un etat de
ccs paiements soit presente a I' Assemblee generale
avec la comptabilite annuelle.
Article 27
Le Secretaire general peut, apres une enquete
approfondie autoriser a passer par profits et pertes
le montant des pertes de fonds, reserves, ou autres
avoirs, sous reserve des dispositions de l'article
24 c).
Article 28
Les offres de soumission relatives a l'equipement, au materiel et a tous autres besoins, sont
provoquees par voie d'annonces, sauf lorsque le
Secretaire general estimc que l'interet de !'Organisation des Nations Unies justifie une derogation a
cette regle.

Regulation 26
The Secretary-General may make such ex gratia
payments as he deems to be necessary in the interests of the United Nations, provided that a statement of such payments shall be submitted to the
· General Assembly with the annual accounts.
Regulation 27
The Secretary-General may, after full investigation, authorize the writing off of losses of cash,
stores and other assets, subject to the requirements
of regulation 24 ( c) .
Regulation 28
Tenders for equipment, supplies and other requirements shall be invited by advertisement,
except where the Secretary-General deems that,
in the interest of the United Nations, a departure
from the rule is desirable.
THE ACCOUNTS

COMPTABILITE

Regulation 29
The accounts of the Organization shall be kept
in the currency of the State in which the United
Nations has its headquarters, provided, however,
that the local accounts of branch offices may be
maintained in the currency of the country in
which they are situated.
Regulation 30
There shall be established one cash control
record in which shall be recorded all cash receipts
accruing to the benefit of the Organization. The
cash control record shall be divided into such subsidiary receipts classifications as may be deemed
necessary.
Regulation 31
Cash shall be deposited in one or more bank
accounts as required; branch accounts, or special
funds which involve a separation of cash assets,
shall be established as charges to the cash control
record under appropriate regulations as to objects,
purposes and limitations of such accounts and
funds.
Regulation 32
The accounts shall consist of:
(a) Budget accounts showing:
(i) Original appropriations;
(ii) Appropriations after modification by any
transfers, carried out in accordance with the
provisions of regulation 12;
(iii) Credits, if any, other than appropriations
made available by the General Assembly;
(iv) Allotments made;
(v) Obligations incurred;
( vi) Expenditures.
( b) A cash account showing all cash receipts
and actual disbursements made;

Article 29
La comptabilite de !'Organisation est tenue clans
la monnaie de l'Etat ou !'Organisation des Nations
Unies a son siege, etant entendu toutefois que la
comptabilite locale de chaque bureau annexe reste
tenue clans la monnaie du pays ou ii est situe.

(c) ~eparate accounts for the Working Capital
Fund, its sub-funds, and any other fund which
may be established;
( d) Property records showing:
(i) Capital acquisitions and disposals;
(ii) Equipment and supplies purchased, used and
on hand.
( e) Such records as will provide for a statement
of assets and liabilities for each fund at 31 December of each financial year.
Regulation 33
The accounts shall be submitted by the Secretary-General to the Board of Auditors by 31
March following the end of the financial year.

Article 30
II est etabli un livre de caisse unique ou sont
inscrites toutes Jes recettes de !'Organisation. Le
livre de caisse comprend autant de categories de
recettes que l'on juge necessaire.
Article 31
Les fonds sont deposes a un OU plusieurs
comptes bancaires, selon Jes besoins; les comptes
separes, OU les comptes speciaux necessitant des
avoirs distincts, sont imputes sur le livre de caisse,
conformement aux regles appropriees concernant
l'objet, le but et Jes specifications des dits comptes
et fonds.
Article 32
La comptabilite comprend:
a) La comptabilite budgetaire faisant ressortir:
i) Les ouvertures de credits initiales;
ii) Les ouvertures de credits apres modification
par virements effectues conformement aux
dispositions de l'articlc 12;
iii) Les credits autres que ceux qui ont ete ouvcrts
par l'Assemblee generale, s'il s'cn trouve;
iv) Les credits accordcs;
v) Les engagements contractes;
vi) Les depcnses.
b) Un comptc de caisse ou sont portces toutes
lcs recettcs en especcs et Jes sommes effectivement
decaissccs;
c) Les comptes distincts du fonds de roulcment,
de scs subdivisions et de tout autrc fonds qui pourrait ctre cree;
d) Un compte de capital faisant apparaitre:
i) Les acquisitions et dispositions de capital;
ii) Le materiel et Jes fournitures achetes, en service
et a l'inventaire.
e) Le bilan de chaque fonds arrete au 31 decembre de chaque exercicc financier.
Article 33
Le Secretaire general soumet la comptabilite au
Comite des commissaires aux comptes le 31 roars
qui suit la fin de l'exercice financier.

73

APPOINTMENT OF EXTERNAL AUDITORS

DESIGNATION DE C0MMISSAIRES Al/X C0MPTES

Regulation 34
A board of three auditors, each of whom shall
be the Auditor-General ( or officer holding equivalent title) of a Member Government, shall be
appointed by the General Assembly . as Exte:nal
Auditors of the accounts of the United Nations
and of such specialized agencies as shall have
agreed thereto. The appointments. shall be made
in the following manner, and subject to the following provisions:
(a) In 1947, and every year thereafter, the
General Assembly at its regular session shall appoint an auditor to take office from 1.July of the
following year and to serve for a period of three
years·
(b) The auditors in office shall constitute the
Board of Auditors, which shall elect its own
Chairman and adopt its own rules of procedure;

(/) The audit shall be carried out by the Board
of Auditors subject to the requiremrnts of th,·
General Assembly as established by resolution
thereof.
TRUST AND OTHER SPECIAL FUNDS

Article 34
Un comite de trois commissaires, dont chacun
est le verificateur general des comptes ( OU le fonctionnaire possedant un titre equivalent) d'un Etat
Membre, est nomme par l'Assemblee generate
pour constituer le Comite dt's commissaires aux
comptcs de !'Organisation des Nations Unies et
des institutions specialisees qui ont donne leur
accord. Les designations se font de la maniere suivante, et conformement aux dispositions ci-apres:
a) Err 1947, et par la suite chaque annee, l'Asscmblee gencrale nomme, !ors de sa session ordinairc, un commissaire aux comptes qui entre en
functions le lcr juillet de l'annee suivante pour
une duree dt' trois ans:
b) Les commissaires aux comptes en functions
constituent le Cornite des commissaircs aux
rnrnptes qui elit son proprc President et adoptt'
son propre reglemrnt interieur;
C) Le Comite, compte tenu des credits bu<lgetaires ouverts par l' Asscmblee generalc pour ('OUvrir ks depcnses afferrntes a la verification des
comptes, et aprcs avoir etudie avec le Cornite
consultatif pour les questions adrninistratives l't
budgetaires l'ctendue des verifications a faire, peut
proceder a ('t'S verifications, comptc tcnu des dispositions du present reglement, scion ks modalites
qu'il juge appropriees, en employant le cas f-cheant
des experts comptables publics de reputation intcrnationale;
d) Si un rnnnbre du Comite cesse d'occuper
clans son pays lt' poste rnentionne au premier paragraphe du prest'nt article, son succcsseur au poste
susmt'ntionne le rcmplacr dam lcs functions en
question;
e) Le Cornite dt's commissairrs aux comptes
soumet a l' A,scmblfr generale SOIi rapport avec
Jes comptes certifies rxacts et ks autrcs declarations que lr Comite jugr nect'ssaires, de fa~on quc
cc rapport soit a la disposition du Comite consultatif pour Jes questions administratives et budgetaircs au plus tard le lcr juin qui suit la fin de
l't·xrTcicc financier auquel h·s compks sc rapportcnt. Le Comite consultatif prfscnte :.'ii y a li,·u
a l'Assemblfr generalc ses observations sur le rapport de verification des comptes.
I) Le Comite des commissaires aux compt<'s
procede a la verification drs cornptrs rn trnant
cornpte des exigenC('S d<' l' Assrrnblfr genera le,
tclks quc cdk-ci le, fornmlc <lans sl'S rfmlutions.
FoNOS FIDUCL\IRES ET AIJTRF.S FONDS spf:cutrx

Regulation 35
Appropriate separate accounts shall be maintained for trust funds and other special funds for
the purpose of accounting for unclaimed monies,
and monies received and held in suspense, and
for projects where the transactions involve a cycle
of operations. The purpose and limits of each trust
or other special fund established shall be clearly
defined by the appropriate authority.
INVESTMENTS
Regulation 36
The Secretary-General may make short-term investments of monies which are not needed for immediate requirements and shall inform the Advisory Committee periodically of the investments
which he has made. Notwithstanding tht'st'
provisions, the Secretary-General may make longterm investments on account of the Joint Staff
Pension Scheme on the advice of the Investments
Committee, established under the Provisional
Regulations for the United Nations Joint Staff

Article 35
I ks l'0rnptt-s appropries et distincts sont etablis
pot•r lcs fnnds faisant l'objet d'un fideicommis et
autrcs fonds spfriaux, en vue de comptabiliser lcs
sommes non reclamecs, les sornmes n~ucs et en
suspt'ns, ainsi que les projets dont !'execution comporte un cycle d'operations. L'autoritc competente
<let,·rmine l'ob jet et Jes specifications de chaque
fonds fiduciaire OU autre fonds special ainsi crcc.
PLACEMENTS
Article 36
Le Secretaire general est autorise a placer a
!'ourt terme lrs fonds qui nc sont pas requis pour
des besoins irnmediats; ii fera periodiquement
connaitre au Comite consultatif Jes placements
effectues. Par derogation a ces dispositions, 1r
St'crctaire general est autorise, apri-s avoir consulte
le Comite des placements cree en vertu du reglement provisoire de la Caisse commune des pensions du personnel de !'Organisation des Nations
lJ nies, a faire des placements a long termc pour

( c) The Board, subject to the budgetary provision made by the General Assembly for the cost
of audit, and after consultation with the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions relative to the scope of the audit, may
conduct the audit, subject to the provisions of
this regulation, in such manner as it thinks fit
and may engage commercial public auditors of
international repute;

( d) If any member of the Board ceases to hold
the national office described in the opening paragraph of this regulation, he shall be replaced by
his successor in the national office described;
( e) The Board of Auditors shall submit its report, together with the certified accounts and such
other statements as it thinks necessary, to the General Assembly to be available to the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions not later than 1 June following thf" end
of the financial year to which thf" accounts ri·latc.
The Advisory Committee shall forward to thr
General Assembly its commrnts, if any, on th<'
audit report;

74

le compte de la Caisse commune des pensions du
personnel et pour le compte du Fonds de dotation
de la Bibliotheque ainsi que pour d'autres fonds
speciaux.
Article 37
Le revenu provenant des placements du fonds
de roulement entre dans la comptabilite au titre
des revenus divers.
Le revenu provenant des placements de la Caisse
de prevoyance du personnel est porte au credit de
la Caisse des pensions.

Pension Scheme, and in respect of the Library
Endowment and other special funds.

Regulation 37
Income from investments of the Working Capital Fund shall be accounted for as miscellaneous
income.
Income from investments of the Staff Provident
Fund shall be credited to the Pension Fund.

RESOLUTIONS DES CoNSEILS ENTRAiNANT DES
DEPENSES POUR L'ORGANISATION

COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS INVOLVING UNITED
NATIONS EXPENDITURES

DES NATIONS UNIES

Regulation 38
No resolution involving exprnditure from the
United Nations funds shall be approved by a
Council unless the Council has before it a report
from the Secretary-General on the financial implications of the proposals and an estimate of the
costs involved in the specific proposal.
Where, in the opinion of the Secretary-General,
the proposed expenditure cannot be made from
the existing appropriations, it shall not be incurred until the General Assembly has made the
necessary appropriations unless the Secretary-General certifies that provision can be made under
the conditions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly relating to unforeseen and extraordinarv
expenses and the Working Capital Fund.

Article 38
Aucune resolution entrainant des depenses imputables sur Jes fonds de !'Organisations des Nations Unies ne peut recevoir !'approbation d'un
Consc-il si celui-ci n'a ete prealablement saisi d'un
rapport du Secretaire general sur les incidences
financieres de la proposition, et d'une prevision des
depenses qu'entrainerait !'adoption de la proposition en question.
Lorsque le Secretairc general estime que Jes
depcnses envisagees ne peuvent pas etre imputees
sur lcs credits ouverts, ces depenses ne sont pas
cffectuees avant que l'Assemblee generale ait vote
les credits necessaires, a moins que le Secretaire
general nc certifie qu'il est possible de prendre des
dispositions en vertu des resolutions de 1' Assemblee
generale concernant Jes depenses imprevues OU
extraordinaires et le fonds de roulcment.

164 (II). Supplementary estimates for the
flnancial year 1947
The General Assembly resolves that:
1. For the financial year 1947, an amount of
$US876,568 is hereby appropriated as a sup-

164 (II>. Previsions de depenses supplementaires pour l'exercice 1947
L' Assemblee generale decide ce qui suit:
l. Pour l'exercice financier 1947, un credit de
876.568 dollars americains est ouvert a titre de
supplement au credit de 27.740.000 dollars americains ouvert par la resolution 68 (I) ', adoptee
le 14 dccembrc 1946, commc suit: (Voir page
suivante).

plement to the amount of $US27, 740,000 appropriated by resolution 68 (I) 1 adopted on 14
December 1946, as follows:

Section
PART I-UNITED NATIONS

I
II
III
IV
V
VI

VII
VIII

1

For expenses of travel of representatives to
the General Assembly and travel of members
of committees and commissions ......... .
For expenses of personnel services . . . . . . . . .
For expenses of contributions to the Staff
Provident Fund, Provisional Staff Retirement Scheme and related benefits ........ .
For expenses of common services ........ .
For expenses of establishment of headquarters and initial recruitment of staff ....... .
For expenses of advisory social welfare functions .............................. .
TOTAL, Part I ..................... .
PART II-INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
For expenses of the International Court of
Justice ............................ .
For expenses of the Registry and Common
Services of the International Court of Justice
ToTAL, Part II.....................
TOTAL, Parts I and II..................

•
See Resohitions adoP_ted by the 9eneral Assembly, durmg the second part of its first sess10n, page 128.

I

75

Amount
appropriated
b)' resolution
68(1) part B

Supplemeniary
appropriation:
decrease

Revised
amounts of
appropriation

Dollars (US)

Dollars (US)

Dollars (US)

1,090,500
13,999.223

-( 68,371)
1,955,141

1,022,129
15,954,%4

2,301,179
5,966,500

-(865,496)
149,723

1,435,683
6,116,223

3,074,000

-(99,085)

2,974,915

670,186
27,101,588

-(115,344)
956,568

554,842
28,058,156

387,894

-(55,000)

332,894

250,518
638,412
27,740,000

-( 25,000)
-(80,000)
876,568

225,518
558,412
28,616,568

incrt:ase or

'Voir les Resolutions adoptees par I' Assemblee genlrale
pendant la seconde partie de sa premiere session page
128.
'
