Reeolutlona adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

4. Rcquests Member States to encourage the giving
of the maximum publicity to the report of the Ad H oc
Working Group of Experts within their territories;
5. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
report to the Secretary-General on the measures taken
or envisaged in accordance with paragraph 3 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General :
(a) To take steps to draw the widest possible public
attention to the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
of Experts;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its twentyfourth session 011 the implementation of the present
resolution.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2441 (XXIII), lnternational Year for Human
Rights
Thc General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 Decemher 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights,
Rccalling also its resolutions 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965, 2217 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 and
2339 (XXII) of 18 December 1967,
Having considcrcd the report of the Secretarv-General on the measures and activities undertaken 'by the
Mem1?er Sta.tes, 1:Jnited N ations organs, specialized
agencies, reg10nal mtergovernmental organizations and
national and international organizations concerned in
connexion with the International Year for Human
Rights, 27
Believing that, despite the violations of human rights
that ha".e occurred and continue to occur during the
Internat1onal Year for Human Rights, many of these
measures and activities have contributed to the pron~otion of universal respect for ami observance of human
nghts and fundamental freedoms for ali without clistinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
1. E:i:presses its appreciation to the Meml~r States
~nited Nations organs, specialized agencies, regionaÍ
mtergovernmental organizations and national and international organizations concerned for their efforts and
undertakings in connexion with the International Y ear
for Human Rights, in particular in giving effect to the
measures set out in the annexes to General Assembly
resolutions 2081 (XX) and 2217 A (XXI);
2. Further ex¡,resses its ap¡,reciation to the Member
S!ates, ~nited N ations organs, specializecl agencies, reg1onal mtergovernmental organizations and national
and international organizations concernecl that have kept
the Secretary-General informecl of their efforts and
unclertakings in connexion with the International Year
for Human Rights aml invites them to continue to supply as nmch relevan! information as possible to the
Secretary-General to enahle him to prepare a final
report 01~ the International Year for Human Rights to
he suh1111tted to the General Assemhly at its twentyfourth session, as provided for in General Assembly
resolution 2339 (XXII);
3. Invites Member States ~o consicler prolonging,
after the end of the I nternat1onal Year for Human
Rights and as appropriate, such activities unclertaken
during the lnternational Y ear as would continue to be
2 7 A/7195 and Add.1-9.

49

helpful in the promotion and protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms ;
4. Considers that the newsletter on the International
Year for Human Rights prepared by the SecretaryGeneral has been of value and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to issue from time to time an
appropriate bulletin containing information on the activities of the United Nations and of the specialized
agenci~s in the_ field of human rights an~ a bibliography
of Umtecl Nauons documents and pubhcations on that
subject.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 Decem.ber 1968.

2442

(XXIII).

lnternational Conference on
Human Rights
Tite General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 on the International Year for Human Rights,
N oting with appreciation the Final Act of the lnternational Conference on Human Rights 28 held at Teheran from 22 April to 13 May 1968,
C 011vin_ced that. th~ Conference made an important
construct1ye contnbution to the cause of human rights
and that 1ts results should be translated into effective
acti~n by States, the competent organs of the United
Nat10~1s _and its family of organizations, and other
orgamzat1011s concerned,
l. Expresses its gratitude to the Government and
people of Iran for acting as hosts to the International
Conference on Human Ri~ht?, for the excellent arrangen?ents and for the hospttahty extended to ali partic1pants;
2. A/so expresses its apprecw.tion to the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Secretary of the Conference
and_ the membe:s. of the Secretriat for effectively preparmg and serv1cmg the Conference ;
3. Expresses its satisfaction with the work of the
Conference, which constitutes a solid foundation for
further action and initiatives by the United Nations
and other interested international bodies, as well as by
the States and national organizations concerned;
4. Confirms the views of the Conference on the urgency of elimin:iting denials and violations of human
rights;
. 5. EndorsP., the Proclamation of Teheran 29 as an
nnport~nt ~nd timely . reaffirmation of the principies
embocl1ed 111 the Umversal Declaration of Human
Rights and in other intérnational instruments in the
fielcl of human rights;
6. Calls upon ali States and organizations concerned
to take further action with a view to the ful) realization
of human rights in the light of the recommendations of
the Conference;
7. Urges ali States and organizations concerned
to encourage and assist ali media of mass communicat\on in giving widespreacl publicity to tlie Proclamatlon of Teheran and the work of the Conference as
ap~r?~riate, and in lending support to the achicvem;nts,
act1nt1es ancl concerns of the United Nations m the
fiekl of human rights ;
8. lnvites the Secretary-General to transmit to the
c?n~petent or~ans of the United N ations aml the spec1ahzed agencies tho5e resolutions or parts of resolutions
of the Conference which interest them ·
28 United Nations publication
29 !bid., p. 3.
'

Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2.

so

~encral Allembly-Twenty-third Seuion

9. Invites the Secretary-General and the United
Nations organs and specialized agencies concerned to
take action, as appropriate, on the resolutions and
recommendations of the Conference ;
10. Further invites the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth sess-ion on
the measures .taken and the progress achieved in the
implementation of the recommendations of the Conference by Member States, the United N ations organs,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations concerned;
11. Decides to keep under review to the extent possible the resolutions of the Conference in connexion with
related agenda items.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2443 (XXID). Reepect for and implementation of
human rights in occupled territories
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter
of the United Nations and by the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War of 12 August 1949,30
Mi11dful of the principie embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights regarding the right of
everyone to return to his own country, and recalling
Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June
1967, General Assembly resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of
4 July 1967 and 2341 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
Commission on Human Rights resolution 6 (XXIV)
of 27 February 196831 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1336 (XLIV) of 31 May 1968, in which
those United Nations orians called upon the Government of Israel, inter alia, to facilitate the return of
those inhabitants who have fled the area of military
operations since the outbreak of hostilities,
Recalling the telegram dispatched by the Commission
on Human Rights on 8 March 1968, calling upon the
Government of Israel to desist forthwith from acts of
aestroying homes of the Arab civilian population in
areas occupied by Israel,82
Recalling also Security Council resolution 259 ( 1968)
of 27 September 1968, in which the Council expressed
its concern for the safety, welfare and security of the
inhabitants of the Arab territories under military
occupation by Israel, and deplored the delay in the
implementation of Council resolution 237 ( 1967),
N oting resolution I on respect for and implementation of human rights in occupied territories, adopted
by the International Conference on Human Rights on
7 May 1968,33 in which the Conference, inter alia:
(a) Expressed its grave concern at the violation of
human rights in Arab territories occupied by Israel,
( b) Drew the attention of the Government of Israel
to the grave consequences resulting from the disregard
of fundamental freedoms and human rights in occupied
territories,
ao United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.
81 See Official ReconJ.s of the Economic and Social Council,
Fort31-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4475), chapter

XVIII.

82 ]bid., para. 400.

aa See Final Act of the foten1ationat Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 5.

(e) Called u pon the Government of Israel to desist
forthwith from acts of destroying homes of the Arab
civilian population inhabiting areas occupied by Israel
and to respect and implement the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19493 4 in occupied territories,
( d) Affirmed the inalienable rights of all inhabitants
who have leí~ their homes as a result of the outbreak
of hostilities in the Middle East to retum home, resume
their normal life, recover their property and homes, and
rejoin their families according to the provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
l. Decides to establish a Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories, composed of three Member States;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint the members of the Special Committee ;
3. Requests the Government of Israel to receive
the Special Committee, co-operate with it and facilitate
its work;
4. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever
the need arises thereafter;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the necessary facilities for
the performance of its task.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2444 (XXIll). Reepect for human right• In armed
conftlcts
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the necessity of applying basic humanitarian principies in all armed conflicts,
Taking note of resolution XXIII on human rights
in armed conflicts, adopted on 12 May 1968 by the
International Conference on Human Rights,85
Afferming that the provisions of that resolution need
to be implemented effectively as soon as possible,
l. Affirms resolution XXVIII of the XX.th International Conference of the Red Cross held at Vienna
in 1965, whit:h laid down, ínter alia, the following principies for observance by ali governmental and other
authorities responsible for action in armed conflicts :
(a) That the right of the parties to a conflict to
adopt means of injuring the enemy is not unlimited;
( b) That it is prohibited to launch a.ttacks against the
civilian populations as such ;
( c) That distinction must be made at ali times between persons taking part in the hostilities and members of the civilian population to the effect that the
Jatter be spared as much as possible ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other appropriate international organizations, to
study:
(a) Steps which could be taken to secure the better
application of existing humanitarian international conventions and rules in ali armed conflicts;
H United Nations, Treat31 Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.

°"

8G See Final Act of the lnternational Confermce
H..,.
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.
