VII,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

the consequent increase in the number of awards
granted for 1978/79,
Recognizing that, because of the continuing influx
of student refugees from southern Africa into neighbouring States and the continued rise in the cost of
educational and training awards, additional funds are
essential if the Programme is to continue in operation
at a satisfactory leve!,
Reaffirming that the Programme has been a significant and worthwhile effort of the intemational community to assist the people of southern Africa and
that its continuation and expansion during this critica!
period are essential,
l. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southem Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and expanding the Programme;
3. Appeals once again to all States, organizations
and individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme in arder to ensure its continuation and
expansion;

4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee, to arrange for an evaluation of the Programme in the light of developments in
southern Africa since the last evaluation in 1975;70
5. Decides to enlarge the composition of the Advisory Committee by the addition of up to six members,
on the basis of consultations by the Secretary-General
with regional groups. 71

82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978
70 See A/10331, paras. 25-28.

7 1 The

composition of the Advisory Committee will be
announced subsequently.

33/43.

187

Offers by Memher States of study and
training facilities for inhahitants of Non•
Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/38 of 28 November 1977,
H aving examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Goveming Territories,72 prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Goveming Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to
the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southem Africa, and, whenever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made
by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to
enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resoIution.
82nd p/enary meeting
13 December 1978
72 A/33/372.
