UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/28
24 September 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ARABIC, CHINESE,
ENGLISH, FRENCH,
RUSSIAN AND SPANISH
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4048th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 September 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Small arms",
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of
the Council:
"The Security Council recalls its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security, in view of which its attention is drawn inevitably to small
arms and light weapons as the most frequently used weapons in the majority
of recent armed conflicts.
"The Security Council notes with grave concern that the destabilizing
accumulation of small arms has contributed to the intensity and duration of
armed conflicts. The Council also notes that the easy availability of
small arms can be a contributing factor to undermining peace agreements,
complicating peace-building efforts and impeding political, economic and
social development. In this regard, the Council acknowledges that the
challenge posed by small arms is multifaceted and involves security,
humanitarian and development dimensions.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned that countries involved in,
emerging from, or close to protracted armed conflicts are particularly
vulnerable to violence resulting from the indiscriminate use of small arms
in armed conflict. In this regard, the Council recalls the report of the
Secretary-General on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict of
8 September (S/1999/957) and its resolution 1265 (1999) of
17 September 1999.
"The Security Council emphasizes that the right of individual and
collective self-defence recognized in Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations and the legitimate security demands of all countries should
be fully taken into account. The Council recognizes that small arms are
traded globally for legitimate security and commercial considerations.
Bearing in mind the considerable volume of this trade, the Council
underlines the vital importance of effective national regulations and
controls on small arms transfers. The Council also encourages the

99-27471 (E)

240999

/...

S/PRST/1999/28
English
Page 2

Governments of arms-exporting countries to exercise the highest degree of
responsibility in these transactions.
"The Security Council emphasizes that the prevention of illicit
trafficking is of immediate concern in the global search for ways and means
to curb the wrongful use of small arms, including their use by terrorists.
"The Security Council welcomes the various initiatives that are
currently under way, globally and regionally, to address the issue. These
initiatives at the regional level include the Economic Community of West
African States moratorium on the production and trade in small arms, the
Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing and Trafficking
in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials, the
European Union Joint Action on Small Arms and the European Union Code of
Conduct on Arms Exports. At the global level, the Council welcomes the
negotiation process on the elaboration of an international convention
against transnational organized crime, including a draft Protocol Against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition and
Other Related Materials.
"The Security Council emphasizes the importance of regional
cooperation in tackling the issue of illicit trafficking in small arms.
Initiatives, such as the work done by the Southern African Development
Community and the Southern African Regional Police Commissioners
Coordinating Organisation, illustrate how regional cooperation can be
harnessed to tackle small arms proliferation. The Council recognizes that
while regions may sometimes benefit from the experiences of others, one
region’s experience cannot be extended to others without taking into
account their different characteristics.
"The Security Council also welcomes and encourages efforts to prevent
and combat the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of and illicit
trafficking in small arms and invites Member States to involve civil
society in these efforts.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the growing attention
paid within the United Nations system to the problems associated with the
destabilizing accumulation of small arms. The Council welcomes the
initiative by the Secretary-General for Coordinated Action on Small Arms
(CASA), designed to ensure a coherent and coordinated approach to the small
arms issue within the United Nations system.
"The Security Council notes that although the humanitarian impact of
small arms in a conflict situation is verifiably serious, a detailed
analysis is not available. The Council therefore requests the SecretaryGeneral to specifically include the humanitarian and socio-economic
implications of the excessive and destabilizing accumulation and transfer
of small arms and light weapons, including their illicit production and
trade, in relevant studies he is currently undertaking.
"The Security Council calls for effective implementation of arms
embargoes, imposed by the Council in its relevant resolutions. The Council
/...

S/PRST/1999/28
English
Page 3

encourages Member States to provide the Sanctions Committees with available
information on alleged violations of arms embargoes and recommends that the
Chairmen of the Sanctions Committees invite relevant persons from organs,
organizations and Committees of the United Nations system, as well as other
intergovernmental and regional organizations and other parties concerned,
to provide information on issues relating to the implementation and
enforcement of arms embargoes.
"The Security Council also calls for measures to discourage arms flows
to countries or regions engaged in or emerging from armed conflicts. The
Council encourages Member States to establish and abide by voluntary
national or regional moratoria on arms transfers with a view to
facilitating the process of reconciliation in these countries or regions.
The Council recalls the precedents for such moratoria and the international
support extended for their implementation.
"The Security Council recognizes the importance of incorporating, as
appropriate, within specific peace agreements, with the consent of the
parties, and on a case-by-case basis within United Nations peacekeeping
mandates, clear terms for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, including the safe and timely disposal of arms and
ammunition. The Council requests the Secretary-General to provide the
negotiators of peace accords with a record of best practice based upon
experience in the field.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to develop a
reference manual for use in the field on ecologically safe methods of
weapons destruction in order better to enable Member States to ensure the
disposal of weapons voluntarily surrendered by civilians or retrieved from
former combatants. The Council invites Member States to facilitate the
preparation of such a manual.
"The Security Council welcomes the recommendations of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms (A/54/258), including the convening of
an international conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects no
later than 2001, noting the offer by Switzerland to host the conference.
The Council encourages Member States to participate actively and
constructively in the conference and any preparatory meetings, taking into
account the recommendations contained in this Statement, with a view to
ensuring that the conference makes a meaningful and lasting contribution to
reducing the incidence of illicit arms trafficking."

-----
