A /74/PV.63*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

63rd plenary meeting

Friday, 4 September 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Draft resolution (A/74/L.90)
The President: In connection with this agenda
item, the Assembly has before it a draft resolution
issued as document A/74/L.90.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/74/L.90?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/303).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
for explanations of vote after the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): I am delivering this
explanation of position on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States.
The European Union attaches great importance
to revitalizing the General Assembly with a view to
increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of this
organ by streamlining the work and agenda of the
Assembly and its six committees. We consider this to be

particularly important in the year of the Organization’s
seventy-fifth anniversary, which we wanted to use to
further shape the United Nations we need. This having
been said, we fully recognize that the constraints
imposed by the coronavirus disease pandemic did not
allow for making substantial progress on this agenda
item during the seventy-fourth session. We would like
to express our sincere thanks to the two facilitators of
this process for their tireless efforts in achieving what
was achievable under difficult circumstances.
Resolution 74/303 is a technical rollover resolution
that reconfirms the validity of last year’s resolution
73/341, as well as its mandates, and provides the basis for
discussions at the next session, including the important
analysis of how the pandemic has affected the work
of the General Assembly and of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. It is our understanding that this rollover, as
laid out in paragraph 1, also reconfirms the mandate
for the alignment process, which we consider to be an
essential element of the overall revitalization agenda.
We feel the need to voice our disappointment
over the lack of tangible results stemming from the
alignment process during the session. We recognize
that this is partly due to the challenges arising from
the extraordinary working methods that have made
systematic exchanges nearly impossible. We have also
noticed the unfortunate lack of willingness among
some partners to engage constructively in discussions
aimed at eliminating existing and clearly noticeable
duplications and overlaps in the agenda of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-22992 (E)

*2022992*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 13 August 2021

A/74/PV.63

04/09/2020

Along with a number of non-EU countries, the EU
and its member States presented a constructive vision
on the way forward on alignment, which we hope will
be part of the basis for discussion during the upcoming
seventy-fifth session. We are determined to make
further progress on alignment guided by, in particular,
paragraphs 28 and 29 of resolution 73/341.

Inter-Parliamentary Union. The text outlines the
links between the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the
Organization. The draft resolution lays out a noteworthy
democratic vision by recognizing the importance of the
collaboration of parliamentarians, national parliaments
and the Inter-Parliamentary Union in achieving the
common goals of both organizations.

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position after the adoption of
resolution 74/303.

The text calls for the elimination of violence against
women in politics and requests the Secretary-General
to report on best practices to increase the participation
of women in parliaments. It recognizes the role
parliamentarians play in the response to the coronavirus
disease pandemic. It underlines the importance of
ensuring that our response to the pandemic is based on
unity, solidarity and renewed multilateral cooperation,
and reiterates the need to ensure the availability of and
access to essential medicines and vaccines without
discrimination of any kind.

I should now like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassadors Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee and Michal
Mlynár, Permanent Representatives of Ghana and
Slovakia, respectively, Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly, who have so ably to conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations of the Ad Hoc
Working Group. I should also like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassadors Collen Vixen Kelapile and
Milica Pejanović Đurišić, Permanent Representatives
of Botswana and Montenegro, respectively, who also so
ably conducted the discussions and negotiations in the
intergovernmental consultations on the alignment of the
agenda of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and their subsidiary bodies. I am sure
that Members of the Assembly join me in extending to
them our sincere appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 125
Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Draft resolution (A/74/L.85)
The President: The President: I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico to introduce draft
resolution A/74/L.85.
Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, I too would like to extend
my delegation’s congratulations on the way you have
conducted the work of the General Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session.
I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/74/L.85, on the interaction between the
United Nations, national parliaments and the
2/20

In other substantive areas, the text recognizes the
contributions of parliamentarians and the role they
play in advancing the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goals to promote human rights, including
efforts aimed at eliminating racial discrimination, in
empowering young people and in promoting interfaith
and inter-ethnic dialogue, among other important points.
The draft resolution we introduce today is the
product of an open, inclusive and transparent negotiation
process. Throughout this process we had five informal
meetings in which the positions of all delegations were
discussed and taken into account. We therefore believe
that the draft resolution is balanced and relevant.
The draft text that we introduce today has been
adopted without a vote for 25 years, which testifies to the
importance of interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
We invite all delegations to support this draft resolution
as presented and proceed to its adoption.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.85, entitled
“Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
I give the floor to the representative of the United
States of America to introduce an amendment to draft
resolution A/74.L.85.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): The
United States proposes the following amendment
to draft resolution A/74/L.85, entitled “Interaction
20-22992

04/09/2020

between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union”. The United States
proposes that the sixth preambular paragraph be deleted
in its entirety.
Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We understand that a separate vote has been requested
on the sixth preambular paragraph of draft resolution
A/74/L.85. We reject the amendment proposal. We
therefore call on all delegations to support the text as
a whole as it was presented. As we have already said,
the sixth preambular paragraph was discussed at the
informal consultations on the basis of consensus-based
language previously agreed in the General Assembly.
We should therefore not delete it.
We call on all representatives to support the text
of draft resolution A/74/L.85, as presented. In that
regard, we encourage all delegations to vote against the
deletion of the sixth preambular paragraph.
The President: Before we proceed to take action
on draft resolution A/74/L.85, in accordance with
rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly will
first take a decision on the oral amendment proposed
by the representative of the United States of America.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,

A/74/PV.63

Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Benin, Brazil, Japan, Kiribati, Oman, Senegal
The draft amendment was rejected by 161 votes to
1, with 6 abstentions
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.85, entitled
“Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I would like to announce that,
since the submission of the draft resolution, in addition
to those delegations listed in document A/74/L.85, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors
of draft resolution A/74/L.85: Andorra, Argentina,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chad, China, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Guatemala, Guinea
Bissau, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Norway,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Serbia, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Spain,
Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda,
Uruguay and Viet Nam.

20-229923/20

A/74/PV.63

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.85 as a whole?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/304).

04/09/2020

both pose serious security and health risks, which could
cause the virus to re-emerge.
For those reasons, Hungary disagrees
operative paragraph 14 of the resolution.

with

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.

Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): The
United States would like to clarify its views on several
elements in resolution 74/304 and state for the record its
dissociation from consensus on two paragraphs.

Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary wishes
to highlight its national position concerning
resolution 74/304, entitled “Interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”.

The United States dissociates from the sixth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 6 and
does not concur with the references to the World Health
Organization in this resolution. While the United States
supports access to safe, effective, affordable and quality
essential medicines, vaccines, testing and diagnostics,
personal protective equipment and medical equipment
for addressing the coronavirus disease, that access
should not undermine incentives for innovation.

Hungary regrets that the text refers to the Global
Compact for Migration, which has not been accepted by
all countries. Hungary, among others, voted against it.
Also, Hungary cannot support the reference to
orderly, safe and regular migration and mobility of
people at the current time of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has
caused serious changes in the economic and labour
market for all countries. The massive job losses are a
worrisome development in the labour market situation.
Hundreds of thousands of citizens have lost their jobs
since the crisis began. It is more than obvious that we
cannot continue the approach we have taken so far. In
the medium term, and possibly in the long term, the
economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic
may result in changes in the structure of the labour
market and could trigger a decrease in the need for
a new workforce in destination countries as well.
Consequently, Hungary has emphasized that, instead
of promoting or facilitating migration, the focus should
be on providing assistance to third countries locally
by creating local conditions that are more conducive
to stable growth and development, thereby allowing
everybody to stay at home in peace and prosperity.
Currently, Governments have to handle not only
health challenges but also economic problems, and
have to immediately provide support to assist their
own citizens in overcoming challenges by providing
new or alternative job opportunities and ensuring safe
economic, living and health conditions.
Based on all this, Hungary stresses that any form
of migration or mobility, in particular the planned or
managed forms of them, is not desirable under our
current circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic, as
4/20

The United States objects to the language calling
for continued and enhanced cooperation in supporting
Governments in the facilitation of the “orderly, safe,
regular and responsible migration and mobility of
people”. The resolution is silent on whether such
movements are consistent with national immigration
laws, nor does it advocate for the need of such
movements to be in accordance with law. The way the
Assembly talks about crossing international borders
should reflect the centrality of law.
Regarding the position of the United States on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the United States raised its
concerns in its global explanation of position delivered
on 21 November 2019. The United States submitted
formal notification of its withdrawal from the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change to the United Nations on
4 November 2019. The withdrawal will take effect one
year from the delivery of the notification. Therefore,
references to the Paris Agreement and climate change
are without prejudice to United States positions.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation, who has asked to make a statement
after the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the
adoption of resolution 74/304, on the interaction
20-22992

04/09/2020

between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union. We would like to also
thank the delegation of Mexico for the efforts it made
to agree the text of the resolution.
Our delegation is a co-sponsor of this important
document, which will become yet another contribution
towards the strengthening of interaction among the
organizations and the national parliaments mentioned
therein and will contribute towards the development
of parliamentary diplomacy. We are convinced that a
non-politicized, mutually respectful and constructive
exchange of opinions among parliamentarians
enables us to come up with decisions for serious
international problems.
As a host country of the world conference on
interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue, which is mentioned
in operative paragraph 23 and is scheduled take place
in 2022 in Russia, we would like to announce that
its title will be “World Conference of Heads of State,
Parliamentarians and Representatives of the World
Religions on Intercultural and Inter-religious Dialogue
for the Benefit of Peace and Humankind”.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 125?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 31
Prevention of armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2019, the
Assembly decided to include this sub-item in the agenda
of the seventy-fourth session. In connection with this
item, I have received a letter dated 6 July 2020 from
the Permanent Representatives of Finland and Turkey
to the United Nations, as co-Chairs of the Group of
Friends of Mediation, requesting the inclusion of this
sub-item in the provisional agenda of the seventy-fifth
session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this sub-item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session?
It was so decided (decision 74/577).

A/74/PV.63

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 31?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 33
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 20 September 2019, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfourth session. In connection with this item, I have
received a letter dated 27 August 2020 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations requesting that the item be included in the draft
agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include this item in the draft agenda of the seventyfifth session?
It was so decided (decision 74/578).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 37
The situation in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2019, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-fourth session. In connection with this
item, I have received a letter dated 3 August 2020
from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to
the United Nations requesting that consideration of
this item be deferred to the seventy-fifth session of the
Assembly and that the item be included in the agenda of
the seventy-fifth session.
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): My delegation would
like to disassociate itself from the decision to include
agenda item 37 on the draft agenda of the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to defer consideration of this

20-229925/20

A/74/PV.63

item and include it in the draft agenda of the seventyfifth session?
It was so decided (decision 74/579).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 37?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 38
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 20 September 2019, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfourth session, with the understanding that there would
be no consideration of this item by the Assembly. In
connection with this item, I have received a note verbale
dated 15 April 2020 from the Permanent Mission of the
Comoros to the United Nations requesting the inclusion
of this item in the provisional agenda of the seventyfifth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include this item in the draft agenda of the seventyfifth session?
It was so decided (decision 74/580).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 38?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63
The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine
Letter dated 28 July from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly (A/74/972)
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2019, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-fourth session. In connection with the
item, an identical letter dated 28 July 2020 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly has been issued
6/20

04/09/2020

as document A/74/972, in which it is requested that
the item be included in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-fifth session of the Assembly.
I now call on those members who wish to make
statements before the voting.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries of the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the European
Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; as well as the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union reaffirms its resolute support
of Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We reiterate that we do not recognize and continue to
condemn the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by the
Russian Federation, which is a violation of international
law. It remains a direct challenge to international
security, with grave implications for the international
legal order that protects the unity and sovereignty of
all States.
The European Union continues to call for full
compliance with international human rights standards
on the Crimean peninsula. All pending cases of
human rights violations and abuses, such as enforced
disappearances, torture and killings, should be
thoroughly investigated. International human rights
observers must be granted full, free and unhindered
access to the whole territory of Ukraine, including
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol.
The European Union recalls all General Assembly
resolutions on this topic from the past few years and
calls for their full implementation, including of Russian
Federation’s obligations under applicable international
humanitarian law. The European Union reaffirms its
full support, through the endeavours of the Normandy
format, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), including the work of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, and the
Trilateral Contact Group.
The European Union stresses the importance of
enhancing negotiation efforts aimed at the sustainable
and peaceful resolution of the conflict in view of the
20-22992

04/09/2020

full implementation of the Minsk agreements by all
sides and of measures aimed at rebuilding confidence
by underlining the responsibility of the Russian
Federation in that regard.
For all those reasons, the States members of the
European Union and aligned countries decide to vote
in favour of the inclusion of the item “The situation in
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine” into
the regular agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I am taking the floor to explain our position on the
inclusion in the General Assembly’s agenda for the
coming session of the item entitled “The situation in
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine”.

A/74/PV.63

hostage to destructive approaches. This platform for
dialogue is being used by the Ukrainian delegation
and its patrons in order to put forward an artificially
created agenda that has nothing to do with reality and
even less with trying to find solutions for burning
global issues. Member States are having an alternative
reality imposed on them, in which a country that does
not want to conduct a civilized dialogue with its own
people presents itself as a victim of external factors.
I call on the Assembly to consider the title of
the item proposed for inclusion in the agenda of the
seventy-fifth session. Let me remind delegations that
there have been no temporarily occupied territories in
Ukraine since the 1940s. In other words, we are being
asked to believe in a sham.

We are of the view that debating a multifaceted
issue of a highly political and controversial nature will
not be very helpful in furthering efforts to achieve
workable solutions to any issue that has been already
agreed on in the Minsk agreements of 2015 and those
reached in resolution 2202 (2015). When there is an
agreed international mechanism in place, supported
by the Security Council, inserting this dispute into the
General Assembly’s agenda could emphasize existing
differences and sow division among the Member States
rather than bridging those differences. It could even
undermine the internationally recognized and agreed
framework for settlement in the Ukraine. It would be
wise to give the agreed mechanism more time and
refrain from making hasty decisions.

If the Crimea is meant in this context, then it is
no secret to anyone that the peninsula became part of
the Russian Federation as a result of a referendum.
More than 96 per cent of the participants in the
referendum voted in favour of becoming part of the
Russian Federation. If what is meant in this context
is the Donbas, that is a territory where, for six and a
half years, Kyiv has been waging war against citizens
of Ukraine, who in 2014 refused to accept the coup
d’état in the country. That is very well known to the
Security Council, which in resolution 2202 (2015)
endorsed the specific parameters needed to resolve the
situation. I am referring to the package of measures for
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It is just
that Kyiv is in no hurry to implement the provisions of
this document.

Iran’s principled position supports a peaceful
resolution of the dispute between Ukraine and Russia,
and we firmly believe that the issue primarily concerns
the two States involved. A solution reached outside
that framework will not work unless it is endorsed by
both States.

It is well known that the key to resolving intra-State
differences and disputes is an inclusive internal
dialogue. This applies also to countries in Asia, in the
Americas, Africa and Europe; it is only in Ukraine that
the authorities continue to ignore the just demands of
the people of Donbas.

The Islamic Republic of Iran does not support
the inclusion of the supplementary item entitled “The
situation in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine” in the agenda of the seventy-fifth session
of the General Assembly. We think it has adverse
implications for internationally agreed modalities and
formats for reaching the settlement of the dispute that
are represented by the Minsk agreements and endorsed
by resolution 2202 (2015).

The General Assembly is being dragged into a
campaign against people in the east of Ukraine, and
the United Nations has been led to believe a narrative
developed for internal purposes, in which all of the
problems of the country are attributed to the myth of
Russian aggression. This deception is being actively
supported by the Western patrons of Ukraine, which
turn a blind eye to the obvious fact that Kyiv is
sabotaging the Minsk agreements.

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The General Assembly has yet again become

We hope that those present in the General Assembly
Hall today will see the Ukraine’s destructive approach

20-229927/20

A/74/PV.63

for what it is and not support the proposal to include
this item on the agenda of the seventy-fifth session. We
request a vote on the proposal. We will vote against it
and urge other delegations to do the same.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic remains convinced
that the request to include the item entitled “The situation
in the temporary occupied territories of Ukraine” on the
agenda of the General Assembly is a politicized request
that reflects the desire of some countries to escalate the
situation in that territory and put unfair pressure on the
Russian Federation, to the detriment of peace, security
and stability at the regional and international levels and
of the well-established historical relationship between
the Ukrainian and Russian peoples.
This situation is governed by long-standing legal
norms, the Charter of the United Nations, international
agreements and the rules of international law, which,
taken together, require the total reconsideration of
the inclusion of the item proposed on the agenda of
the General Assembly. In this context in particular,
it is important to reaffirm the fact that if the General
Assembly takes up this situation on its agenda, it will be
encroaching on the mandate of the Security Council, in
violation of Article 12 of the Charter. We reiterate that
inserting the term “temporarily occupied territories”
in the title of the proposed item does not change the
fact that this situation falls under the purview of the
Security Council, in implementation of resolution 2202
(2015). The situation in these territories will remain
governed by the provisions of the Minsk agreements
endorsed by the Security Council in that resolution and
in presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 in 2018.
The implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Minsk agreements requires all
parties to show genuine political will and collectively
work to restore peace and stability in Ukraine and
normalize relations between the two neighbours, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine, without any negative
interference from Western Governments, which claim
that they care for Ukraine, while, in reality, they aim to
escalate the situation and return to a cold war reality,
cultivate animosity through the use of medium- and
long-range missiles, and threaten peace and security in
this part of the world.
Accordingly, we consider the request to include this
item in the agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly, as set forth in document A/74/972,
8/20

04/09/2020

to be a deplorable new attempt to undermine the Minsk
agreements and relevant Security Council resolutions,
weaken international efforts aimed at resolving the
situation and stifle the implementation of measures
adopted by the Normandy quartet.
We very sincerely advise our Ukrainian colleagues
to respect the fact that there are disagreements between
them and their historical neighbours. We advise them
to open the door to genuine dialogue with Russia,
with a view to implementing the Minsk agreements
and Security Council resolutions. We advise them not
to give any other State an opportunity to use these
disagreements to worsen the situation between the
two countries.
My country will vote against the request to include
the item on the agenda of the seventy-fifth session of
the General Assembly. We call on everyone else to
respect the rules of procedure governing this issue and
join us in voting against the request.
We again ask our colleagues in Ukraine to open
the door to direct dialogue with its people and with the
Russian Federation. Dialogue is the only way to resolve
disagreement. Ukraine must not let any other party
turn the country into theatre of conflict to score points
that will not work in favour of the Ukrainian people or
to use it as a means to threaten security in Russia, its
historical neighbour.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): I would like to speak in
support of the request for the inclusion of the item
entitled “The situation in the temporary occupied
territories of Ukraine” in the agenda of the seventyfifth session of the General Assembly.
The illegal annexation of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by the Russian
Federation constitutes a grave violation of international
law and infringes upon the fundamental principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Helsinki Final Act, including the principles of
territorial integrity, the sovereign equality of States,
non-use of force or threat of force, and the inviolability
of internationally recognized borders. The occupation
of Crimea has also resulted in grave violations of
human rights and freedoms there, in the absence of
international human rights monitors on the ground.
These questions are directly affecting the maintenance
of regional and international peace and security.
20-22992

04/09/2020

Georgia fully supports the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and urges the Russian
Federation to implement its international obligations.
We therefore support and call for the inclusion of
the item on the situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine in the agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
supports the continued consideration of agenda item 63,
“The situation in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine”. We will vote in favour of its inclusion in
the agenda of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session, and we encourage others to do the same.
The position of the United Kingdom is clear.
We do not recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of
Crimea and remain concerned about the situation in
non-Government controlled areas of eastern Ukraine.
As long as that situation continues, the United Kingdom
believes that this item should remain on the agenda.
Let me reiterate: the United Kingdom stands with
the international community in its unwavering support
for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

A/74/PV.63

Ukraine” in the provisional agenda of the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
Amid the negative but predictable position of the
Russian Federation as a party to the inter-State conflict,
my delegation continues to insist on a positive decision
by the General Assembly on Ukraine’s request for the
following reasons.
As you, Mr. President, already informed
representatives, under your presidency the General
Assembly has decided to include the item in the
provisional agenda for the current session. I would
like to highlight the fact that the decision was adopted
at the beginning of the session by consensus both in
the General Committee and at the General Assembly
plenary meeting. We therefore consider the request for
a recorded vote today as a sign of disrespect for the
Assembly and its decision and an uninhibited attempt
by the Russian Federation and a number of States to
impede the General Assembly’s special authority, as
the most representative main organ of the Organization,
to continue its consideration of an issue of particular
importance for the international community.

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We welcome the
successful resumption of in-person meetings of
the General Assembly under your wise presidency
and guidance, Mr. President. A broad range of very
important decisions were adopted during the meetings,
including resolution 74/300, introduced by Georgia,
with a large number of co-sponsors, under agenda
item 32, “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and
their implications for international peace, security and
development” (see A/74/PV.62).

I am convinced that, as the main deliberative,
policymaking and representative organ of our
Organization, the General Assembly is entrusted to
discuss any questions or any matters within the scope
of the Charter of the United Nations. I would like to
underline that every Member State of the United
Nations has the right to be heard in the Assembly.
Member States should think about that when they
vote. It does not matter whether they are a member of
the permanent three, the permanent five, the group of
eight, the European Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Organization of American States,
the Commonwealth, the Group of 77 and China or the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries — or of none of
those groups. They still have the right to be heard in the
Assembly. When members are called on to vote against
the inclusion of an item, they are basically called on
to undermine their right to be heard in the Assembly
on any issue that may be of interest to their countries,
whether today or tomorrow. Members should think
about that.

My delegation very much regrets the statements
of Iran, the Russian Federation and the Syrian Arab
Republic demanding a recorded vote on the request
of Ukraine (see A/74/972) to include the item “The
situation in the temporarily occupied territories of

The Assembly is well aware that, due to the
military aggression in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol in Ukraine in
2014, the General Assembly, by its resolution 68/262,
entitled “Territorial integrity of Ukraine”, affirmed its

Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): The
United States supports retaining this item on the agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
It is entirely appropriate for the General Assembly
to continue its deliberations on Russia’s aggressive
acts against Ukraine, including its ongoing violations
of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in
the Donbas region and occupied Crimea. We urge all
delegations to vote in favour.

20-229929/20

A/74/PV.63

commitment to the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. On 27 March 2014,
100 nations voted in support of the territorial integrity
of Ukraine. I call on the countries present today to vote
for the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Since then, in numerous subsequent resolutions,
the General Assembly has condemned the ongoing
temporary occupation of parts of the territory of
Ukraine. I therefore want to underline that the foreign
occupation in Ukraine, which continues to this day, is
not a new topic for the General Assembly. The retention
of the item on the agenda has given the Assembly a
much-needed framework and venue for considering
the issue comprehensively and in all its complexity,
encompassing its political, security, humanitarian,
social, human rights, gender and other dimensions,
including providing a platform for the Russian
Federation to speak under the agenda item.
The consideration of the item in plenary meeting
of the General Assembly on 20 February 2019
demonstrated the international community’s growing
significant attention to the issue of the ongoing unlawful
military actions against Ukraine.
Due to the ongoing foreign aggression against my
country, the Assembly’s close attention to the issue
must be consistently maintained.
Let me underline that today’s decision is by and
large a procedural step. I call on all Member States
to vote in favour of the inclusion of this item in the
provisional agenda of the seventy-fifth session. I call
on all Member States to vote for their right to be heard
in the Assembly.
The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to a recorded vote on the proposal that the
agenda item entitled “The situation in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine” be included in the
draft agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
10/20

04/09/2020

Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, India, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Paraguay, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia
By 81 votes to 17, with 65 abstentions, the General
Assembly decided to include the agenda item
entitled “The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine” in the draft agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session
(decision 74/581).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
20-22992

04/09/2020

minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Armenia.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): We asked for the floor
to explain our vote on the inclusion of agenda item 63,
on the situation in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine, in the draft agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session.
We reiterate our position that a comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the conflict can be achieved
between the parties concerned through negotiations
within the established formats and through the
implementation of mutually agreed arrangements.
Armenia continues to believe that there is no alternative
to an exclusively peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 86
Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
Letter dated 14 August 2020 from the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the General Assembly (A/74/991)
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 20 September 2019, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-fourth session. In connection with the
item, a letter dated 14 August 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Assembly has been
issued as document A/74/991, in which it is requested
that the consideration of the item be deferred to the
seventy-fifth session of the Assembly. May I therefore
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to include
agenda item 86 in the draft agenda of the seventy-fifth
session?
It was so decided (decision 74/582).

A/74/PV.63

The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 120
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting on 20 September 2019, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfourth session. It is my understanding that it would be
desirable to include this item in the draft agenda of the
seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
include the agenda item entitled “Implementation of the
resolutions of the United Nations” in the draft agenda
of its seventy-fifth session?
It was so decided (decision 74/583).
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 130
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Note verbale dated 13 August 2020 from the
Permanent Mission of Denmark addressed
to the President of the General Assembly
(A/74/989)
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 20 September 2019, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-fourth session. In connection with the
item, a note verbale dated 13 August 2020 from the
Permanent Mission of Denmark to the United Nations,
also on behalf of the Permanent Missions of Costa Rica,
Croatia, Guatemala, Nigeria, Qatar, Romania, Ukraine
and Uruguay to the United Nations, addressed to the
President of the General Assembly, has been issued as
document A/74/989, in which it is requested that this
item be included in the agenda of the seventy-fifth
session. May I take it that it is the wish of the General

20-2299211/20

A/74/PV.63

04/09/2020

Assembly to include this item in the draft agenda of its
seventy-fifth session?

cleansing and crimes against humanity” on the agenda
of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly.

I now give the floor to those members wishing to
make statements before the voting.

Before I elaborate further, I would like to clarify
one important point. We are not against the substance
of the item. We are discussing today the procedures.

Mr. Licharz (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States.
This year the world has faced an unprecedented
challenge presented by the global coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. COVID-19 has also impacted
the work of the General Assembly, and it has not been
possible for a formal debate to take place during this
session.
The European Union supports the rollover of
agenda item 130, entitled the “The responsibility to
protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity”, as
requested in document A/74/989, in the draft agenda of
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly.
It is important to recall that, in the past, the General
Assembly voted in favour of including the responsibility
to protect on the formal agenda of its second, seventythird and seventy-fourth sessions. The highly attended
formal debates of 2018 (see A/72/PV.105) and 2019 (see
A/73/PV.93 et seq.) offered Member States an occasion
to share views and promote better understanding on
all sides. Similarly, we have seen how the debates have
informed the work of the Secretariat in its efforts to
implement the principle.
It is important to continue on this positive path
and allow all Member States to forge consensus on this
issue, including in the most representative organ of the
United Nations, especially in our effort to build back
better together after the COVID-19 pandemic.
For this reason, the EU member States will vote
in favour of the rollover and call on all other member
States to do the same.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): This is the third time that we have come to
this Hall and witnessed disappointing actions by some
States in manipulating our procedures to undermine
the informal dialogue process on the responsibility to
protect. Those States have requested the inclusion of
agenda item 130, entitled “The responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
12/20

Members may recall that this unfair game began
three years ago, when some permanent delegations
requested that this item be included on the agenda of
the seventy-third session. At that time, those States
pledged to request such inclusion only once. However,
since then, we have seen the same game repeated
every year with different players. Therefore, with all
due respect to colleagues and sponsoring States that
support this inclusion, allow us to call this a game and a
manipulation of procedure. We wish those States would
have disassociated themselves from such practice.
It has become obvious that some States still insist
on this exclusionary act, which started three years ago,
even at the cost of the well-established good practices
of the General Assembly aimed at ensuring consensus
on the agenda of each session. I remind the Assembly
that over the past two years many Member States have
criticized this non-transparent manner and called on
the States supporting the inclusion of the item to stop
playing this game before the opening of each session.
However, those States have turned a blind eye to
the deep disagreements among Member States on the
concept of the responsibility to protect, in particular,
with regard to the third pillar. Everyone knows that this
pillar remains a pretext used by some Governments
for military aggression against other States.
Everyone — including the Secretariat — knows that, to
this day, Member States have failed to put in place real
rules and limitations to ensure that the responsibility
to protect is not misused by the Governments of some
Member States unilaterally and without a United Nations
mandate. Let us not forget that there are Governments
that have carried out military aggression against other
States, occupied other States and infringed upon the
sovereignty and independence of other States under the
pretext of the responsibility to protect.
My delegation, together with a considerable
number of Member States, remains unconvinced that
the inclusion of this item on the agenda of the seventyfifth session would serve the collective free-willed
discussion of the concept of the responsibility to
protect, particularly in the light of the fact that the
informal interactive dialogue meetings have not been
20-22992

04/09/2020

given a real opportunity to iron out disagreements on
this controversial concept.
Allow me to ask the Assembly a question and call
on it to think deeply about it without putting it to a
vote — what is the added value of including the item on
responsibility to protect on the agenda of the General
Assembly, other than deepening disagreement and
shaking our confidence as a result of this exclusionary
practice, and giving no chance to the informal dialogue?
Legally speaking, my country reiterates that
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Outcome Document
of the 2005 World Summit (resolution 60/1) did not
establish the responsibility to protect as a principle,
but reaffirmed the fundamental, inherent and wellestablished principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations — the principles of maintaining
international peace and security, saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, reaffirming faith
in fundamental human rights and in the dignity of
the human person and promoting social progress and
better standards of life in full freedom while respecting
the sovereignty of States and not interfering in their
internal affairs.
In that context, we would like to draw the attention
of Member States to the fact that the consensual
language on the responsibility to protect adopted in
the World Summit Declaration is not consistent with
the title of agenda item 130, which we are discussing
today. Instead, it cancels out the linkage, in substance
or form, in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World
Summit Declaration and the proposed agenda item
130. It is known to all that, when we deliberate on a
sensitive, serious and controversial issue, such as
the responsibility to protect, it is assumed that we
will demonstrate responsibility and observe political
realism, which makes it incumbent upon all of us to
recognize that we are not living in an ideal world, a
utopia free of conflict, and that we should eschew the
tendency to put narrow national interests above the
common good.
To be clearer, some Governments have used the
responsibility to protect in the past, some are using it
today and some will continue to use it in the future as
a pretext to serve their policies of military interference
and aggression and to impose unilateral coercive
economic measures on peoples of the world under the
guise of protecting them.

A/74/PV.63

I have a second question — do we, as the States
Members of the United Nations, have a stake in
ignoring the sharp disagreements on the concept of
the responsibility to protect, and its third pillar in
particular? Do we have a stake in giving the United
Nations the responsibility to give legitimacy to
military aggression and to punish, economically and
politically, the peoples of the world by means of this
very controversial concept?
We therefore hold the States that requested to
include this item on the agenda of the seventy-fifth
session responsible for deepening disagreements and
turning this question into a divisive issue among the
United Nations membership. In addition, by doing so,
those States undermine the existing consensus among
Member States on the agenda for the upcoming session.
In reaction to the firm position of some States,
my country, together with a considerable number of
other countries, has not and will not recognize any
references, ill-founded claims or hypothetical pillar
of the responsibility to protect, as being promoted
by some Member States in an exclusionary, selective
manner that threatens international peace and security.
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic reiterates
the fundamental importance of further deliberations
on this issue in an informal dialogue. My country
objects to the inclusion of item 130 on the agenda of
the seventy-fifth session before reaching consensus
on the notion and its pillars, as well as the controls
and guarantees that prevent it from being misused to
advance politicized goals, which runs counter to the
United Nations Charter. We request a recorded vote on
the inclusion of this controversial and non-consensual
item on the agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly, and call on Member States to vote
against it. Please stand for the Charter and for the rules
of procedure.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation disagrees with the inclusion of the concept of
the responsibility to protect as an item in the provisional
agenda of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session — not because we oppose the basic ideas of
the concept, but rather because we want to draw the
attention of Member States to the fact that a formal
discussion in the General Assembly is not an appropriate
way to arrive at an acceptable conceptual framework
for its implementation. We would like to underline
that the lack of an intergovernmental agreement on the

20-2299213/20

A/74/PV.63

scope of the application and definition of this initiative
will increase uncertainties around the responsibility
to protect and the risk of its biased interpretation and
application. Discussion on this issue should therefore
be devised in a way that appropriately addresses the
legal uncertainties and existing conceptual differences
among Member States. Formal discussion in the
Assembly will only deepen the existing divisions.
In our view, continuing informal interactive
dialogues on the subject, as agreed in 2009, is a more
appropriate way to address those differences.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is firmly committed to respecting and
protecting all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
That is why we reject the commission of crimes against
humanity, war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing,
and reiterate the role of the State as guarantor of the
security of its people at all times. We also express our
support for justice in cases where such crimes have
been committed.
Nevertheless, the concept of the responsibility to
protect is of serious concern to a significant number
of States, including Venezuela. This is due not only
to the lack of agreement on its definition and scope
but also to the fact that it has been used in practice to
promote interference and invasions. Affected peoples
have never been protected because the concept has
been used as an excuse to encourage unconstitutional
changes of Government and plunder their natural
resources. The nefarious application of the concept has
meant interference in the internal affairs of States with
the aim of destroying their independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as is intended to be done
against Venezuela.
We therefore express our rejection of the inclusion
of this item in the agenda of the seventy-fifth session
of the General Assembly, since it is clear that divergent
positions persist on this matter. To proceed otherwise
would be to further undermine the consensus that may
have existed at some point between 2005 and 2017.
In conclusion, we recall on this occasion that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela cannot participate
in the vote that will take place shortly on this matter
because, as is well known and for reasons beyond our
control, our country’s right to vote has been suspended
pursuant to the provisions of Article 19 of the Charter.
However, we would like to put on record our rejection
14/20

04/09/2020

and opposition of the inclusion of this item on the agenda
of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The main outline of the responsibility to
protect was initially reflected in the 2005 World Summit
outcome document (resolution 60/1). As we all know
very well, that document was adopted by consensus.
Thereafter, States conducted an informal interactive
dialogue in which they had a comprehensive discussion
and expansion of the concept, clarifying details and
implementation mechanisms.
Unfortunately, in 2017 the consensus was broken.
A number of States decided to end the informal
open dialogue and pursue the discussion within the
framework of the official General Assembly agenda.
Since then, we have seen serious regression on this
issue. Unfortunately, consensus is no longer a subject
for discussion. We can look at the minutes of plenary
meetings and see the deep divergences in the positions
of Member States.
We are convinced that the working method on
the concept that is proposed in this context will only
deepen the existing differences among States. Given
this situation, we think that including this item on
the agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly is not useful.
Mrs. Guardia Hernández (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The Cuban delegation takes the floor in
connection with the request for the inclusion of the
item on the responsibility to protect and the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity in the agenda of the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
International efforts to prevent the occurrence
of acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity are objectives that Cuba
shares. However, it is well known that, in the past,
some States have manipulated the concept of the
responsibility to protect, with disastrous consequences
for other countries. Originally, the request for inclusion
of this issue in the agenda of the General Assembly was
only for the seventy-second session of the Assembly,
according to the proponents of inclusion at the time.
However, every year since then, there have been requests
for its inclusion on the Assembly’s agenda, despite the
differences of opinion and doubts that persist among
the Member States on the issue.
20-22992

04/09/2020

These differences of opinion have been evident in
the debates that have taken place on the subject. We
remain convinced that the inclusion of the concept of
the responsibility to protect in the agenda of the General
Assembly is a premature step, as the achievement of
consensus is not guaranteed. On the contrary, it will
exacerbate differences and prompt greater polarization
of positions. For this reason, my delegation will vote
against the inclusion of this item on the agenda.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): The Philippines
is of the view that there is still no consensus on the
concept of the responsibility to protect. We therefore
support the inclusion of this item on the agenda of the
seventy-fifth session because we believe there is a need
for a formal and continuing discussion by the General
Assembly on the concept of the responsibility to protect
and on its operationalization.
It is critical that delegations be able, in a formal
debate of the General Assembly, to articulate that the
responsibility to protect is not a license to interfere in
domestic internal affairs and that focus should instead
be on coming up with a shared and agreed understanding
of it. We must ensure that any understanding of the
principle of the responsibility to protect is strictly in
accordance with the parameters of the 2005 World
Summit outcome document (resolution 60/1). My
delegation will therefore vote in favour of the inclusion
of this item on the agenda of the seventy-fifth session of
the General Assembly.
Ms. Wegter (Denmark): Allow me first to thank
you, Mr. President, for your work as President of the
General Assembly.
Denmark, together with Costa Rica, Croatia,
Guatemala, Nigeria, Qatar, Romania, Ukraine and
Uruguay, has requested the item on the responsibility
to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity to be
included in the draft agenda of the seventy-fifth session
of the General Assembly. We believe that it is important
for the General Assembly to debate prevention of the
most serious crimes and our shared, unanimously
agreed responsibility in this regard.
A large majority of States Members of the United
Nations has for the last three years decided to include
the item in the seventy-second, seventy-third and
seventy-fourth sessions of the General Assembly.
Regrettably, because of the coronavirus disease and
its effect on the work of the Assembly, no debate has

A/74/PV.63

been held on the agenda item at the seventy-fourth
session. However, during previous debates, statements
were made on behalf of more than 100 Member States,
providing an overwhelming number of national,
regional and international examples of best practices
and recommendations on how to prevent these crimes.
Numerous calls have also been made to maintain the
item on the agenda of the General Assembly, and we have
on numerous occasions stated that we wanted to resume
the debate. There have been no games whatsoever.
We have listened very carefully to the voices
questioning the value of the item. We remain
unconvinced that it will help the prevention of the most
serious crimes to stop sharing examples of prevention
or looking for opportunities for the international
community to work together on prevention, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. On
the contrary, it is clear that these debates are useful.
They inspire Member States to make a difference and
they inform the work of the Secretariat. Recently,
we have seen reports and recommendations from the
Secretary-General on topics chosen because they were
raised multiple times during these debates.
The year 2020 marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of
the World Summit outcome document (resolution 60/1),
including the principle of the responsibility to protect.
Much has happened since then, but our obligation to
protect individuals from the most serious crimes has
not changed. Nor has our commitment to this end, as
challenges in this field continue to exist. By requesting
a rollover of this agenda item, we are providing Member
States with an opportunity to continue to share best
practices and build on the work already established. We
urge all States to support this inclusion.
Mr. Guo Jiakun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
can all recall the many debates and votes that we have
had in the General Assembly Hall on this agenda item
over the past three years. It would appear that Member
States have not reached consensus on the definition
and criteria for the responsibility to protect, and have
even greater differences over how to implement the
concept. We therefore believe that to act in accordance
with the decision of the 2005 World Summit to discuss
this issue through informal dialogues of the General
Assembly (see resolution 60/1) is a reasonable and
constructive approach.

20-2299215/20

A/74/PV.63

Further attempts to force the inclusion of the issue
on the Assembly’s agenda will not help Member States
to increase mutual understanding and build consensus.
The Chinese delegation will therefore vote against the
inclusion of this item on the agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine is among the
countries that continuously support the consideration
of the item on the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity by the General Assembly.
We hope that further discussion of the responsibility to
protect will help to overcome the persistent gap between
the commitments and actions of some United Nations
States Members. Only by listening to each other can we
reach a solution and enhance the protection of peoples
from, and the prevention of, atrocity crimes.
Unfortunately, due to the pandemic, we did not
discuss many agenda items, including agenda item
130, on the responsibility to protect. Ukraine therefore
supports the inclusion of the item on the agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session. We
encourage all Member States to do the same.
Mr. Shahin (Egypt): Notwithstanding the
fundamental responsibility of Member States to protect
their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, as enshrined
in numerous international human rights instruments,
we nevertheless believe that the notion still suffers
from a number of political and legal gaps, which, if
left unheeded, will do more harm than good with
regard to the universal acceptance of the responsibility
to protect. It is therefore imperative that we strive to
achieve consensus on the conceptual framework of the
principle before continuing to mainstream it across the
United Nations system. In our view, such clarifications
are an essential prerequisite before we can again
include the responsibility to protect on the agenda
of the General Assembly, or take any practical steps
towards the realization of the concept, including in the
area of accountability.

04/09/2020

community in that regard should focus on enabling
and assisting States to develop capacities to carry out
such responsibilities, while respecting the principle
of national ownership of the relevant policies and
programmes. The international community should
therefore focus on preventive diplomacy and prevention.
While we fully support the view that prevention lies
at the core of the responsibility to protect, we stress
that a holistic and comprehensive approach should be
adopted. Such an approach should not be limited to
military or security aspects but should be interpreted
more broadly so as to address the root causes of
conflicts, including foreign occupation, poverty, food
insecurity and environmental degradation, as well as
religious and ethnic discrimination and intolerance.
In conclusion, while voting against the inclusion
of the item on the agenda of the General Assembly at
its seventy-fifth session, Egypt affirms its unwavering
commitment to international norms with regard to the
protection of populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. In that
regard, we will continue to strive towards reaching a
consensus on all outstanding aspects pertaining to the
so-called responsibility to protect in a manner that
would address the concerns of Member States, while
providing more effective protection to populations on
the ground against such violations.

I would like to reaffirm Egypt’s steadfast and
unwavering commitment to preventing impunity and
ensuring accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law.

Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Nicaragua does not support the inclusion
of the agenda item on the responsibility to protect on
the provisional agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session. Many countries, in particular
small and developing countries, continue to have
serious concerns over this issue. On various occasions,
Nicaragua has reiterated the fact that there is not even
agreement on the scope, definition and implications of
the concept. That continues to give rise to a great deal
of uncertainty over its application and political ends.
The responsibility to protect is an item that violates the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including respect for the sovereignty of States
and non-interference in their internal affairs. This issue
is also being manipulated by many States to impose
unilateral coercive measures and economic sanctions
on free and sovereign States, which contravenes
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

We highlight the fact that the primary responsibility
to protect populations from such crimes rests with
Member States. The principal role of the international

Nicaragua therefore does not support the inclusion
of this item on the agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session and will vote against its inclusion.

16/20

20-22992

04/09/2020

A/74/PV.63

Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): We find
it a little ironic that, in decrying the lack of consensus
with respect to the inclusion of the responsibility to
protect, several delegations are breaking consensus on
the inclusion of the item on the agenda. We also find it
a little ironic that, in opposing the inclusion of that item
on the agenda, many delegations are delving deeply
into the substance of the item on the responsibility to
protect. We therefore believe that we should continue
the discussion of the substance, which has already
begun today, at a formal debate of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session. We therefore call on all
delegations to vote in favour of the inclusion of the item
on the provisional agenda of the General Assembly at
its seventy-fifth session.

and to support the call for action on human rights that
the Secretary-General launched this year, in particular
when it comes to situations of crisis and conflicts.

Ms. Borbón Beeche (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica wishes to express its full support
for the inclusion of this agenda item on the provisional
agenda of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session, as we have in previous years. Moreover,
this year, together with Qatar, Croatia, Denmark,
Guatemala, Nigeria, Romania, Ukraine and Uruguay,
we request the President of the General Assembly
that the item on the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity be included on the agenda
of the general debate. It is an issue of great importance
not only to multilateralism but also in particular to
prevent suffering and protect lives.

Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is one of the countries that has called for the
inclusion of the responsibility to protect, the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity on the agenda of the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly. We live in a global
context in which the crisis caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic is exponentially
increasing the risk that these crimes could be
committed against millions of innocent human beings,
in particular against the most vulnerable among us,
including women and children.

The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated
people’s suffering due to not only the disease itself but
also the measures taken to prevent it and its impact
on economies and societies, rendering them more
vulnerable. We, as States, must therefore be mindful of
the responsibility to protect entrusted to us as States.
We are witnessing an unprecedented situation
at the United Nations with the denial of in-person
meetings and debates of the General Assembly.
However, that does not prevent us from recalling and
renewing our moral, political and legal commitment
to the responsibility to protect made 15 years ago at
the 2005 World Summit. We must continue working to
achieve the full implementation of this principle and its
three pillars with a view to increasing the capacity of
States and the Organization in the areas of prevention,
early warning and effective and rapid response. The
fact that atrocity crimes, sexual violence, persecution
and the displacement of ethnic groups continue means
that we need to continue discussions about protection

These debates have proven their utility insofar as
they allow us to broaden and integrate the responsibility
to protect agenda within the United Nations system.
The debates have also served to link this issue with
other equally important global issues, such as women
and peace and security, and must also be part of the
peacekeeping agenda.
The General Assembly must continue to discuss the
principle of the responsibility to protect on an annual
basis. We hope that one day it will become a standing
agenda item.

The General Assembly, as the most representative
organ of the United Nations, is the most appropriate
forum to consider actions that States Members can take
to implement the responsibility to protect. Moreover,
given the lack of unity that often paralyses the Security
Council, the General Assembly has the unavoidable
responsibility to actively and transparently debate
mechanisms that fundamentally prevent atrocity crimes
from being committed. Through a fruitful exchange of
ideas and experiences and formal debates of the General
Assembly, it will be possible to forge consensus and
achieve consensus-based action among the membership
to avoid the perpetration of those abhorrent crimes,
which undermine human life, human security and the
most essential elements of human dignity.
The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to a recorded vote on the proposal that the
agenda item entitled “The responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity” be included
in the draft agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly.

20-2299217/20

A/74/PV.63

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, South Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Comoros, Djibouti, Gabon, India, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Nepal, Oman,
Pakistan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Serbia, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia
18/20

04/09/2020

By 121 votes to 13, with 32 abstentions, the
General Assembly decided to include the agenda
item entitled “The responsibility to protect and
the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity” in the
draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session (decision
74/584).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): My delegation abstained in
the voting decision 74/584 for the following reasons.
First, despite the fact that this item has been
reappearing on the General Assembly’s agenda for
the past couple of years, there remain divergent views
among Member States, either on the procedural or
substantive aspect of its utility and deliberation. My
delegation therefore believes the end discussion on the
subject can be meaningful and truly genuine only if
it is done at a level that is convenient to all. In that
regard, we recommend that we continue discussing the
subject in the format of interactive informal dialogues.
As used to be the case, this could take place under
the framework of the General Assembly, as the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of
the United Nations.
Secondly, disagreement over whether this item
should be on the agenda at all has consumed us for
the past years. It contributed little, if anything, to the
advancement of our discussion on the matter. What is
pressing at the moment is for Member States to help
each other in reinforcing moderation and respect
towards toward differences — be they religious or
having to do with values and culture. No country is
immune from hatred and prejudice. We should come
together to address this challenge while refraining from
exercises that divide us.
Thirdly, my delegation believes that we should not
reformulate or reinterpret the commitment that world
leaders made in paragraphs 138 and 139 of resolution
60/1, entitled “World Summit Outcome”, for they were
crystal clear with regard to how the responsibility
to protect can come into play. Let us be guided by
their wisdom.
20-22992

04/09/2020

Let me conclude by restating that what we
confirmed last year: the deliberations on this very topic
should be on the basis of consensus so that any process
that we choose to advance is one that garners collective
support and ownership and is not the position of a few,
rather that of the majority.
Mr. Mohsin (Pakistan): The notion of the
responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity speaks to the collective resolve of
the international community to prevent those crimes
from happening. This is clearly affirmed in paragraphs
138 and 139 of the World Summit Outcome document
(resolution 60/1) of 2005.
Unfortunately, progress has been marred by
persistent divergences over the definition, scope
and application of the responsibility to protect.
Meanwhile, well-orchestrated and systematic atrocity
crimes continue to be committed in full view of the
international community. Innocent and vulnerable
populations continue to pay a heavy price for global
indifference and inaction. In our view, this situation
demands that we not let our existing differences
diminish our collective resolve to protect the weak and
the vulnerable, but instead bridge those differences and
develop a unified and common response.
The international community must act in a consistent
and unified manner against all atrocity crimes. While
we are not convinced by the overly focused approach by
some on the modalities of our discussion, we hope that
efforts will remain afoot during the forthcoming session
to find common ground on the substantive nature of the
differences in our perspectives and viewpoints.
With this in mind, my delegation decided to abstain
in the voting on the inclusion of this item on the agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
Mr. Naing (Myanmar): My delegation voted
against including this item on the agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session. It is the third time
the Assembly has had to vote on this particular item.
Despite the well-intentioned outcome of the 2005
World Summit (resolution 60/1), States Members of
the United Nations have not reached agreement on
the definition, scope and practical application of the
responsibility to protect, especially its third pillar. The
legitimate concerns of Member States regarding the
possible misuse of the responsibility to protect remain

A/74/PV.63

to be addressed. The General Assembly informal
debates on this item in the past few years did not serve
to narrow the prevailing political and legal gaps. A
confrontational approach and persistent requests to
include the item in the formal agenda of the General
Assembly only widened the existing divisions among
Member States.
In order to seek common ground on the conceptual
framework of the responsibility to protect, we are of the
view that interactive informal discussions are the most
appropriate at this stage. We think that it is premature
and counterproductive to push to mainstream the notion
of the responsibility to protect into the formal dialogues
of the General Assembly. That is why Myanmar voted
against decision 74/584.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 130?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 131
Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War
Letter dated 31 August 2020 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the General Assembly
(A/74/1002)
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2019, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-fourth session. In connection with the
item, a letter dated 31 August 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Assembly
has been issued as document A/74/1002, in which it is
requested that the item be included in the agenda of the
seventy-fifth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include agenda item 131 in the draft agenda of the
seventy-fifth session?
It was so decided (decision 74/585).

20-2299219/20

A/74/PV.63

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 131?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 154
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 20 September 2019, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfourth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of agenda item 154
and to include it in the draft agenda of its seventyfifth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 154?
It was so decided.
Results of the election of the Chairpersons of the
Main Committees
The President: Before adjourning, I wish to remind
members that as stated in my letter dated 12 June
2020, the following representatives have been elected
Chairpersons of the Main Committees of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session in accordance
with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, as well as Assembly decisions 74/555 and
74/557, and are accordingly members of the General
Committee for that session:
First Committee — His Excellency Agustín Santos
Maraver (Spain)

20/20

04/09/2020

Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) — His Excellency Collen
Vixen Kelapile (Botswana)
Second Committee — His Excellency Amrit
Bahadur Rai (Nepal)
Third Committee — Her Excellency Katalin
Annamária Bogyay (Hungary)
Fifth Committee — His Excellency Carlos Amorín
(Uruguay)
Sixth Committee — His Excellency Milenko
Esteban Skoknic Tapia (Chile)
I congratulate the Chairpersons of these Main
Committees at the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly on their election.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like
to thank very sincerely all the membership and in
particular to pay tribute to the vital work of the Main
Committees — the co-facilitators, the co-coordinators
and the many others who had to work to get us to
where we are today. The fact that a lot of work was
undertaken by the Assembly is due not only to the
membership’s support but also to the really important
work of the co-facilitators of all the processes and the
co-coordinators. This is absolutely first-rate work that
shows a high level of responsibility in the face of very
difficult situations.
I should like also to acknowledge the tremendous
support that we have received from the Secretariat in
making this work look easy. It was never easy, but I
am glad that we have come this far. Obviously, we also
worked very, very closely with all the other organs,
in particular through the various Presidents of the
Security Council and especially the President of the
Economic and Social Council. So this is just to register
my appreciation.
I wish to remind members that it would be helpful
if we left row by row, so that when the next round of
mitigation measures is in place, we will have the same
cooperation from the others we work with.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

20-22992
