NATIONS

UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 15

107etne et 108eme seances
18 fevrier 1947

and l08th nleetings

February 1947

Lake Success

New York

TABLE DES MA'r1ERES

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Cent-septi-eme seance

Hundred and seventh meeting
Page

nal agenda

59. Ordre du jour' provisoire. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 29 3

. 293

m of the discussion of the
:,ingdom complaint against
........... , .. ,
, 293

307

62. Ordre du jour provisoi~e.... : ..... '.... 307

, 308

63. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . . . .•.. 308

ional agenda

0-1.

61. Suite de la discussion de la plainte du
Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie
. 293

Cent-huitieme seance

Hundred and eighth meeting

ion of the agenda

. 293

60. Adoption de rordre du jour

on of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 293

63. Suite de la discussion du Pr~mier Rapport
de la Commission de 1'6~ergie atomique 308

L:ontinuation of the discussion of the
Fint Report of the Atomic Energy Com-

mission

308

Documents

Documents
Annex

Annexes

Les documents suivants, se rapportant aux
cent-septieme et cent-huitieme seances,
figurent all:

The following documents relevant to the
hundred and seventh and hundred and
eighth meetings appear in:
Supplement No. 3) Second Year

Supplement No 3) Deuxieme Annee

Letter from the representative of the United
Kingdom on the Security Council addressed .to the Se.cretary-Cencral and enclosures (document 8/247)

B

Lettre en date du 10 janvier 194-7 adressce
au Secretaire general par le representant
du Royaume-Uni au Conseil de securite
et pieces jointes (document S/24-7) . . . . .

8

9

Communications du Gouvernement albanais
relatives aux incidents survenus dans le
detroit de Corfou (document.S/250) ...

9

Communications from the Albanian GovcrI1lm~nt concerning incidents in the
Corfu Challnel (document S/250). . . .
SUjJplement No. 5, Second Year

Supplement No 5) Deuxieme Annee

Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic
Energy Commission to the President of
tbe Security Council dated 31 December
I !Hli tl':tllsmiuing tlH.~ First Report of the
Atomic Energy Commission (document
8/239)
14·

Lettre en date du 31 decembre 1946 adressee par le President de la Commission de
l'energie atomique au President tiu
Cons~il de· securite pour accompagner le
PremIer Rapport de la dite Commission
(document 8/239)

14

307

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Does anyone wish to speak?
If no one else wishes to take part in the
debate today, we can continue it tomorrow
afternoon at 3 o'clock.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

temps de guerre, l~ Conseil de securite rappelle a tous les Etats, qu'ils soient ou non
Membres des Nations Unies, qu'illeur incombe
de faire draguer, ou de laisser draguer, toutes
les zones situees dans leurs eaux territoriales
ou l'on a des raisons de supposer la presence
de mines.
J e termine la l'expose des faits et des arguments presentes par mon Gouvernement. I1 lui
a ete tres penible d'etre oblige de saisir le Conseil
de cette affaire, mais il est oblige de veiller a ce
que la vie d'innocents marins de toutes nationalites soit protegee contre des activites criminelles
clandestines.. J'aime it croire que le Conseil ne
verra pas dans cette affaire une tentative d'intimidation de la part d'un grand pays it l'egard
d'un petit. Les petites nations n'ont pas plus que
les autres le monopole de l'infaillibilite, et elles
doivent se conformer aux principes de civilisation qui sont it la base de la Charte des Nations
Unies.
J'ai vu dans un journal yougoslave un dessin
humoristique representant deux paysans albanais
qui, debout au bordde la mer, regardent passer
deux navires de guerre, avec la Iegende: "Pourquoi ces navires ne sont-ils done pas venus au
moment ou nous nous battions contre les fascistes?" A ceIa, je reponds: "Ces navires sont
venus". La marine britannique, en efIet, a pris
part, en 1943 et 1944, a d'innombrables operations dans l'Adriatique, et je pourrais fournir de
longs rapports sur l'appui qu'elle a donne aux
forces de la liberation. Ce sont les forces britanniques qui, de concert avec les partisans, ont
libere Corfou, et Saranda meme, au mois d'octobre 1944. Ce fut le jour de Noel de la meme
annee-il y a de cela un peu plus de deux ansque la marine royale britannique a invite 750
enfants albanais a une fete organisee pour eux.
Je puis assurer au Conseil qu'elle serait heureuse
d'avoir l'occasion de renouveler ce geste, si seulement elle avait l'assurance de ne pas etre payee
de retour avec des balles, des obus et des mines.
Le PRESIDENT: Personne ne demande la
parole?
Si personne ne desire plus intervenir aujourd'hui dans le debat, nous pourrions le poursuivre
demain a 15 heures.
La seance est levee cl 13 heures.

HUNDRED AND EIGHTH MEETING

CENT-HUI1'IEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 18 February 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue Lake Success, N ew-Yark,
le mardi 18 jevrier 1947, 15 heures.

President: Mr. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium) .

President: M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique) .

Present; The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America. A representative of
Canada also attended the meeting.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-U ni, Etats-U nis
d'Amerique. Le representant du Canada assistait
egalement a la seance.

62. Provisional agenda (document 5/278)

62. Ordre du jour provisoire
(document 5/278)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre en date du 31 decembre 1946 adressee

Security Council reminds all States, whether
Members of the United Nations or not, that
it is incumbent on them to sweep or permit to
be swept all parts of their territorial waters
where there is reason to suspect the presence
of mines.
This concludes my Government's case. It has
been very painful for my Government to have
to .bring it. But it is necessary for my Government to see that the lives of innocent mariners
of every nationality are protected against clandestine criminality. I trust the Council will not
look at this case as an example of a large country
trying to bully a small one. Even small countries
are not infallible and must obey the rules of
civilization, which lie at the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations.

I have seen a cartoon in a Yugoslav paper,
depicting two Albanian peasants standing on
the sea coast, and watching two warships passing by; the caption is "Why did not those ships
come when we were fighting the fascists here?"
The answer is: "They did". The British Navy
took part in countless operations in the Adriatic
in 1943 and 1944, and I could produce lengthy
accounts of the support it gave to the forces of
liberation. It was our forces which, in co-operation with the partisans, liberated Corfu, and
Saranda itself in October 1944. It was on Christmas Day of the same year-a little more than
two years ago-that the Royal Navy gave a
Christmas party to 750 Albanian children. Let
me assure the Council that the Navy would
gladly accept an opportunity to repeat this hospitality, provided they can be assured it will not
be returned with bullets, shells and mines.

a

a

308
Energy Commission to the President of the
Security Council, dated 31 December 194~,
transmitting the First Report of the Atonu~
Energy Commission to the Security Councll
(document S/239).1-

63. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

par le President de la Commission de l'ener.

gie atomique au President du Conscil de
securite pour accompngncr le Premier Rap.
port de la Conunission de I'energic atomique
au Conseil de securite (document Sj239)\

63. Adoption de I'ordre du jour
Vordre du jour est adoJ1M.

64. Continuation of the discussion of the
First Report of the Atomic Energy
Commission

64. Suite de la discussion du Premier Rapport de la Commission de I'energie
otomique

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I am
circulating to the members of the Security
Council the proposals, amendments and additions of the Soviet delegation. 2 I assume that
the Security Council will only consider and take
decisions on the general findings and the recommendations contained in the report, and that it
will consider the other parts of the report as
material submitted to the Security Council by
the Atomic Energy Commission for its information. If my assumption is correct-and I consider that this would be the only correct procedure in considering the report-I shall confine
myself to submitting the proposals, amendments
and additions which all the members of the
Security Council will presently receive. If, however) the Security Council decides to consider
not only the general findings and recommendations contained in the report of the Atomic
Energy Commission,8 but the other parts of this
report as well, the Soviet delegation will submit
a number of other amendments and proposals
relating to the other parts of the report.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiqucs socia·
listes sovietiques) (traduit du 1"llsse): .le vais
faire distribuer maintenant aux memhres du
Conseil de securite les propositions, les amende·
ments et les addenda que prcsente la. delegation
sovietique2 • .le pense que le Conscil de securite
se contentera dJexaminer les conclusion,s generales
et les recommandations contenues dnns le rapport, et ne prendra de decisions que SUI' les dites
conclusions et recommandations, ks autrcs par·
ties du rapport devant ctre considcn~es comme
des documents tral1smis au Conseil de sccurite
par la Commission de l'energie atomique :\ titre
de renseignement. S'i! en est ainsi,--et scion moi
cette methode est la seule qui soit appropricc a
l'examen du rapport-je me borncrai a presenter
les propositions, amendements et addenda que
l'on va distribuer a l'instant a tous les membrcs
du Conseil. Si, au contraire, le Conseil de securite decide dJexaminer non seulemcnt lcs conclu.
sions et recommandations generales CCllItcnucs
dans le rapport de la Commission de l'cnergic
atomique 3 , mais aussi les autrcs paJtics du rapport, la delegation sovictiq ue prescntcra de nouveaux amendements et propositions se rapportal1t
aces autres parties du rapport.
C'est tout ce que j'avais dire avant de faire
distribuer aux membres du COI1seil lcs propositions, amendements et addenda de la delegation
sovietique.
'

This is all I wish to say before circulating to
the members of the Security Council the text
of the Soviet delegation's proposals, additions
and amendments.

a

Mr. MWHALOWSKI (Poland): More than a
year ago, on 24 January 1946, the General
Assembly in London adopted the first resolution
on the subject of atomic energy:' I should like to
quote one passage of it here:

M. MICHALOWSKI (Pologne) (traduit de ['anglais): 11 y a plus d JuI1 an, le 24· janvier 1946,
l'AssembIee generale, rcunie a LoncIres, adoptait
la premiere resolution relative a I'encrgie atemique4 • Je voudrais citer tin passage de cette
resolution:

"The work of the Commission should proceed by separate stages, the successful completion of each of which will develop the necessary confidence of the world before the next
stage is undertaken."

"La C. o~l1nusslOn
"
'I
'
proccc
eases
travuux par
stades dlstmcts de fa~on q \le l(~ succes obtenu
a la fin de chaque stade dcveloppe parmi les
pays la confiance indispensable, avant qu'oll
ne passe au stade suivant."

Since this resolution was adopted, during the
seventy-nine meetings of the Atomic Energy
Commission and various committees mOre than
a million words have been spoken, ~nd tons of
paper used to record them. We believe that the
time has come when we can ask ourselves

Depuis le jour Oll cette resolution a ete adop·
tee, au COUl'S des soixante-dix-neuf seances de la
Con:-n;ission de l'energie atomique et dc'i divers
comItes, on a prononce plus d'un million de
mots, et l:on a employe ~Ics tonnes de papier pour
les enreglStrer. Nous estmlOns qu'il est temps de

] See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supple!!1ent No. 5..1. Ann~x.14, and Official Records
of the AtomIC Energy c..;ommtSsIOn, Special Supplem~nt.
• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 7, Annex 16.
• Parts II an d II I.
• ~ee Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
durIng the first part of its first session, .page 9.

I V,oir Proc~s-rJlrbaux officieLr d,J Conuil dd stcuritl,
Deuxleme Annee, ~uppl~inent No 5, Annexe. H, et
ProcB.s.rJlrbaux officlIls de la Commission dl! l'inlfgi,
at~mlq.ue, SuppICment special.
V,olr Proc~s'[)lrbau:~ otficiels du Conseil de sicuritJ,
De.uXle~e Annee, Supplement No 7 Annexe 16.
Parties II et Ill.
'
'Voir RJsolll~i,ons ad~Plt!es par t'AssembUIt glnhall
pendant la premIere partle de Sa premiere session, page 9.

309
whether this first "separate stage" which we
have completed during the past year has been
successful, and whether the completion of it hac,;
"developed the necessary confidence of the world
before the next stage is undertaken."
The Polish delegation must unfortunately raise
a doubt on that point, although among the
millions of words that have been spoken during
many meetings, the word "confidence" was frequently used.
The main reason for our doubt is the fact that
despite the solemn declarations made on 24 Jan. uary 1946 and on 14 December 1946, atomic
bombs continue to be produced and stock-piled.
In the eyes of the world, this fact destroys all the
efforts of statesmen and scientists who at meetings speak of control and of outlawing, of world
security and confidence. Suspicion has grown
instead of confidence, fear instead of security.

The blast which was heard round the world,
on 6 August 1945, marked the beginning of a
new war, a war of nerves. This war is all the
more tragic in that it has, as its source, not
weapons created by the enemy, but a weapon of
our own making, an allied weapon. It is being
fought in the hearts and minds of the common
peoples of the allied world.
I am speaking not only of atomic weapons,
though they may be the most loudly spoken of
and proclaimed. Let us not overestimate them.
We Poles know a weapon just as destructive and
horrible as this one. We know the death factories
of Oswiecim, Tremblinka, Majdanek, and Buchenwald. This weapon killed six million people
in Poland, more than a hundred times as many
as died at Hiroshima. The atomic bomb must
not overshadow the more general problem of
weapons of mass destruction, weapons directed
against peaceful towns, women and children, the
old and the weak.

If we are to reach the first stage of "necessary
confidence", if we are to struggle for "freedom
from fear", first we must all clearly and without
doubt condemn, once and for an, every kind of
weapon of mass destruction, including the
atomic bomb.
.
. The Polish delegation thus maintains its positIon, ~dopt~d many months ago. In the course of
the dlScussIOn all the question during the first
part of the first session of the General" Assemblv
in Lond01:,~ Mr. Zygmunt Modzclewski, the
present Mmlster for Foreign Affairs, submitted
a proposal that the parliaments of the countries
represented should adopt a law embodying the
following principles:

1. That the results obtained ill the scientific
fi ',See Verbatim Records of the Plenary m"tings of the

g'st part of tlk, first session of the GencT(ll AWlmbly
eventeenth p enary meeting, pages 2 6 2 - 2 6 3 . '

nous demander si et premier "stacle distinct" que
nous a.VOIlS atteint l'anm:e dernierc a ell d('~ ltHaltats fructllcuX, et si les progrt·s realises ont bien
"developpe parmi les pays la confianre indil;·
pensable, avant ql1'on lH: pas,~e all stacic' sllivant",
La delegation polonaise doit maJh(~ur('tI~·('n1{'nt
exprimer des doute.<; sur ee dernicl' poim. hit'l\
que Pon ait SOllv~nt c:ntendu le: mot "1'fmli,lIler'''
panni les millions de mot.. . prmlOll\"I:~ ;l~l n nlr~
de ces nombrell~·('$ S(:~llKC$,
Nos doutes pro\,j(:nm~nt Slll'tout du bit q lI'(,l1
clepit des dcdarations solenndks [:lite,;; Ir ~:,l jilnvier 1946 et le 14 c1cn'mlm: l!14fi, 011 ll'("ll
continue pas mains it fabriqut'r dC's hombc,:; :nomique.c; et it en constitm'r de.... ~to\,k,<, AII"\ yt'liX
du monde en tier, cc ~("ul fait rrdUlt ;1 Ut;l!lt hllJ<;
les efforts des hommcs c1'Etat (~t dt';:'; SIY.lIlt!' qui
parlent, au eOlIn; de leurs rcuniom. Ill- \ nn(n~lt:
et d'abolition, ck s:ectlritc momli;llt~ ('t dr
confiance, Cc sont la su~pki?f~ etl,a (r;!intt',et
non la confiance et la s(~eunte, qUI ~c 9mr al'·
erues.
L'explosion duG aout 1945. qui a rrttnti d,\u!'\
le monde en tier, a mal'qlJ(~ le debut cl'une JlOUvelle gucn-c. une gucrrc des ncrfs, qui est d'at!_
tant plus tragiquc qu'dlc doit son ()ri~ine, nnn
it des armes cn~ees pill' l'enm'mi, mail' unc~ arme
que nom; avons I1OlIS-mCmes fabriqutc, uue arrne
alliee. Cctte guerrc se deroll)(~ dans le fil'Ur et
dans !'csprit des rnns..<;e.<; populaires riu Ulcmdr:
allie.
Je ne park pa.., lllliql1cment des arnH'$ atnmiques, bien qu'dlcs mic-Ilt (,II"s dom nil parlC'
le plus ouvertemenL N'y attadlOllS pits lllle importance cxagcr6c. Now, :UltH'$, Pn!nn:tis,
connaL'>Sons une arrne tout n u~~i dc;~mlct rife ct
horribl~ que l'armc atomiquc, Nou!! ronnai~lt.Qn~
les usincs de mort d'n'twiccim, de Trcmblinka,
de Majdanek et dc Biidwnwald. C~tt(' anlle a
tue six millions de pcrsonnrs ell Pll!qi!nl'\ !'toit
plus de cellt fois le Ilornbre tk p[·n;onlll'.'; tllf(','i ;l
Hiroshima. La bombe atOlniqllr. 11(' doit 1';1." bin"
oublier le problcm(~ gh1Cl'al (k~ arIlw- d(' d('~.
t~ucti(lll .f:Hl.S$ivc, de,'t amH\<; dirigtt., nHHI'f" !i(""
VIBes pauHbk$, des fenHn('~'i et dl.\<;; ('Il£anl,;, dr.~
vieillards et (k~" if11irrm~$.
Si nOli!; \'otJ!OllS alteindrc 1(' pn'mit'r~t;i,ir d('
uconfiance indi8pcnsflblc", ~i n(Ht!i \'!'Hllnn.. tuttr(
pour nous libcrrr de la craint,,, !IOU!' d['\nll~ tnut
d'abord prnnollcer, lInc foi!l pOllr VHl!f,~·. Iln('
condamwltinn JlC'ltc et 1';,ms ('.qlliw)(1l1r lir tflU"
les types d'arnlcs de dc~tnH'lion ma"'i;."i\ t. ',' r"'nl.
pris la hmnbe atomiquc.
.
La deJegation polonai~(' maimkm dnm: 1,\
position qu'dlt~ a rri~,c, ch·plli.!> cks mnk All i.I'HU''!I
de la dis(lJ&"i~m qlli $1 r£t dhonlfr :1 ,'(' ""jrt prn.
dant la prenllcrc partir de b prl'lnih'~ :'<'".. iml tll'
l'As.<;cmblee ~t'fl(~l':11(' j\ I...ol1dn"$!, :\t Zvitfmmt
Modzelcws.ki; mtuellrm('nt Mini~tr~ dc:; .;\ff;lirt':'I
6trang'trt'$; a £oumiffl \lll~. propll"'itio!l illvlt;uH I(';~
ParIcmrnts dr'$ diflhtllt'l P;\\':'\ Trprb:.rntf!l j
adopter Illlt' Ini nmtrn.lnt lc~.. primipi~I;~lli.
vants:

a

1. I.I's T.:,qJ!tats

01Hf'IlW'

d.\ll!'

Ir dmn.llnr

310
field should be used only for the benefit of
humanity and not for its destruction;
2. That the Member States should give full
support to the United Nations in its efforts to
control and supervise the use of atomic energy;
3. That Member States of the United
Nations should undertake to eliminate atomic
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
from their national armaments; and that the
above principles should become part of the constitutions of Member States.
At that time, in London, we decided not to
submit this proposal as a formal resolution, in
view of the adoption on 24 January of a resolution concerning the control of atomic energy.
The events of the last year prove that we were
right in assuming that without the outlawing of
the use of atomic weapons, in whatever form
they may appear, there can be no progress in
the solution of the atomic energy problem.

We have often heard the argument that the
outlawing of atomic weapons must be preceded
by the formation of a system of control and inspection. May I draw the attention of this
Council to the fact that nowhere in the world has
the prosecution of crime and punishment ever
preceded the formation of principles of human
.conduct. The commandment "thou shalt not kill"
existed long before the first court came into being
and the first policeman was appointed. Thus,
before we can form a system of control and inspection, we must outlaw the production and
possession of atomic weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction.
We have often heard the reasoning that the
problem is that of giving away the secret of this
dangerous weapon. But actually it is not. The
peace-loving nations are not interested in the
manufacture of the atomic bomb. Their only
desire is-and we say it openly before the whole
world-the destruction of the stockpiles of
bombs now in existence and the prevention of
their use by anybody, anywhere. Once this is
accomplished the way will be open for the peacetime application of this enormous source of
energy for the benefit of hu~anity. A monopolistic approach to atomic energy in one country
diverts research from peaceful purposes to a
race for inventive research for military purposes
in all other countries.
,
At a time when more than half the world is
going through a very difficult post-war economic
crisis, when lack of energy and fuel paralyses the
life and work of hundreds of millions of people,
efforts to use atomic energy for peaceful purposes
are being neglected for political reasons.
Last week we made considerable progress on
the question of disarmament. We do not consider
the resolution adopted to be as perfect as we
would desire, and we expressed this feeling when
voting on its various parts. Nevertheless, we
voted for the resolution as a whole because on

scientifique devront etre utilises exclusivement
pour le bien de l'humanite, et non pour sa destruction;
2. Les Etats Membres devront accorder un
appui sans reserve aux efforts accomplis par les
Nations Unies afin de controler et de surveiller
l'utilisation de l'energie atomique;
3. Les Etats Membres des Nations Unies de~
vront s'engager a eliminer de leurs arrnements
nationaux les armes atomiques et autres armes de
destruction massive, et incorporer les principes
ci-dessus dans leurs constitutions respectives.
A cette epoque, a Londres, nous avons decide
de ne pas presenter cette proposition comme une
resolution formelle, etant donne qu'une resolution relative au controle de l'energie atomique
avait deja ete adoptee le 24 janvier. Les evenements qui se sont derouIes au cours de l'annee
passee prouvent que nous avions raison de sup~
poser qu'a moins que l'emploi des armes atomiques, sous foutes leurs formes, ne soit interdit~
la solution du probleme de l'energie atomique ne
saurait faire aucun progres.
Nous avans souvent entendu dire qu)avant de
mettre hors la loi les armes atamiques, il faut
etablir un systeme de contrOle et d'inspection.
Puis-je attirer l'attention du Conseil sur le fait
que, mule part dans le monde, la repression <iu
crime et le cMtiment n'ont precede l'elaboration
des principes de la conduite humaine. Le COUl.mandement "tu ne tueras point" existait bien
avant la creation du premier tribunal et la nomination du premier agent de police. Aussi, avant
de pouvoir etablir un systeme de cantrole et d'inspection, il nous faut proscrire la fabrication et la
detention des armes atomiques et de toutes les
autres armes de destruction massive.
On a souvent dit que le probleme est celui de
la divulgation du secret de cette arme dangereuse. Mais tel n'est pas le cas, Les nations pacifiques ne s'interessent pas a la fabrication de la
bombe atomique. Leur seul desir--et nous le
disons ouvertement devant le monde entier-est
de voir detruire les stocks de bombes actuellement existants et d'empecher que ces stocks ne
so~ent utilises ou que ce soit et par qui que cc
SOlt. Des que l'on aura accompli cela, la voie sera
libre pour l'utilisation padfique de cette cnorme
source d'energie pour le bien de l'humanite. Tout
pays qui desirerait se constituer un monopole de
l'energie atomique inciterait les autres a detourne,r les recherches de leur but pacifique pour les
onenter vers une course aux inventions et aux
recherches d'ordre militaire.
Au moment meme ou plus de la moitie du
globe traverse une crise economique aigue a la
suite de la ?,uerre, et ou le tnanque d'energie et
de combustibles paralyse la vie et le travail de
centai~les de ~i~lions d'hommes, on neglige pour
~es ra~ons pol~tlques les efforts visant a employer
I energIe atomlque a des fins pacifiques.
,La se~ai,ne derniere, nous aVOilS fait des progres conSlderables dans la question du desarmen;ent. Nous :stimo~s que la resolution adoptee
n est pas aUSSl parfaIte que nous l'aurions desire
et nous 1,avons d'emontre, au cours du vote sur les~
differentes parties de celle-ci. Mais nous avons

311
such an important issue-important for our
country and for the entire world-we prefer an
imperfect resolution to no resolution at all. In
this resolution the disarmament problem has
been very carefully separated from the problem
of atomic energy. We are quite aware that we
cannot divide these questions from each other.
Should we not move forward, should we not give
up weapons of mass destruction, should we not
disarm with regard to atomic weapons as well,
the work of the Disarmament Commission will
be fruitless and futile.

(2) The destruction of all existing stockpiles
of atomic weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction;
(3) The formation of an international system
of control and inspection;
(4) The formation of an international body
which should promote the exploitation of atomic
energy for peaceful purposes in all countries.
This is the order which should be attained. If
preferred, we might attempt to carry all the four
stages through simultaneously in one day.
Only distrust stands in the way of such an
order. On the other hand, any other order will
create even more distrust. And so we come to a
vicious circle. I am under the impression that
distrust sits at this table as the thirteenth repre-

vote pour l'ensemble de la resolution parce que,
dans une question aussi importante-importante
pour notre pays et pour le monde entier-nous
aimons mieux avoir une resolution imparlaite
que de n'avoir aucune resolution. Dans cette
resolution, le probleme du desarmement a ete
soigneusement separe du probleme de l'energie
atomique. Or, nous nous rendons parfaitement
compte que l'on ne peut separer ces deux questions. Mais, si nous ne faisons pas de progres, si
nous n'eliminons pas les armes de destruction
massive et si, en meme temps, nous ne supprimons pas les armes atomiques, les travaux de la
Commission du desarmement seront infructueux
et vains.
Dans sa lettre 'en date du 31 decembre, cite~
dans le document S/239\ la delegation polonaise
a souligne qu'a son avis, l'unanimite de tous les
membres permanents du Conseil de securite est
d'une importance capitale si l'on veut aboutir a
une solution fructueuse du probleme de l'energie
atomique.
Le probleme de l'unanimite n'est pas seulement un probleme juridique; on ne saurait l'envisager uniquement du point de vue de la conformite avec la Charte. La delegation polonaise
envisage le probleme de l'unanimite du point de
vue des possibilites d'elaborer, d'une part, un
systeme efficace de controle et d'inspection et,
d'autre part, une convention efficace destinee a
interdire et a mettre hors d'usage les armes atomiques et les autres armes de destruction massive. Nous ignorons quel sera le principe directeur
de l'organe futur charge du controle et de l'inspection, mais, ici, au Conseil de securitc, le principe de l'unanimite existe. Autour de cette table,
il faut que nous aboutissions a un accord una..nime. Il faut que nous trouvions une solution
raisonnable dans l'interet des peuples du monde.
A la suite des discussions qui se deroulent
depuis un an, nous voyons clairement que, pour
aboutir cl l'unanimite, il est necessaire de proceder suivant un certain ordre logique dans le
cadre du Conseil de securite, cl savoir:
1) U ne convention prevoyant l'interdiction de
la fabrication des armes atomiques et autres
armes de destruction massive et l'abandon de
l'utilisation de l'energie atomique cl des fins militaires.
2) La destruction de tous les stocks existants
de bombes atomiques et autres armes de destruction massive.
3) L'etablissement d'un systeme international
de controle et d'inspection.
4) La creation d'un organisme international
charge d'encourager l'utilisation de l'energie atomique a des fins pacifiques dans tous les pays.
Tel est l'ordre que 1'0n devrait suivre. Si on
le voulait, on pourrait franchir ces quatre etapes
en un seul jour.
Seule, la mefiance nous empeche d'adopter cet
ordre. D'autre part, tout ordre different engendrera une mefiance encore plus grande. Nous
tournons ainsi dans un cercle vicieux. J'ai l'impression que la mefiance siege cl cette table en

1 Letter from
the Chairman of the Atomic Energy
Commission to the President of the Security Council.

1 Lettre adressee par le President de la Commission de
l'energie atomique au President du Conseil de securite.

The Polish delegation, in its letter of 31 December, quoted in document S/239/ has emphasized that it considers the unanimity of all the
permanent members of the Security Council to
be of paramount importance for a fruitful solution of the problem of atomic energy.
The problem of unanimity is not merely a
legal one, and cannot be discussed only from the
point of view of conformity with the Charter.
The Polish delegation approaches the problem
of unanimity from the angle of the possibility of
an effective system of control and inspection
and, furthermore, of an effective convention for
the prohibition and demolition of atomic and
other weapons of mass destruction. We do not
know what will be the ruling principle of the
future authority of control and inspection, but
here, in the Security Council, the principle of
unanimity does exist. Here, at this table, we must
reach unanimous agreement. We must find a
reasonable solution in the interest of the peoples
of the world.
As a result of the discussion, which has lasted
a year, it is clear to us that in order to reach this
unanimity a certain logical sequence of procedure within the framework of the Security Council is necessary :
(1) A convention providing for the prohibition of production of atomic and other weapons
of mass destruction and the relinquishment of
the use of atomic energy for military purposes;

312
sentative and casts its veto on all our endeavours.
We must free ourselves from this unwanted
representative. We must find a formula which
will be both unanimous and effective. The Polish
delegation, in spite of some reservations mentioned in the letter of 31 December, has accepted
the report of the Atomic Energy Commission as
a working paper. We consider this report an important step forward in our work, but we cannot
accept the attitude of "take it or leave it". In
our opinion, it forms a sound basis for discussion.
We welcome the fact that all the 'representatives
here agree that this report should be discussed
point by point and paragraph by paragraph, and
we are confident that we shall find a unanimous
solution to the entire probleI?-'

The Polish delegation, for its part, offers its
co-operation in the forthcoming discussion and
will use all the resources in its power to help in
achieving a unanimous agreement.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I think it would be advisable for the Council to
decide the order in which the report of the
Atomic Energy Commission is to be considered.
The representative of the Soviet Union has
just proposed that the Security Council should
be called upon to express an opinion on Parts
11 and IIl, headed respectively "Findings" and
"Recommendations". On the other hand, the
Council would treat :the other parts of the report merely as information, and would not be
called upon to reach a conclusion regarding
them.
If this point of view is adopted, we should
proceed to the consideration of the second and
third parts paragraph by paragraph, as soon as
the general discussion is finished. At the same
time, we would consider the amendments submitted by the representative of the Soviet Union,
as well as any others that may be submitted by
members of the Council.
Does the Council agree to this procedure?

qualite de treizieme representant et oppose son
veto it tous nos efforts. Nous devons nous debarrasser de ce representant indesirable. 11 faut
trouver une formule qui soit, a la fois, efficace
et susceptible de realiser l'unanimite. En depit
des quelques reserves signalees dans sa lettre du
31 decembre, la delegation polonaise a adopte le
rapport de la Commission de l'energie atomique
it titre de document de travail. N ous estimons
que ce rapport constitue une etape importante
vers l'avancement de nos travaux, mais nous ne
pouvons accepter l'attitude du "c'est a prendre
ou a laisser". A notre avis, ce rapport fournit a
nos discussions une base solide. Nous sommes
heureux de voir tous les representants au Conseil
convenir qu'il faut le discuter point par point,
paragraphe par paragraphe, et nous esperons
bien que nous aboutirons it une solution de l'ensemble du probleme, qui ralliera l'unanimite.
De son cote, la delegation polonaise apportera
sa collaboration dans la discussion a. venir et emploiera ,toutes les ressources en son pouvoir pour
aider it la realisation d'Ull accord unanime.
Le PRESIDENT: Il convient, je crois, que le
Conseil determine l'ordre scIon lequel il procedera al'examen du rapport de la Commission de
l'energie atomique.
Le representant de l'Union sovietique a propose tout a l'heure que le Conseil de securite
soit appele a se prononcer sur les parties II et In
intitulees respectivement "Conclusions" et I'Re_
commandations". En revanche, le Conseil considererait comme simples elements d'information
les autres parties du rapport et il ne serait pas
appele ase prononcer a leur sujet. ,
Si cette maniere de voir etait adoptee, nous
devrions, sitot que la discussion generale sera
terminee, proceder a l'examen des deuxieme et
troisieme p.arties, paragraphe par paragraphe. A
cette occasIOn, nous prendrions en consideration
les amendements presentes par le representant de
l'Union sovietique ainsi que tous autres que
pourraient soumettre les membres ciu Conseil.
Le Conseil est-il d'accord sur cette procedure?

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I was
not referring to the findings as a whole. I said
that we should ,limit our task to the consideration of the "General findings", that is to say,
Part n, C, of the report. The "General findings"
do not include the whole text of Part, H, but
only a part of that text. I also had in mind Part
Ill, "Recommendations". I did not refer to the
whole of Part H, but only to a section of this
part, namely, to "General findings".

. M. G~?~YKO (Union des Republiques sociahstes sovletiques) .(traduit du russe): Je n'ai pas
p~le des conclUSIOns dans leur ensemble. J'ai
dlt que nous devrions nous limiter a. l'examen
des "Conclusions generales" contenues dans la
section C de la partie II du rapport. Les
"Conclusions generales" ne comprennent pas
tout le texte de la partie II mais seulement une
par~e de ce ;exte. J:avais egalement a l'esprit la
partle Ill, c est-a.-dIre les I'Recommandations".
Ai?si, il ne s' ~git pas ?e toute la partie H, mais
umquement dune sectIOn de cette partie a savoir
'
, r.
'
Ies "C oncIUSIOns
generales"
.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
A slight misunderstanding has arisen. The proposal of the representative of the Soviet Union
regarding the second part, referred to the "Gen~
eral findings", Section C, page 15.1 The discussion o.f the points on which the Security Council'

Le PRESr,nENT: U ne legere confusion s'est, en
e,ffet,. produ!~e: La proposition du representant de
1.Utyon so~~etlq ue c~ncernant la deuxieme partie
VIsalt les ConclUSIOns generales" section C
page 15 1 . C' est a, cette section de "la deuxieme
partie que serait limitee la discussion des points

1 See Official Records of the Atomic Energy Commission, Special Supplement. page 15.

,,' Voi,r Proc~s-verbaux officiels de la Commission dl1
1energJe atomzque, Supplement special, page 15.

313'
should take a decision would be limited to this
section of the second part.
. The pl:oposal of the Soviet Union's representatlve also mcludes, of course, the discussion of the
third part, headed "Recommendations".

sur lesquels le Conseil de securite serait appele a
Se prononcer.
B!en .entend.~, .la proposition du representant
de 1.Umon sovlet.lCj.~e comporte egalement la disCUSSIon de la trOlsleme partie intitulee "Recommandations".
.
'

¥. A~STIN .(Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduzt de l anglazs): A mon avis la declaration
que vient de faire le represent~nt de l'Union
sovietique contient certains points qui doivent
etre clarifies avant que nous n'arrivions a un
malentendu. '
\'"c are dealing here with a report of a maNous examinons ici un rapport emanant de la
jority of the Atomic Energy Commission. The
majorite des membres de la Commission de
activity of that Commission is finished, so far as
l'energie atomique. Le travail de cette Commission est acheve en ce qui concerne ce premier '
this first report is concerned. Everybody recognizes that it is not the completion of the work
rapport. Nous admettons tous que ce rapport
n'est pas l'aboutissement des travaux de la Comof the Atomic Energy.. Commission, but rather
mission de l'energie atornique, mais constitue en
that it constitutes an interim report. It is clearly
realite un rapport provisoire. Cela est nettement
identified by the statement in the report that it
etabli par le passage qui precise que ce rapport
is "based upon its deliberations to date". Thereest "base sur les deliberations de la Commission
fore, we cannot view the report before us as if
jusqu'a ce jour". En consequence, nous ne pouit were open to amendment. It is open to attack
vans pas considerer le rapport qui est devant nous
by minority views, minority suggestions, and so
comme susceptible d'etre amende. Ce texte peut
on, but, as I understand it, the report is not
faire l'objet de critiques et de suggestions de la
subject to amendment at this time.
part de la minorite, mais, a mon avis, le rapport
ne peut pas faire l'objet d'amendements, en ce
moment.
Apres avoir, au cours de ses seances, fourni a
The Atomic Energy Commission, having afses
membres l'occasion de presenter tous amendeforded an opportunity during its hearings for
ments et modifications utiles, la Commission de
amendment and consideration of changes, has
l'energie atomique a finalement elabore un rapfinally made this interim report, which we have
under consideration as a basis, and which con- , port provisoire contenant des principes fond amentaux, rapport que nous prenons comme base
tains fundamental principles. The new and sigde discussion. Or, ce rapport contient deux ordres
nificant material in this report is twofold: the
d'eIements nouveaux et importants: les uns sont
"General findings" and the "Recommendations"
les "Conclusions generales" et les "Recommandaform onc part; the other is the "Findings on the
tions"; les autres se retrouvent dans les "Conclusafeguards" which are summarized in Section
sions relatives aux mesures de precaution", resuB of the "Findings", and which reflect the two
mees dansla section B des "Conclusions" et qui
and a half months of exploration of the problem
tiennent compte des resultats de deux mois et
of safeguards in the informal conversation meetdemi d'etudes que le Comite 2 a consacres aux
ings of Committee 2.
mesures de precaution, au cours d'entretiens
officieux.
Une lecture attentive des "Recommandations~'
A careful reading of the "Recommendatj.ons",
montrera qu'on ne peut les comprendre parfaitewill show that they cannot be fully understood
ment sans se referer a la fois aux "Conclusions
without reference to the "General findings" in
generales"
de la deuxieme partie, section C,
Part II C, page 15/ as the President has said,
page
15t,
comme
l'a dit le President, et aux
and also to "Findings on the safeguards" in
"Conclusions
sur
les
mesures de precaution",
Part II B. This is particularly true with respect
figurant dans la deuxieme partie, section B. Ceci
to the functions of the control agency, which are
est particulierement vrai des fonctions de l'orga.sketched in the "Recommendations" only in the
nisme de controle, qui ne sont esquissees dans
most general tenns.
les "Recommandations" qu'en termes tres generaux.
En consequence, je ne vois pas tres bien ou
Therefore, it is not clear to me just where we
nous
en sommes, efant donne la fagon' dont la
stand. Are we discussing whether this report shall
question
nous est presentee., Sommes-nous en
be accepted or not? Are we discussing whether,
train
de
discuter
le point de savoir si ce rapport
during the discussion, and at the end of it, we
sera
adopte
ou
non?
Discutons-nous pour savoir
should make certain references back to the
si,
au
cours
et
a
la
fin
de nos deliberations, nous
Atomic Energy Commission, if, for example, we
renverrons
certaines
questions
a la Commission
were to find here that while the Security Counde l'energie atomique, dans le cas, par exemple,
cil did agree on certain parts of th~ "~eco~­
ou nous constaterions que le Conseil de securitc
mendations" and certain general pnnclples, It
est
d'accord sur certaines parties des "Recomcould not agree on certain other parts, parts
.Mr. AUSTlr-: (~nited States of America): I
tlunk some pomts 111 the statemen~ made by the
representative of the Soviet Union ought to be
cleared up before we get into a misunderstanding
about them.

1 See 0 ffieia! Records of the S ecurit')' Council, Second
sion, Special Supplement, page 15.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels de la Commission
de
l'Jnergie atomiqull, Supplement special, page 15.

314
which would need amendment in the view of
the Soviet Union as suggested by this document,
entitled "Amendments and additions of the delegation of the USSR to the First Report of the
Atomic Energy Commission to the Security
Council"/ which I have not yet read except for
scanning the first page.

Then, having carefully considered all the
minority reports and suggestions contained in
this document, and any other document that
they may wish to present to us, we may refer
the matter to the Atomic Energy Commission
for it to decide whether or not to amend its
report on the points upon which there is disagreement.
It seems to me that we ought to understand
where we are heading for in this matter of procedure, and not to have any confusion about it,
in order to avoid anyone being foreclosed in the
discussion of the "Recommendations", from
using these important parts of the report, which
are only sketched in general terms in the "Recommendations", but in greater detail in Parts
11, B, and n, C.
From my point of view, it seems that we
should be perfectly Clear about what we are
doing, and that really we are considering the
majority report and the minority report from the
Atomic Energy Commission, and trying to find
out to what extent we agree. We can refer the
part on which we agree to the Atomic Energy
Commission in order that it may commence work
at once upon the drafting of proposals for that
section of any treaty or treaties that this agreement justifies. Then we can discuss the views
that are suggested in this document received this
morning, and refer those parts upon which we
do not agree to the Atomic Energy Commission
to see if it can find it possible to amend its
report in those respects.
(After the interpretation into French of the
above remarks) Mr. Austin continued as follows. )
As.I listened to the translation, it seemed to
me that I might have left a wrong impression. I
want to clarify it. The purpose I have in view is
to refer the points of disagreement to the Atomic
Energy Commission for discussion, to see whether
we can accommodate each other's views; it is
not to decide arbitrarily for or against these
amendments. I would not assume such an arbitrary position in the matter. I have in mind the
possibility of composing in the Atomic Energy
Commission differences that we are unable to
reconcile here.

i See Official Records of the Security Council> Second
Year, Supplement No. 7, Annex 16.

mandations", sur certains principes generaux,
mais qu'il ne peut donner son accord en ce qui
concerne certaines autres parties qui, de l'avis de
l'Union sovietique, necessiteraient un amendement conformement aux propositions du document "Amendements et addenda proposes par
la delegation de l'URSS au Premier Rapport de
la Commission de l'energie atomique au Conseil
de securitCl", document que, d'ailleurs, je n'ai
pas encbre lu, n'ayant fait que jeter un coup
d'reil sur la premiere page?
Quand nous aurons acheve nos deliberations
et examine attentivement toutes les opinions, les
rapports et les suggestions de la minorite, qui
figurent dans ce document, quand nous aurons
egalement examine tous les autres documents que
la minorite pourrait nous soumettre, nous pourrons renvoyer la question a la Commission de
l'energie atornique, qui devra alors decider si eUe
modifiera ou non, dans son rapport, les points
1itigieux qui lui ont ete renvoyes.
Il me semble que nous devrions comprendre
ou nous en sommes dans cette question de procedure et eviter toute confusion en la matiere,
afin que, par la suite, un membre ne sevoie pas
dans l'impossibilite de faire usage, dans la dis- ,
cussion des "Recommandations", des importantes
parties du rapport qui sent ebauc1lecs d'une
maniere tres generale dans les "Recommandations", mais plus en details dans les parties Il, B, et Il, C.
J'estime que nous devons envisager clairement
la situation et nous rendre compte que nous
examinons en realite le rapport de la majorite :
et le rapport de la minorite des membres de la
Commission de l'energie atomique, tout en essayant de voir dans quelle mesure nous sommes
d'accord. Nous pourrons alors renvoyer la partie
du rapport sur laquelle nous sommes d'accord a
la Commission de l'energie atomique, qui commenceni immediatement l'elaboration du projet
de la partie du au des traites que cet accord
justifie. Par la suite, nous pourrons discuter les
suggestions qui se trouvent dans le document
que nous avons re~u ce matin, et renvoyer les
parties sur lesquelles nOllS ne sommes pas d'accord ~ la Co.mmission de l'energie atomique, qui
exammera SI elle peut accepter d'amender son
rapport sur ces points.
(Apres rinterpretation des observations precedentes en franfais) M. Austin poursuit comme
suit. )
En ecoutant la traduction, il m'a semble avoir
laisse une fausse impression. Je voudrais mettre
les choses au point. Je preconise de renvoyer a la
Commission de l'energie atomique la discussion
des points sur lesquels nous ne sommes pas d'accord, afin ~e co~cilier, si possible, nos points de
vue respectIfs; Je ne demande pas que l'on se
prononce arbitrairement pour ou contre ces
am~I?-dement~. Je .ne .voudrais pas prendre une
pOSItiOn aussl arbltrmre en la matiere. Ce que
j'ai a l'esprit, c'est la possibilite de concilier au
s~in de la Commission de l'energie atomiqu;' les
dIvergences sur lesqueIles nous ne pouvons nous
mettre d'accord id.
i

V?ir Proces-verbaulC officiels du Conseil de sdcurite,

DeUlueme Annee, Supplement No 7, Annexe 16.

315
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
It appears that there are two questions to
be decided. The first is that of the order to be
followed in considering the report of the Atomic
Energy Commission; the second is that of the
form in which the conclusions reached by
the Security Council should be presented as a
result of this consideration.

Le PRESIDENT: Il semble qu'il y ait deux
questions a trancheI'. La premiere vise l'ordre a
suivre dans l'examen du rapport de la Commis~
sion de l'energie atomique, la seconde la forme
a- donner aux conclusions auxquelles le Conseil
de securite parviendrait a l'issue de cet examen.

As regards the order to be followed in considering the report, I feel sure that since the
whole of the Atomic Energy Commission's report is before the Security Council, members of
the Council are quite at liberty to express their
opinion on each part of the report. From a
practical point of view, it appears advisable to
consider whether we devote our attention exclusively, or at least prim~rily, to those parts of the
report in which the difficulties are, as it were,
concentrated. I think these are the parts referred to by the representative of the Soviet
Union, so they will also be those affected by
his amendments.

En ce qui concerne l'ordre a suivre pour
l'etude du rapport, il m'apparait avec certitude
que, le Conseil de securite etant saisi de l'ensemble du rapport de la Commission de l'energie
atomique, les membres du Conseil ont pleine
liberte d'exprimel' leur opinion sur chacune des
parties de ce rapport. D'un point de vue pratique, il convient, semble-t-il, de se demander si
nous devons porter exclusivement ou, tout au
moins en premier lieu, notre attention sur les
parties du rapport ou se trouvent concentrees, en
quelque sorte, les difficultes. Je crois que ce sont
les parties qu'a visees le representant de l'Union
sovietique; ce sont celles, aussi, qu'irtteressent les
amendements qu'il a presentes.

As regards the form of our concl usions-a
point to which the representative of the United
States has particularly drawn the Council's attention-should these conclusions be presented
in the form of amendments to the report, which
appears to be the view of the representative of the
Soviet Union, or should they be in the form
of observations for the future guidance of the
Atomic Energy Commission?

Sur la forme a donner aux conclusions de
notre examen-point sur lequel le representant
des Etats-Unis vient d'attirer particulierement
l'attention du Conseil-convient-il de donner a
ces conclusions la forme d'amendements au rapport, ainsi que semble l'envisager le representant
de l'Union sovietique, ou convient-il de leur
donner la forme d'observations en vue de l'orientation future de la Commission de l'energie atomique?

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I think
that as a result of the debate on the report of
the Atomic Energy Commission, the Security
Council may well be able to achieve something
definite. If it is in a position to take a decision
on any of the "Recommendations" and "Findings" of the Atomic Energy Commission, then
these "Recommendations" and "Findings", once
agreed upon, will cease to be the "Recommendations" and "Findings" of the Atomic
Energy Commission and will become decisions
of the Security Council.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (t1'aduit du russe): 11 me
semble qu'a la suite de la discussion portant sur
le rapport de la Commission de l'energie atomique, le Conseil de securite pourrait bien aboutir a certains resultats precis. S'il parvient a se
prononcer au sujet de quelques-unes des "Recommandations" et "Conclusions" de la Commission de l'energie atomique, les "Recommandations" et "Conclusions" qui aurontfait l'objet
d'un accord cesseront alors d'etre des "Recommandations" et "Conclusions" de la Commission
de l'energie atomique pour devenir des decisions
du Conseil de securite.

I imagine that the final results of the debate
on this q ucstion may be as follows: if the
Security Council reaches unanimous decisions,
these decisions will cease to be "Recommendations" of the Atomic Energy Commission and
will become, on their adoption, decisions of the
Security Council.

Je crois que nous aboutirions en fin de compte
au resultat que voici: si le C011seil de securitc
parvient a des decisions unanimes, celles-ci ces·
seront d'etre des "Recommanelations" de la Commission de l'energie atoll1ique pour devenir, une
fois adaptecs, des decisions dll Conseil de sCcurite.

. I think that this formal aspect of the matter
clear. I have 110 objection to the Security
Council discussing this question as a whole.
Members of the Security Council are entitled to
,refer to all or to any particular parts of this
report. I think, however; that it would be
log~cal to t~ke decisions only on those parts
whlch constltnte the substance of the report,
. the substance of the question on which the
Atomic Energy Commission prepared this report.
The '''Recommendations;' and the "General

11 me semble que cctte question de forme ne
prete pas it malentendu. Je ne m'oppose pas ace que le Couseil de sccurite discute cette question dans son ensemble. Les membres elu Conseil
peuvent, dans !curs interventions, toucher a l'ensemble des questions e1u rapport, ou a chacune
de ccs questions en particulier. Mais il me
semble logique de ne prendre de decisions q u' au
sujet des parties qui constituent le fond du rapport, c'est-a-dire le fond elu problcme qui fait
}'objet du mpport de la Commission de l'energie

IS

316
findings" of the Atomic Energy Commission
constitute such parts.

For this very reason I think that, in so far
as decisions are concerned, the Security Council
should limit itself to taking decisions only on
the "General findings" and the "Recommendations". I repeat that this does not preclude
members from dealing with all questions and
all sections of this report in the discussion.
I think that this would be the best procedure
and, furthermore, it seems to me to be the only
correct one.
.

atomique. Les parties du rapport auxquelles je
fais allusion sont les "Recommandations" et
"Conclusions generales" de la Commission de
l'energie atomique.
.
S'il y a des decisions a prendre, le Conseil de
securite' devrait done, me semble-t-il, se limiter
aux decisions sur les "Conclusions generales" et
les "Recommandations". Je le repete, cette fac;on
de proceder n'exclut pas une discussion portant
sur toutes les questions, sur toutes les sections de
ce rapport.
J'estime que cette methode serait la plus appropriee et la seule appropriee.

.rules of procedure, I ask you, Mr. President, for
permission to speak in Portuguese; if necessary,
I will have my remarks translated by an interpreter from my delegation.
(Tmnslated
Portuguese): This is the
first time that the Security Council has to take
note of a report by one of its commissions.
There is nothing in our rules of procedure prescribing the order in which the Council should
consider and judge resolutions adopted by such
commissions. It seems to me that, in view of
.the volume of information, the range of subjects covered and the vast quantity of details
.usually embodied in such reports, not only
of the Atomic Energy Commission but also of
other commissions set up by this Council, we
ought to dra':V up forthwith standards and
rules, which are unfortunately still lacking in
our rules of procedure, governing the consideration of the findings of these commissions.

M. ARANHA (Bresil): En vertu de l'article 44
du reglement interieur, je vous demande, Mon·
sieur le President, la permission de parler en
portugais; au besoin, je ferai faire la traduction
de mes observations par un interprete de ma
delegation.
(Traduit du portugais): C'est la premiere
fois que le Conseil de securite prend connaissance
du rapport de l'une de ses commissions. 11
n'existe aucune disposition dans notre rcglement
interieur qui fixe l'ordre dans lequel nons devom i
prendre connaissance des resolutions adoptees
par ces commissions, ou celui dans lequel nous
devons les examiner. n me semble qu' etant
donne le volume des renseignements, l'etendue
des considerations et le grand nombre de details
que ces rapports renferment en general, q u'll
s'agisse d'un rapport de .la Commission de
l'energie atomique ou du rapport d'une des
autres commissions creees par ce Conseil, nous
devons fixer des maintenant, pour l'examen des
conclusions de ces commissions, les -normes et Ies
regles qui n'existent malheureusement pas dam
notre reglement interieur.

I think that, in view of' the conclusions of
the Atomic Energy Commission, the correct
and most helpful procedure for carrying on our
work would be for the President of the Council
to draw up, with the assistance of the Secretariat, a programme of work to be considered
by this Council, as a conclusion and summary
of a commission's report and, in this particular
case, of the Atomic Energy Commission's report. If the programme of work drawn up by
the Secretariat and submitted by the President
does not meet with the consent and appproval
of all the members of the Council, it could be
modified like any other programme of work
submitted for our consideration and discussion.
But it would be adding to the difficulties of our
task and making our debates more confused, to
consider a report of these dimensions, either in
its entirety or even in detail, as we seem to be
about to do now, as it would be impossible,
without prior study, to determine and select the
material which should be particularly considered
in detail by the Council.
It is therefore the Brazilian delegation's
opinion that the President of the Security Council, with the assistance of the Secretariat, should
draw up a programme of work and submit it
for consideration at the next meeting of the
Council; this procedure would avoid the doubts

En presence des conclusions de la Commission
de l'energie atomique, le plus sur, me semble-toil,
et le plus utile ala marche de nos travaux, serait
que le President du Conseil de securite dressat,
avec I'aide du Secretariat, un plan de travail qui
serait comme une conclusion ou un resume des
rapports presentes au Conseil de securite,-dans
le cas present, du rapport de la Commission de
l'energie atomique-et soumit ce plan'de travail
a I'approbation du Conseil. Si ce projet etabli
par notre Secretariat et presente par notre Presi·
dent n'obtient pas I'assentiment et l'approbation
de tous les membres de ce Conseil, il nous sera
loisible de l'amender comme tout autre projet
presente a notre examen. Mais ce qui ne serait
pas possible, ce qui rendrait notre tache difficile,
ce qui augmenterait la confusion de nos debats,
ce serait l'etude d'ensemble, ou meme de detail,
a laquelle nous semblons etre sur le point de
nous livrer d'un rapport aussi. volumineux dans
lequel on ne peut pas, sans un examen prealable,
:fixer et distinguer les points auxquels le Conseil
doit reserver une attention particuIiere.
Le sentiment de la delegation bresilienne est
done que le President du Conseil de securite
devrait dresser, de concert avec le Secretariat, un
plan de travail et le soumettre, au cours de la
prochaine seance,
I'examen ciu Consei!. On
eviterait ainsi les doutes que l'on vient d'exprimer

Mr. ARANHA (Brazil) (translated from
French): In accordance with article 44 of the

tmm

a

317
which have arisen and which would certainly
consume whole days of debate, whilst we should
not be getting any nearer to a conclusion on the
subjects deserving our decision and consideration.

et qui nous prendraient des journees entieres de
d6bats sans nous permettre d'aboutir a une
conclusion sur les points qui meritent vraiment
de faire l'objet de notre attention et de nos
decisions.

Mr. HASLUCK (Australia): The resolution of
the General Assembly which established the
Atomic Energy Commission might possibly give
us some guidance in this matter. I think we can
assume' that the contents of that resolution are
'not only a direction to the Atomic Energy
Commission, but are to be observed by the
Security Council itself.

M. !IASLUCK (Australie) (traduit de ['anglais): La resolution de l'AssembIee generale
portant cre~tion de la Commission de l'energie
atomique pourrait sans doute nous fournir quel.
ques indications en cette matiere. A mon avis,
il nous est perrnis de supposer que cette resolution renferme des directives qui ne visent pas
seulement la Commission de l'energie atomique,
mais s'adressent egalement au Conseil de securite
lui-meme.
La resolution du mois de janvier 1946 prevoit
explicitement ce qui suit:
"La Commission adresse ses rapports et ses
recornmandations au Conseil de securite;
ceux-ci sont rendus publics, sauf decision
contraire prise par le Conseil de securite dans
l'interet de la paix et de la securite. Lorsqu'il
le juge approprie, le Conseil de securite transm~t ces rapports a l'Assemblee generale et aux
Membres des Nations Unies, ainsi qu'au
Conseil economique et social et autres organes,
dans le cadre de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

The resolution of January 1946 expressly provides that:
"The Commission shall submit its reports
and recommendations to the Security Council, and such reports and recommendations
shall be made public unless the Security
Council, in the interest of peace and security,
otherwise directs. In the appropriate cases the
Security Council should transmit these reports to the General Assembly and the Members of the United Nations, as well as to the
Economic and Social Council a~d other
organs within the framework of the United
Nations.
"In view of the Security Council's primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council shall
issue directions to the Commission in matters
affecting security. On these matters the Commission shall be accountable for its work to
the Security Council. m ,

I

The second conclusion that one might draw
from the resolution of the General Assembly is
that in one particular field, the Security Council not only has the right, but the obligation
to issue directions to the Atomic Energy Commission: that is the field which covers matters
affecting security. We are directed by the General Assembly to issue directions on any matters
within that field.

"En raison de la responsabilite principale
du maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales conferee au Conseil de securite par
la Charte des Nations Unies, le Conseil de
securite donne a la Commission des directives
sur les questions interessant la securite. Daus
cet ordre de questions, la Commission est res~
ponsable de ses travaux envers le Conseil de
securite."
Or, j'estime que ces directives au Conseil de
securite et a la Commission signifient que l'approbation officielle par le Conseil de securite d'un
rapport emanant de la Commission de l'energie
atomique n'est pas absolument necessaire pour
permettre ala Commission de poursuivre ses travaux. Que nous approuvions ou non un rapport
ou une partie d'un rapport, rien ne s'oppose a ce
que la Commission de l'energie atomique poursuive ses travaux. Toutefois, ce premier principe
etabli, j'estime que nous devons reconnaitre les
realites politiques, qui sont independantes de la
question de forme que nous etudions en ce moment; en effet, a moins que nous ne reussissions
a realiser une certaine mesure d'accord sur que!ques-unes des questions qui font l'objet de ce rapport, la Commission de l'energie atomique pourra
difficilement faire avancer ses travaux.
La deuxieme conclusion que l'on pourrait degager de la r~solution de l'As:'emblee.ge~eral~ est
la suivante: il y a un domame partlcuher ou le
Conseil de securite a non seulement le droit, mais
encore le devoir de fournir des directives a la
Commission de l'energie atornique. Il s'agit des
questions interessant l,a securite,. et l'As~em~lee
generale nous a charges de fourmr des drrectlVes
sur toutes les questions relevant de ce domaine.

'See Resolutions adopted by th/! General Assembly
during the first part of its first session, page 9.

'Voir Resolutions adoptees par I' AssembU/! generale
pendant la premi~re partie de sa premi~re session, page 9.

Now, I take it to be the sense of that direction
to the Security Council and to the Commission
that the formal approval, by the Security Council, of any report from the Atomic Energy
Commission is not essential to enable the Com-,
mission to proceed. Whether or not we formally
approve a report, or any part of it> there should
be no obstacle to the Atomic Energy Commission proceeding with its work. But, having stated
that as a first principle, I think we have also to
recognize the political reality> which is rather
distinct from the formal question which we are
now considering: unless we can reach some
measure of agreement regarding certain subjects in tlus report, it will be extremely difficult
for the Atomic Energy Commission to make
much more progress.

318
Now, having drawn those two conclusions
from the General Assembly resolution, I would
suggest that when we consider the form that
our action should take, this leads us to this
position: first of all, we have to decide whether
or not we want to transmit this report formally
either to the Members of the United Nations,
or to any of the organs of the United Nations.
In making that decision I should imagine that
it would be quite appropriate for the Council
to add any comments of its own to the report,
before transmitting it.
The second formal matter to which we come
is this: do we wish to give any direction to the
Atomic Energy Commission on security matters? Again I should imagine that if we did
wish to give such a direction, it would be given
, in general terms. And in neither case, whether
transmitting to other organs or to the Members
of the United Nations with comments, or giving
directions to the Atomic Energy Commission
itself, do I think that the sense of the Assembly
resolution is that we should amend the text. I
do not think that the General Assembly resolution ,either gives us the right, or proposes the
desirability of making amendments to the text
in the Security Council. Rather, it seems to
lead towards a broader and much more general
expression of the Security Council's opinion regarding the substance of this report, and it
would seem to be a matter for the Council's
own judgment whether it expresses that opinion
in general terms on one part of the report or
on the report as a whole.

It would seem that a possible way in which
we might make progress in the Security Council
would be for the representative of the Soviet
Union, and any other representative who cared
to do so, to raise his particular objections and
point out his particular difficulties regarding this
report. Then it will be open to the Council,
by adopting a resolution couched in general
terms, to refer either parts or the whole of the
report back to the Atomic Energy Commission,
or to some other organ of the United Nations,
with the comments which it deems appropriate.
But to my mind the Security Council has not
the power to make precise amendments to the
text, nor has it the power to adopt the text
as a whole, or sections of it in their entirety,
nor do I think any useful purpose would be
served by attempting to do so. 1 think such a
course would lead us nowhere, nor would it be
in conformity with the General Assembly resolution which established the Atomic Energy Commission and provided for the submission of the
report to this Council.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I hope I shall not increase' the confusion that
seems to exist on this procedural question but
1 should like just to say one or two words:
The situation, it seems to me, is that the
AtomiG Energy Commission was assigned a
definite task, with instructions to report to the

Ayant tire ces deux conclusions de la resolution de I'Assemblee generale, je voudrais ajouter
que lorsque nous examinons la question de la
procedure a suivre dans nos deliberations, ces
conclusions nous amenent a poser le probleme de
la maniere suivante: d'abord, nous avons a decider s'il convient ou non de transmettre ce rapport officiellement soit aux Membres des Nations
Unies, soit a d'autres organes des Nations Unies.
Quelle que soit notre decision en la ma~i(~re il
serait parfaitement normal, me semble-t-il, que
le Conseil ajoutat ses propres commentaires a ce
rapport, avant de le transmettre.
La deuxieme question de procedure qui se
pose est la suivante: voulons-nous fournir a la
Commission de l'energie atomique des directives
enmatihe de securite? Id encore, il me semble
que si nous decidions de fournir des directives
de ce genre, il faudrait les formuler en termes
generaux. Dans un cas comme dans l'autre, qu'il
s'agisse de transmettre ce rapport, accompagne
de commentaires, aux autres organes ou apx
Membres des Nations Unies, ou qu'il s'agisse de
fournir des directives a la Commission de l'energie atomique elle-meme, la resolution de l'Assemblee generale ne nous autorise pas, je crois, a
modifier le texte du rapport. A mon avis, la reso·
lution de l'Assemblee generale ne nous donne pas
ce droit ni ne suggere qu'ils sait desirable d'ap·
porter, au sein du Conseil de securite, de.<;
amendements au texte de la Commission. Cette
resolution, me semble-t-il, invite plutot le Consell
de securite a donner son avis sur le fond du
rapport en termes bien plus generaux, et laisse
au Conseille sbin de decider s'il exprimera cette
opinion generale sur une des parties du rapport
ou sur l'ensemble du rapport.
Pour faire avancer les travaux au sein du
Conseil de securite, nous paurrions proceder
comme suit: le representant de l'Union sovietique et tous les autres representants qui le jugeront opportun, signaleront leurs objections particuliere touchant ce rapport. Il sera alors
loisible au Conseil, en adoptant une resolution redigee en termes generaux, de renvoyer soit certaines parties du rapport, soit I'ensemble du rapport a la Commission de l'energie atomique ou
a d'autres organes des Nations Unies, en y joignant les commentaires qui lui sembleraient appropries. Mais, a mon avis, le Conseil de securite
n'a pas le pouvoir d'apporter au texte des
amendements specifiques ou d'adopter l'ensemble
du texte ou des parties entieres de ce texte. Je
ne vois d'ailleurs aucun interet pratique a proceder ainsi. J'estime qu'une telle fa90n de proceder n'aboutirait a rien; au surplus, eHe ne serait
pas conforme a la resolution d~ l'AssembIee generale portant creation de la Commission de l'energie atomique et prevoyant la presentation de ce
rapport au Conseil de securite.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-U ni)
(traduit de l'anglais): J'espere que je n'augmenterai pas la confusion qui semble deja. entourer
cette question de procedure, mais je voudrais
simplement dire un ou deux mats.
. A mon avis, le probleme se pose dans Ies
te:mes suivants: la Commission de l'energie atomlque a ete chargee de s'acquitter d'une tache

319
Security Council. The Commission has now
made an interim report to the Council. That
report reaches certain conclusions and makes
certain recommendations, based on fundamental principles.
I imagine that the Commission, before going
on with its work, may wish to know the views
of the Council on the work it has done and the
principles on which it has based that work up
to date. It seems to me that the Council must
do more than take note of the report. It must
pronounce itself, to some extent, on the report
which has now been submitted to it.
That brings us to the question of procedure.
You, Mr. President, suggested that there were
two questions. One is the question of the order
in which we examine the work. Now, in that
respect, it seems to me that this is a voluminous
report which contains a great deal of very valuable material. It represents agreement over a
very wide field. Certain criticisms have been
raised, and it seems to me that if we can be
assured that there is agreement on the rest of
the report, we had better address ourselves at
once to these criticisms, to see whether we can
reach any agreement on them.
Like the representative of the United States,
I have not yet had time to look carefully at the
document which has been circulated this afternoon by the representative of the Soviet Union.
Perhaps wc shall find some points in it upon
which agreement may be reached.
It seems to me that the simplest manner of
proceeding to the examination of this report
would be to direct our attention to those parts
which appear to be in doubt and upon which
there is not, at present, agreement.
Now, as regards the form of our ultimate decision, I agree that you cannot amend the draft
of the Atomic Energy Commission. It is public property; it has been published and you
cannot change it.
If we were all agreed upon it, we could adopt
it, approve it and re-issue it on our own as a
report of the Security Council. That could be
done quite simply. Unfortunately, however, we
may not be able to do that, and there may remain certain points on which agreement has
not yet been reached around this table. In this
event, I think we should attempt to define the
points of difference. I should hope they would
be comparatively few, and would cover only
a small part of the ground.

We could then do onc of two things. We
could refer the report back to the Atomic
Energy Commission, with our approval of all
that large part of the field on which there is
agreement, and ask it to elaborate that part
and then, to go on with its work. If that were
thought useful; we could at the same time,
suggest that more work should be done on those
other points on which agreement was not
reached in the Security Council, in order that,

bien definie et de presenter des rapports au
Conseil de securite. La Commission vient de
presenter, en efIet, un rapport provisoire au
Conseil. Ce rapport aboutit a certaines conclusions et formule certaines recommandations
basees sur des prlncipes fondamentaux.
Avant de poursuivre ses travaux, il est nonnal,
a mon avis, que la Commission desire connaitre
les vues du Conseil sur le travail qu'elle a deja
accompli et sur les principes qui l'ont inspiree
jusqu'a ce jour. 11 me semble que le Conseil ne
doit pas se borner a prendre acte du rapport; il
doit, dans une certaine mesure, se prononcer sur
le rapport qui vient de lui etre SOUmls.
Et cela nous amene a la question de procedure.
Vous avez, Monsieur le President, emis l'avis
qu'il y avait Ht deux questions dont l'une
concerne l'ordre dans lequel nous devons aborder
le travail. A cet egard, il me semble que le rapport dont nous sommes saisis est tres volumineux
et qu'il renferme une documentation abondante
et precieuse. Il traduit l'existence d'un accord
sur un grand nombre de questions. On a souleve
certaines critiques, et il me semble que si nous
etions SUI'S que l'accord existe sur le reste du rapport, nous devrions tout de suite aborder l'examen de ces critiques afin de voir si nous ne
pouvons pas nous mettre d'accord a leur egard.
Comme le representant des Etats-Unis, je n'ai
pas eu le temps, jusqu'ici, d'etudier en detail le
document que le representant de l'Union sovietique a fait distribuer cet apres-midi. Il se peut
que nous y trouvions quelques points sur lesquels
l' accord pourra se faire.
La manihe la plus simple de proceder a l'examen de ce rapport serait, me semble-t-il, de.
porter notre attention sur les parties qui pourraient etre contestees et sur lesquelles, jlisqu'ici,
il n'y a pas eu d'accord.
En ce qui concerne la forme que devra revetir
notre decision finale, je reconnais que le Conseil
de securite ne peut pas amender le texte du rapport de la Commission de l'cnergie atomique. Ce
rapport appartient au domaine public; il a ete
publie et ne peut ctre modifie.
Si nous etions tous d'accord, nous pourrions
l'adopter, l'approuver, le publier a nouveau
comme emanant du Conseil de securite. Cette
maniere de proceder serait tres simple. Il se peut
malheureusement que nous ne puissions pas faire
cela; il reste peut-etre certains points sur lesquels
les representants ici presents ne sont pas d'accord.
Dans ce cas, j'estime que nous devrions nous
efforcer de preciseI' les points sur lesquels subsistent des divergences. Je serais porte a croire
que ces points sont relativement peu nombreux
et constituent une partie minime des questions
qui nous occupent.
Nous serions alors en face des deux solutions
suivantes: ou bien nous renverrions le rapport a
la Commission de l'energie atomique, avec notre
approbation de toute la partie importante sur
laquelle il y a eu accord, en lui demandant de la
mettre au point et de poursuivre ses travaux. En
meme temps, nous proposerions, si le Conseil le
jugeait a. propos, que les autres points, sur lesq uels il n'y a pas eu accord au Conseil de securite, soient soumis a une etude plus approfondie

320
when the next report is issued, there might be
some hope of reaching agreement on them also.
Failing that, with regard to the points not yet
entirely agreed upon, we could perhaps agree
to suspend consideration of them until a later
date. That rather depends on the nature of the
points upon which agreement has nqt yet been
reached.
It seems to me that that is the course which
we should take here in the Security Council.

afin qu'au moment de la publication du prochain
rapport, il y ait quelque raison d'esperer .que
l'accord se fera egalement sur ces POInts.
Deuxieme solution: nous pourrions, en ce qui
concerne les points sur lesquels iI n'y a pas eu
accord complet, decider d'en remettre l'examen
a plus tard. Tout dependra de la nature des
questions sur lesquelles il n'y a pas eu accord.
Voila, me semble-t-il, la ligne de conduite que
devrait adopter le Conseil de securite.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Council will certainly have listened with
interest to the remarks made by the representatives of Brazil, Australia and the United Kingdom"regarding the method of work.
I do not think we are faced with serious
procedural difficulties at the moment. At the
beginning of this meeting, the representatives
of the Soviet Union and of Poland made some
observations on the substance of the matter, in
reply to a request that had been made to
them. The representative of the Soviet Union
put his remarks in writing. I think the other
members of the Council who have observations
to make should also do so, and that we should
then begin the discussion of the report.

Le PRESIDENT: Le Conseil aura ccrtainement
entendu avec interet les remarques faites au sujet
de la methode de travail par les representants du
BrcsiI, de l'Australieet du Royaume-Dni.

We now have the written comments of the
delegation of the Soviet Union and the spoken
comments of the Polish delegation. When, after
this discussion, we have definitely established
the points of agreement and disagreement, I
think we should be able to decide on the form
in which our conclusions should be presented.
But, in my opinion, it would be premature to
consider that now, while we are stilI uncertain
as to the conclusions we shaH reach.

Mr. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombia) (translated from French): I am entirely in agreement
with you, Mr. President, and I fuHy support
your suggestion.
There is obviously nothing to prevent us
from beginning a general discussion now, both
on the report and on the ideas expressed by
Mr. Gromyko and the Polish representative.
After the general discussion, it will be time to
decide on the manner in which we shaH take
our decisions. The further the general discussion goes, the better we shaH be able to determine the best form in which to present the
Council's conclusions. In any case, we shaH save
time by beginning now the general discussion
on the report and on the proposals made by
Mr. Gromyko and the Polish representative.
While dealing with this subject, and in order
that it may be considered when the time comes
to decide on our procedure, I should like to
recall the General Assembly's resolution establishing the Atomic Energy Commission, the last
paragraph of which reads as foHows:
"The Commission shall not infringe upon
the responsibilities of any organ of the
United Nations, but should present recom-

Je crois que nous ne nous trouvons pas, en ce
"moment, devant de serieuses difficultes de procedure. Au debut de cette seance, repondant a l'invitation qui leur avait ete adressce, les representants de l'Union sovietique et de la Pologne ont
formule des observations q uant au fond. Le
representant de l'Union sovietique a eIonne aux
siennes une forme ecrite. J'estime qu'il serait
souhaitable que les autres mcmbres du Conseil
qui ont des observations a presentel' les formulent a leur tour, et que nous abordions cnsuite la
discussion du rapport.
Nous avons actuellement les observations
ecrites de la delegation de l'Union sovietique et
celles, verb ales, de la delegation de la Pologne.
Quand nous aurons, a la suite de cet examen,
etabli d'une maniere precise quels SOllt les elements d'accord et de desaccord, nOlls pourrons,
je crois, decider de la forme que nous dc\'rons
donner aux conclusions de nos deliberatioru;,
Mais il serait, a mon avis, premature de l'en·
visager des maintenant alors que nous sommes
encore dans l'incertitude quant aux conclusions
auxquelles nous aboutirons.
M. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombie): Je suis tout

a fait d'accord avec vous, Monsieur le PI'csident,
et je me rallie entierement a votre suggestion.

11 est evident que rien n'empeche que nouS
nous engagions des maintenant dans une discussion de caractere general, a la fois sur le rapport et sur les idees qu'ont exprimees ~L Gromyko et le representant de la Pologne. Lorsque
la discussion generale sera termince, le moment
sera venu de regler la fa~on dont nous prendrons
nos decisions. Plus le debat general sera avancc,
mieux nous serons en mesure de decider de la
meilleure forme a dOlmer aux conclusions clu
Conseil. Dc toute fac;on, nous gagnerons du
temps en commen~antdcs maintenant la discussion generale du rapport, en mcmc temps que
celle des propositions de M. Gromyko et du
representant de la Pologne. A cettc occasion, et
afin qu'elle soit prise en consideration lorsque le
moment sera venu de regler notre fa<;on de proceder, je voudrais rappeler la resolution de l'AssembIee generale creant la Commission de
l'energie atomique, dont le dernier paragraphe
est redige de la fa~on suivante:
"La Commission ne doit pas empieter sur
les attributions des autres organes des Nations
Unies, mais soumettre des recommandations

321
mendations for the consideration of those
organs in the performance of their tasks
under the terms of the United Nations
Charter. ll1

a l'examen de ces organes en vue de l'accomplissement des taches qui leur incombent aux
terrnes de la Charte des Nations Unies1 ."

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I would
remind the Council how this question arose.
It arose after my statement that if the Security
Council decided to consider and take decisions
not only on the "General findings" and
"Recommendations" but also on other parts
of the report, the Soviet delegation would submit additions, proposals and amendments on
other parts of the report as well.' We can agree
not to settle the question for the time being and
leave it open, but we shall have to settle this
sooner or later, because the submission of additional proposals by the Soviet delegation depends on this decision.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du rum): J e voudrais rappeler au Conseil les circonstances dans
lesquelles cette question s'est posee, EIle s'est
posee aprcs que j'eus declare que si le Conseil de
securite examinait et prenait des decisions non
seulement Sur les "Conclusions generales" et les
"Recommandations", mais aussi sur les autres
parties du rapport, la deh~gation sovietique presenterait des addenda, des propositions et des
amendements se rapportant aces autres parties.
Nous pouvons convenir de rernettre la decision,
de laisser la question en suspens, mais nous de·
vrons la resoudre tot ou tard, car c'est de cela
que dependra la decision de la delegation sovietique de presenter ou de ne pas presenter des
propositions supplementaires.

I do not object to continuing the general
debate, but sooner or later this question will
have to be settled.

Je ne m'oppose pas a ce que la discl,lssion
generale soit prolongee, mais tot ou tard cette
question devra etre resolue.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The whole of the report has been submitted
for consideration by the Security Council. Unless the Council decides otherwise, comments
may be submitted with regard to all parts of
the report.

Le PRESIDENT: L'ensemble du rapport est
soumis a l'examen du Conseil de securite. A
mains que le Conseil n'en decide autrement, il
est permis de formuler des observations portant
sur toutes les parties du rapport.

Mr. GROMYI<O (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I consider your statement inadequate to settle this
question. If we wish to leave it open, we must
then agree accordingly. If we make a definite
ruling regarding the order in which we are to
consider the adoption of the report of the
Atomic Energy Commission, then we must take
this decision and make a ruling accordingly.
One or the other of these decisions must be
taken.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socia·
listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'estime,
Monsieur le President, que votre declaration ne
suffit pas pour n~soudre cette question. Si nous
voulons laisser cette question en suspens, il faut
que nous en convenions d'une fac;;on explicite. Si,
au contraire, nous prenons une decision definie
sur l'ordre dans lequel nous aurons a nous pro·
noncer sur l'adoption du rapport de la Commis·
sion de l'energie atomique, nous devons prendre
cette decision et en tirer la regIe appropriee. Il
faut que nous prenions l'une de ces deux decisions.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
This is how I understand the statements made
during this meeting: the members of the Council are free to make comments on the whole of
the report. It is, therefore, on the whole of it
that comments will be submitted.
I am, of course, prepared to put before the
Security Council the proposal to limit our discussion, at least for the time being, to the parts
referr~d to by the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics. I understood,
however, that several members of the Council
took a different view.

Le PRESIDENT: Voici la fac;;on dont j'ai interprete les declarations qui ont etc faites au cours
de cette seance: les membres du Conseil ont la
faculte de presenter des observations sur Pensemble du rapport. C'est done sur cet ensemble
que les observations seront presentees,
Evidemment, je suis pret a soumettre au
Conseil de securite la proposition tend ant a Hmiter notre discussion, tout au mains pour le moment, aux parties que le representant de l'Union
sovietique a visees. Cependant, j'ai cru comprendre que plusieurs membres du Conscil etaient
d'un avis different.

Mr. HASLUCK (Australia): It seems to me
that the concern expressed by the representative
of the Soviet Union would become real only if
it were envisaged that the Security Council
would eventually be 'carrying a motion approving the complete text of this report. His concern

M. HASLUCK (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais) : A mon avis, les preoccupations exprimees
par le representant de l'Union sovietique ne s~­
raient justifiees que s'il s'agissait pour le Consel1
de securite d'adopter en fin de compte une motion tendant a approuver le texte complet du

] See ResolutJ'ons adopted by the General Assembly
during the first part of Its first session. page 9.

tVoir Resollltions adofJties par l'Asumblt!1l generale
pendant la premiere partie de sa premiere session, page 9,

322
is that we should not approve the report as a
whole unless he has had the opp0rtunity of
preser:ting observations thereon. So it is really
contingent on whether we intend to approve the
report as a whole and adopt it as our own
report.

rapport en question. 11 ne voudrait pas que nous
approuvions le rapport dans son ensemble avant
qu'il n'ait eu l'occasion de presenter ses observations sur l'ensemble de ce rapport. Tout depend
donc de la question de savoir si nous avons l'intention d'approuver l'ensemble du rapport et de
l'adopter comme rapport du Conseil de securite.

Up to date, however, we have not heard
any suggestion of that kind. It may be that we
shall find ourselves in a position to do that at
the end of our debate, but, as I see the position at present, it is this:

O r J'usqu'ici nous n'avons entendu aucune
"
.
'bl e
proposition
dans ce sens. Il n'est pas Im~~ss~
que nous soyons amenes, a la fin. ~e nos d~hbera­
tions, a adopter une telle propOSItIOn, m.ms, pour
le moment, la situation, me semble-t-I1, est la
suivante:

Seven of the representatives at this table
have already expressed their comments on this
report, inasmuch as they have adopted it as
members of the Atomic Energy Oommission.
Three other representatives at this table have
not had the opportunity of expressing an opinion
on it, because they were not members of the
Security Council in 1946 and thus did not take
part in preparing it. It is possible that those
three members, coming fresh to the subject,
may have very useful comments to make and
may be able to direct our attention to some defects or omissions in this report.

Conseil
Sept des representants qui siegent a
ont deja fait connaitre leurs commentalres sur ce
rapport, puisqu'ils 1'ont adopte a titre de mem·
bres de la Oommission de l'energie atomique.
Trois autres representants qui siegent ace Conseil
n'ont pas eu l'occasion d'exprimer leur opinion,
etant donne qu'en 1946, ils n'etaient pas membres du Conseil de securite et n'ont donc pas pris
part a l'elaboration de ce rapport. Il est possible
que ces trois membres, nouveaux venus parmi
nous, aient des observations tres utiles a presenter
et soient en mesure d'attirer notre attention sur
certains defauts ou certaines lacunes de ce rapport.

On the other hand, there are two representatives at this table who did not avail themselves
of the opportunity of presenting amendments
to the first draft when it was before us in the
Atomic Energy Commission, but reserved the
right to present their views when the matter
came before the Security Council. Until this
afternoon, we had not had the objections of
the Soviet Union to this report in concrete
form. Most of the other delegations presented
three, four, or more amendments to the first
draft when we considered it in the Commission;
those amendments were either adopted or rejected and we made our final decision on the

Par ailleurs, deux representants qui sicgent
ce Conseil n'ont pas cru devoir presenter
d'amendements au texte primitif du projet de
rapport soumis a la Commission de l'energie atomique, mais se sont reserve le droit de £aire
connaitre leurs vues lorsque ce rapport serait
presente au Conseil de securite. J usqu'a ce jour,
le representant de l'Union sovietique n'avait pas
formuIe d'objections concretes a ce rapport. La
plupart des autres delegations avaient propo~
trois, quatre amendements au texte primitif,
voire meme davantage, lorsque nous l'cxami·
nions au cours des reunions de la Commission.
Ces amendements ont ete, les uns adoptes, les
autres rejetes, et nous avons abouti a une decision
finale sur le rapport.

r~port.

The representative of the Soviet Union did
not take such an active part in the concluding
debates of the Atomic Energy Commission, and
he has now presented his amendments for the
first time. It would appear, then, that if the
three new members of the Security Council have
any observations to make, we might listen to
them, and then perhaps we could hear the reasons that lie behind the various concrete suggestions which the representative of the Soviet
Union has now put forward. Some of these concrete suggestions, which we now hear for the
first time, may be acceptable to us. It may be
that the Council will feel able to express an
opinion on them. I cannot say, because we have
not had time to examine them in detail. But if
that procedure were followed, it would do no
injury to any member of the Council. It would
make it possible for the Oouncil to see if there
is some point of substance, some point of real
importance, in the new matters which the tepresentative of the Soviet Union has put forward.
Then, having made up our minds, we could,

:c

a

Le representant de l'Union sovietique n'a pas,

a ce moment-la participe tres activement aux
deliberations finales de la Commission de l'energie atomique. 11 presente aujourd'hui ses amendements pour la premiere fois. Il semblerait done
que, si les trois nouveaux membres du Conseil de
securite ont des observations a presenter, il faudrait les entendre d'abord et ecouter ensuite les
raisons que le representant de l'Union sovietique
fait valoir a l'appui des diverses propositions
concretes qu'il vient de presenter. Il se peut que
certaines des propositions qu'il nous soumet pour
la premiere fois se revelent acceptables. Il se
peut que le Conseil s'estime en mesure d'exprimer une opinion sur ces propositions. Pour le
moment, je ne saurais me prononcer, car nollS
n'avons pas encore eu le temps de les examiner
en detail. Toutefois, si l'on suivait cette procedure, eIle ne porterait prejudice a aucun des
membres du Conseil. Elle permettrait au Conseil
de voir s'il existe, dans les nouvelles propositions
que le representant de l'Union sovietique vient
de formuler, quelque chose de veritablement

323
as you suggest, approach the question of the
form in which we can express ourselves.

substantieI, de reellement important. Lorsque
nous aurons reussi a nous former une opinion,
nous pourrons alors aborder la question de la
forme que devront revetir nos decisions.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I see
that it will be difficult for, us to reach any
definite decision today on the question of procedure. Let us therefore continue the general
debate and return to this question later on.
Perhaps it will then be easier for us to reach a
definite decision on the order in which the report of the Atomic Energy Commission should
be considered. Otherwise, it will appear that
we have received a report and do not know
what to do with it.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je vois
qu'il nous est difficile d'arriver aujourd'hui a une
decision definie sur la question de procedure. I1
vaut donc mieux prolonger la discussion generale
et revenir a cette question un peu plus tard.
Peut-etre nous sera-toil alors plus facile d'arriver
a une decision definie sur l' ordre dans lequel le
rapport de la Commission de l'energie atomique
doit etre examine. Sinon, nous pourrions donner
l:impression qu'ayant re<;u le rapport, nous ne
savons qu'en faire.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
If there are no further remarks, we can proceed with the consideration of the report at the
next meeting. We shall then hear any further
comments by members of the Council. They
will, of course, be entitled to comment on any
part of the Atomic Energy Commission's report.
This next meeting will also be devoted to discussion of the comments made.

Le PRESIDENT: S'il n'ya plus d'observations,
nous pourrions poursuivre l'examen du rapport
au cours d'une prochaine seance; a cette occasion, nous entendrions les remarques que les
membres du Conseil auraient encore a fonnuler.
Il es~ bien entendu qu'ils auraient toute faculte
de le faire a propos de n'importe queUe partie
du rapport de la Cotnmission de l'energie atomique. Cette nbuvel1e seance serait consacree,
en meme temps, a la discussion des observations
formulees.

If there is no objection, we shall follow that
procedure.

S'il n'ya pas d'opposition, il en est ainsi decide.

The next meeting of the Security Council, for
the consideration of the Atomic Energy Commission's report, will take place on Thursday,
20 February 1947, at 3 p.m.

La prochaine seance du Conseil de securite,
consacree a l'examen du rapport de la Commission del'energie atomique, aura lieu le jeudi 20
fevrier 1947 a 15 heures.

Mr. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombia) (translated
from French): I understand that a general
discussion on the whole of the report will take
place; during this discussion we shall deal with
the comments made by the delegations of the
Soviet Union and of Poland.

M. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombie): Je crois
comprendre qu'une discussion generale sur l'ensemble du rapport aura lieu; au cours de cette
discussion, nous nous refererons aux observations
presentees par les delegations sovietique et polonaise.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
That is quite correct.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

Le PdSIDENT: I1 en sera bien ainsi.

La seance est levee cl 17 h. 15.
