S/PV.7570

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7570

th meeting
Wednesday, 2 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Al-Moumani
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the review of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (S/2015/899)
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2015/902)
Letter dated 23 November 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/903)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-39961 (E)
*1539961*

S/PV.7570

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Council for the month of December, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to my friend and colleague, His Excellency
Mr. Matthew Rycroft, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for his splended service as President
of the Council for the month of November. I know I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Rycroft and his whole
tired team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
review of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (S/2015/899)
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2015/902)
Letter dated 23 November 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/903)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of South Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of participants to
document S/2015/899, which contains the special report
of the Secretary-General on the review of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, as well
as to document S/2015/902, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on South Sudan.

2/5

02/12/2015

I also wish to draw the attention of participants
to document S/2015/903, containing a letter dated
23 November 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madame, for this new opportunity to present to the
Security Council an update on the peace process in
South Sudan and to address the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
This morning, I informed the representatives of the
countries contributing troops or police personnel of the
new concept of operations proposed for the Mission.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Løj, will present some additional elements on
the operational status of the Mission during our
consultations on the operational situation. I will
therefore focus on the current political trends.
Our assessment is clear. The peace process in South
Sudan is currently in a critical phase that requires
the active political engagement of the international
community, including the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development-plus group, as well as Security
Council members, to encourage the implementation
of the transition. Otherwise, the progress made
to date would be in vain. We must therefore work
collectively to increase the adherence of the parties to
the implementation of their agreement and support the
institutions established by the agreement so as to end
this senseless conflict.
Since late October, as I have said, some progress
has been made on the political front. Following the
seminar on operational implementation of the clauses
of the ceasefire and transitional security arrangements,
held in Addis Ababa from 21 October to 3 November,
the parties finally reached a new agreement on the
distribution of forces provided to ensure safety in the
capital. On 20 October, the Ugandan army began to
withdraw its troops from South Sudan, as stipulated
in the agreement, and that process concluded a month
later. Last week, the Government began to withdraw its
security personnel from Juba, in accordance with the
terms of the agreement.
The Council has probably noted that on 18 November,
President Salva Kiir gave a speech to the nation in which
he reaffirmed that support for the peace agreement and

15-39961

02/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the establishment a Transitional Government of National
Unity were among the Government’s priorities. On
27 November, the first meeting of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission was held, chaired by former
Botswana President Festus Mogae. Unfortunately, the
armed opposition and representatives of former Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement prisoners did not attend
the meeting.
As we feared and must acknowledge, the
implementation of the peace agreement is progressing
very slowly and with great difficulty. Since August,
numerous violations of the ceasefire agreement have
taken place in several regions of the country. Continued
fighting between both parties, especially in Unity
state, has resulted in substantial civilian casualties,
caused the displacement of additional people and
increased humanitarian assistance needs. The clashes
also resulted in additional cattle theft and looting of
humanitarian goods as well as numerous violations of
human rights.
A complete and immediate cessation of hostilities
would be the first real contribution to the peace process,
which the two parties owe to their people. However, we
are still witnessing incessant clashes on the ground.
Unfortunately, we continue to see fighting on a daily
basis aimed at retaking or consolidating military
positions before the start of the transition. That trend is
also evident at the political level.
(spoke in English)
The decision taken by President Kiir on 2 October
to establish 28 states in South Sudan continues to
generate controversy in the country. Most recently,
on 19 November, a special session of the National
Legislative Assembly approved amendments to
the Transitional Constitution of South Sudan that
removed all references to South Sudan being made up
of a specific number of states and gave the President
the power to appoint governors and members of the
National Legislative Assembly during the transitional
period. Strong concerns have been raised by the
oppposition and within other political parties in respect
of the legality of such measures. That initiative could
make even more challenging a reconciliation between
the parties at this important moment in the formation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity.
At this point in the peace process, any
unilateral political initiative taken by either party is
counterproductive. Our messaging to both parties

S/PV.7570

should be clear and unequivocal: we need the agreement,
the whole agreement and nothing but the Agreement,
and we need it urgently.
In that context, the Secretary-General has proposed
to the Security Council a number of adjustments to the
mandate of UNMISS, as well as to the configuration
of the Mission. The proposal is for UNMISS to
focus on providing support to the key institutions
of transition, including the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, which will oversee the
implementation of the agreement in all its facets; the
joint integrated police, which will be responsible for
security in Juba, Malakal, Bentiu and Bor; and the
joint operations centre, which will coordinate the
movements of the forces allowed to remain in Juba.
The Secretary-General has also recommended that the
Mission be authorized to provide technical support to
the Transitional Government in making constitutional
and legislative adjustments, planning for national
elections, establishing transitional justice mechanisms
and developing strategies for security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
As UNMISS takes forward that targeted support,
it would continue to implement its current mandated
tasks, working closely with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to transition the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism formerly
in place to oversee the cessation of hostilities, to the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM) envisioned in the
peace agreement. Operational planning to that effect is
already well under way, as directed by resolution 2241
(2015). The Mission would also continue to focus on
the protection of civilians. Its efforts would be directed
towards providing increased protection from internal
violence within the protection-of-civilian sites, as well
as for civilians facing violence in areas of origin or
displacement outside such sites, by projecting its troops
and conducting extensive patrols in areas of tension.
It is our assessment that an increase of 500 troops
and 600 police personnel would allow us to provide
the support required of the CTSAMM and enhance
such protection-of-civilians activities. It is important
to note, however, that increasing protection outside of
the protection-of-civilian sites fundamentally requires
the cooperation of the Government, as well as that of
UNMISS troop-contributing countries, which have
at times proved reluctant to take the proactive and
forward-leaning posture that the task requires.

15-399613/5

S/PV.7570

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

For our intention to translate into results, the
routine violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
particularly through restrictions imposed on the
Mission’s freedom of movement, must end. As the
Mission moves towards the provision of more robust
support to the national authorities in the implementation
of the peace agreement, it will be essential for the
Government of National Unity to prove itself a willing
partner. It must make the strategic decision to support
and facilitate, rather than simply tolerate, the work of
our Mission.
Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate the
Mission’s continued need for air assets, including
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Real-time
information is critical for the Mission to improve its
awareness of what is happening, to react rapidly and
to save lives. In a country as vast, and in many parts
inaccessible, as South Sudan, UAVs are not only useful,
they are in fact vitally important for monitoring the
changing situation and needs on the ground. They can
also play an essential role in supporting the permanent
ceasefire, which both parties have stated is a key
priority.
With respect to security in Juba, our vision is
also clear. We must invest in the provisions set by the
agreement to address tensions and incidents in the
capital. We must invest in the rapid operationalization
of the joint integrated police, the joint operations
centre, the joint military command and the CTSAMM
to guarantee security. That is not just the request of the
Government, it is the only politically and operationally
sound option. UNMISS must help the parties work
together to rebuild confidence and maintain security
together in Juba. There is no alternative.
Finally, in line with the recommendations of the
High-level Implementation Panel on Peace Operations,
the Secretary-General has recommended a phased
approach to structuring UNMISS’s engagement in
South Sudan. To that end, we feel that a period of
one year would provide us with the time required to
implement the proposed mandated changes and assess
their impact on the situation in South Sudan.
Bringing peace and stability to South Sudan will
require a concerted effort from all partners involved
in resolving the conflict. The Security Council, the
African Union, the IGAD-plus process and countries
of the region have a critical role to play in maintaining
pressure on the parties to implement their agreement,
building its political momentum and demonstrating
4/5

02/12/2015

the benefits of peace. No number of troops or police
can replace the political will required of the leaders of
South Sudan to bring their conflict to an end.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Permit me to thank
you, Madam President, and the other members of the
Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
speak on an issue of great importance to our country.
As this is the first time I speak in the Council under
your leadership, Madam, I would like to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month and to pledge our full support and cooperation
to you and your team. I would also like to acknowledge
the role of your predecessor in successfully leading the
Council last month.
Let me begin by reaffirming that the Government
of the Republic of South Sudan is fully committed
to the implementation of the recently signed peace
agreement. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, in his recent
statement to the nation and to the National Legislative
Assembly, reiterated his commitment to implementing
the agreement in letter and spirit. He urged members of
the Assembly to honour their obligation to the people of
South Sudan by joining hands with him in implementing
the agreement in order to put an end to the suffering
of the people of South Sudan, restore normalcy to the
country and deliver services to the people.
The process of the implementation of the agreement
has indeed begun and is under way. The Government of
the Republic of South Sudan started withdrawing its
forces to within a 25-kilometre radius of the capital city
of Juba, as stipulated by the peace agreement under the
security arrangements.
On 27 November, the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC) Chair, Mr. Festus
Mogae, former President of the Republic of Botswana,
officially opened its offices in Juba. On 28 November,
we welcomed our brothers and sisters who are former
detainees back home from Nairobi and await the coming
of our brothers and sisters from the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, whom we
expect to return soon. The arrival of the aforementioned
persons back to Juba is a very important step, as it will
help build confidence and a measure of trust after many
months of hostilities.

15-39961

02/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President, in his inspiring words to the nation,
called on all of its citizens to welcome their returning
brothers and sisters with open arms and hearts, to
forgive and forget the bitterness of the war and to go
forward as one people and one nation.
The Government of South Sudan stands ready to
form the Transitional Government of National Unity as
soon as all our brothers and sisters who are stakeholders
in the peace agreement join us in Juba, hopefully soon.
Despite allegations of ceasefire violations on both
sides, there is reason to believe that all are interested
in ending the violence and rebuilding the nation,
united rather than divided by what should be enriching
diversity.
As much as the Government of South Sudan
is committed to the implementation of the peace
agreement, it is bound to fall short due to financial
constraints and lack of sufficient resources. For these
reasons, we call upon all parties to the agreement and
the international community to come in and support
the implementation of the agreement so as to ensure
sustainable peace, in which we all have a stake.
We sincerely appreciate the efforts being made
by the international community to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of our people. But while a
great deal has already been done, as the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/902) indicates, the situation
remains dire and much more needs to be done not only
by the United Nations, but also by the international
community, donors and friends of South Sudan.
During this period, when the Council is about to
negotiate the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), we
urge that the United Nations consider reintroducing
capacity-building that is more targeted towards the
implementation of the agreement. The other action to be
considered could be the inclusion of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which would complement the work of
UNMISS and JMEC.
Indeed, one sees encouraging proposals in the report
of the Secretary-General on the review of the UNMISS
mandate (S/2015/899). Many areas are beginning to
emerge that indicate a return to capacity-building,
although this is conditional on progress in the peace
process and the availability of resources. This calls for
support from the wider international community. As
the Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 79 of his
report:

S/PV.7570

“UNMISS is not in a position to deliver all the
support necessary to ensure the success of the peace
process. Substantial resources will be required
to take forward the framework for democratic
transformation, good governance, justice and
reconciliation, reparations and healing and early
recovery provided for in the peace agreement.
Technical and financial assistance must be provided
to the Transitional Government of National Unity
in support of peace. I would encourage donors
to support the implementation of the programme
of transition in a coordinated manner. The dire
humanitarian situation in the country must not be
forgotten. I appeal to donors to continue to fund the
humanitarian effort, as long as needs persist.”
As we begin the implementation of the peace
agreement, the Government of South Sudan and
UNMISS should jointly find a way to encourage
civilians in the protection sites to return to their
villages, as the current status quo cannot be sustained,
as shown by the incidents that have taken place within
those camps and the poor living conditions due to
overcrowding, because these sites were never intended
to hold such large numbers, nor were they meant
to continue being used for such a long period. Since
UNMISS itself admits to the challenges facing it in
providing protection within its camps, there is an urgent
need to broaden the protection of civilians outside the
United Nations camps to the broader population.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s commitment to implementing the peace
agreement in earnest and to working closely with the
United Nations and the international community at
large to address the challenges facing the country. We
also hope that the Government of South Sudan will
be involved in the negotiation of the new UNMISS
mandate, to be renewed on 15 December. In this
connection, we note with satisfaction the SecretaryGeneral’s statement that, in preparing the report, his
Special Representative has consulted with a number
of stakeholders on the findings and recommendations,
including a number of named Cabinet ministers. This
process should to be encouraged and broadened.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

15-399615/5
