S/PV.7206

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7206th meeting

Tuesday, 24 June 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Ms. Jiang Hua
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Lee Kyung Chul
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic

14-43912 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1443912*

S/PV.7206

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Marguerite Marie Maliavo-Samba, Minister for
Public Health, Social Affairs, Gender and Humanitarian
Action of the Central African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Babacar Gaye,
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Gaye, who
is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Bangui.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Gaye.
Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): I express my deep
respect to the Council and I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to update its members, from my vantage
point in Bangui, on the situation in the Central African
Republic. The security situation remains tense in the
capital and within the country. The recent attack on the
Church of Our Lady of Fatima in Bangui on 28 May,
in which 11 people, including the priest, were killed,
illustrates not only the dangerous spiral of attacks and
reprisals affecting the country, but also a radicalization
of both parties and the risk that the situation may grow
more deadly yet.
The attack followed an incident in Bangui in
the same week, in which three young Muslims were

2/7

24/06/2014

brutally killed, probably by anti-Balaka elements, while
traveling to a football match organized to promote
intercommunal reconciliation. These events provoked
spontaneous popular demonstrations against what some
consider to be a failure on the part of the transitional
authorities and international forces to restore security.
A number of barricades were erected in the city and
had to be removed by international forces. Bangui was
paralysed for three days and several people were killed.
The spiral of violence and retaliation has also
affected the interior of the country, in the west and the
centre in particular. In the north-west, along the border
with Chad, an increasing number of attacks on villages
by heavily armed ex-Séléka and Peuhl groups — the
Mbororos — were reported. This probably indicates
an attempt on the part of the ex-Séléka to extend their
area of c​ ontrol to the west, even as the anti-Balakas
are strengthening their presence in these same areas.
Consequently, there have been a number of violent
clashes between anti-Balakas and ex-Séléka.
(spoke in English)
Many villages have been set ablaze, causing the
displacement of local populations. Ex-Séléka have
also enhanced their presence in Bambari, where they
established their military command centre. Forces
from the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic (MISCA) and Operation
Sangaris have been deployed to Bambari.
Civilian communities remain direct targets of
sectarian violence and reprisal killings. Yesterday, for
example, in Bambari, 18 people were reportedly killed,
including 3 children and 1 woman, and 8 were wounded
in an attack by anti-Balaka against the Peuhl. Twentytwo houses were set ablaze. In retaliation, the ex-Séléka
killed eight persons and wounded four later in the day.
Another 129 civilians sought refuge at the MISCA
base, of which 58 were moved from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) compound.
The few Muslim communities that are left in Bangui
remain largely confined to their neighbourhoods,
mainly in the PK5 district. They are encircled by
anti-Balaka who are not only preventing people from
leaving but are also cutting off food and medical
supplies. There are also reports of anti-Balaka targeting
non-Muslim individuals who are believed to be helping
Muslim populations through the provision of supplies or
services. Elements of the Central African Armed Forces

14-43912

24/06/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV.7206

are involved in many of those incidents alongside the
anti-Balaka. Throughout the country, approximately
20,000 people from minority communities are trapped
in 16 locations; if they leave, they may be attacked
before they reach safety.

the political elite are deeply divided, and there is a high
level of political and social antagonism and distrust
among political actors and among communities. That
does not bode well for the holding of credible elections
early next year.

MISCA and Operation Sangaris are doing their
best to stabilize the situation and protect civilians in
their areas of deployment, while humanitarian actors
are addressing the critical needs of the displaced
people. However, their conditions remain precarious.
The European Union military operation in the Central
African Republic has now reached its full operational
capability and is providing security at the Bangui
airport as well as in the third and fifth arrondissements
of Bangui. We are working closely with those forces
to coordinate efforts to enhance the protection of
populations under threat and to prevent further
violence. However, the protection needs in the country
are enormous, and there is an urgent need to strengthen
MISCA’s capabilities to provide an effective response.
Furthermore, international forces can be effective only
if their efforts are coupled with effective measures to
extend State authority, mediate between communities
and armed groups and fight impunity — most important,
by restoring the penal chain. MINUSCA is focusing on
supporting initiatives in those areas.

The recent attempt by the ex-Séléka to unify its
structures and the establishment of its headquarters in
the central city of Bambari were perceived by both the
Government and parts of the population as a provocative
attempt at de facto partition. However, political
cohesiveness within the ex-Séléka structure remains
weak. The anti-Balaka movement remains highly fluid,
despite ongoing efforts to create an organizational and
command structure. It is still difficult to gauge what
role the anti-Balaka could or should play in the political
dialogue that the country must begin.

The MINUSCA guard unit is now deployed in
Bangui, Bouar and Bambari. It has proven to be a
critical asset in ensuring the security of United Nations
installations and personnel and to extricate staff
members under threat.
The human rights and humanitarian situation
remains of serious concern. Violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law continue to be
committed by all armed groups and civilians, using
weapons with impunity. More than half a million people
remain displaced, including 370,000 who have crossed
the borders, placing a significant strain on neighbouring
countries. Half the population of the Central African
Republic is in need of humanitarian assistance.
Let me now turn to the political situation, which
has deteriorated noticeably over the past month. The
continuing insecurity created by the various armed
groups is improving too slowly to satisfy the population.
That has led to growing criticism about the inability
of the Transitional Government to deliver on security,
which risks undermining its authority. The Government
is struggling to govern the country without its own
security forces or financial means. At the same time,

There is no doubt that disarmament and an inclusive
political dialogue are essential steps to achieve lasting
security. The recent seminar facilitated by the Centre
for Humanitarian Dialogue at the request of the Head
of State of the Transition and the dialogue initiative of
a local non-governmental organization are encouraging
developments. They indicate that many Central Africans
are ready for dialogue if they believe it will bring peace.
Such dialogue should lead to a political agreement with
regard to elections, disarmament and the composition of
the national armed forces and other key political issues,
including the future of governance, decentralization,
the question of constructively addressing the root
causes of the crisis, and the economic future. That will
be vital to create the conditions conducive to the return
of refugees and displaced persons.
Based on our consultations with key regional actors,
including the mediator, President Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of the Congo, a representative of
President Deby Itno of Chad, the Chair of the Economic
Community of Central African States and national
stakeholders, we believe that there is an immediate
need to support an inclusive negotiation process on
disarmament that results in a political agreement and
the eventual disarmament of all armed groups. There is
no doubt that the process will be complicated and will
certainly require time to fully evolve. It is essential that
the dialogue process be owned by Central Africans.
However, there will be no lasting solution without the
continued engagement of the subregion.
MINUSCA is working with the transitional
authorities and the international security forces to
prevent further violence in the capital and throughout

14-439123/7

S/PV.7206

The situation in the Central African Republic

the country, including by investigating violations
and in order to take concrete measures to ensure
that perpetrators are held accountable. To that end,
MINUSCA is increasing its civilian component and
preparing for its deployment to a number of locations
outside Bangui by the end of July, with a focus on
supporting local authorities and enhancing efforts
to protect civilians. Efforts continue to establish the
peacekeeping operation and prepare for a seamless
transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA
on 15 September. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will brief the Council in mid-July on the
state of play with regard to the deployment of the
peacekeeping operation and the transition from MISCA
to MINUSCA.
(spoke in French)
The attention that the international community
has paid to the Central African Republic in recent
months has contributed to preventing the country from
falling further into the spiral of violence. MINUSCA,
the United Nations country team and the international
forces continue to make the necessary efforts to support
the authorities and the people of the Central African
Republic to address immediate challenges and prevent
a further deterioration of the situation. However, the
situation in the Central African Republic remains
complex and multifaceted. Facing it will require time
and resources. The continued commitment and resolve
of the region and the wider international community
and a unified and cohesive approach will be critical
factors in achieving that goal.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Gaye
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to brief the Council today on my recent
visit to the Central African Republic. A month ago I
visited Bangui on a joint mission with the Special Envoy
of the African Union on Women, Peace and Security.
Our joint presence strengthened the coordination and
standing of the Mission, as well as the potential for
joint follow-up action with the African Union (AU).
In the Central African Republic, we met with
the President, the Prime Minister, key ministers and
Government officials, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the African
4/7

24/06/2014

Union Chair, Special Representative and Head of the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA), the United Nations
country team, the Technical Follow-Up Committee on
the Crisis in the Central African Republic, the HighLevel Women’s Advisory Group, 17 civil society
organizations, 16 women’s organizations, religious
leaders and many internally displaced persons (IDPs).
We received enormous support from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Head
of MISCA and their teams, for which I am grateful.
Our goals were to give visibility to the plight of
women and girls, ensure that gender issues were
addressed from the outset in the newly established
United Nations Mission and promote women’s
participation and leadership in local reconciliation,
national dialogues, transitional justice and upcoming
elections.
What we heard and what we saw was terrifying.
In displacement camps all over the country, including
the one we visited, people seek shelter under plastic
covers or even pieces of cloth in inhumane conditions,
surrounded by dirty puddles of stagnant water and
garbage, vulnerable to water-borne diseases. The
international community has received numerous reports
of rape, sexual slavery and other violations perpetrated
by armed actors. Those reports were confirmed in
December by a United Nations fact-finding mission led
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (UNHCR) and supported by
UN-Women. That violence has taken place in house-tohouse searches, unauthorized roadblocks and military
camps, and as part of sectarian violence. We learned
that girls were frequently subjected to forced marriage.
Many have become pregnant, miscarried or contracted
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV. There is a
great need for medical and psychosocial support at IDP
sites, 90 per cent of which lack services for survivors of
gender-based violence. The very few services that are
available assist hundreds of rape victims every month.
An untold number of pregnant women do not have
access to basic reproductive and obstetric care. That is
a matter of life and death in a country where a woman’s
risk of maternal death is already 140 times higher
than in a developed country. What I heard over and
over again from women was that they needed security
and the rule of law, health care, food and schools
for their children. Those were some of their greatest
needs. Almost two thirds of schools remain closed,

14-43912

24/06/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

and hundreds of thousands of children are growing up
without an education.
Neighbouring countries are struggling to provide
adequate support for tens of thousands of refugees.
Cameroon now hosts approximately 100,000 newly
arrived refugees, of whom 84 per cent are women and
children who arrived after travelling for many days or
weeks and are often sick and traumatized. They arrive
to find one nurse and fewer than a few dozen hygiene
and medical kits for assisting thousands. It is important
to highlight those alarming and distressing facts
because, as of today, the international community has
funded less than one third of the humanitarian appeal.
Today I would like to call urgently for the full
funding of that appeal. But I would also like to draw
the Council’s attention to a very different side of the
Central African Republic. Against the odds, many
people, including women from all walks of life, are
organizing to survive and prosper. Young people asked
us to support and lead them in rehabilitating their peers
who had been affected by violence or who had also
participated in violent acts. Women leaders separated
by religious and social divides are clear in their resolve
to bridge their differences and build a better future for
their country. They are organized and full of plans, ideas
and courage. They are particularly asking for support
in order to engage in women’s economic activity, for
psychosocial assistance and for help in restoring their
country’s educational system.
I urge members of the Security Council to support
the women of the Central African Republic and to
implement the gender-equality recommendations made
by the United Nations electoral needs assessment
mission. The success of reconciliation initiatives, the
upcoming elections and national recovery depends on
women’s leadership and participation. Priority should
be given to special temporary measures and quotas
for women’s representation, as well as protection and
security from MINUSCA for women’s participation in
the elections.
Stronger action must be taken to protect civilians
and restore State authority and the rule of law. As the
Council knows, most courts and prisons have ceased
to function, and many civil servants and magistrates
have abandoned their positions. UN-Women is taking
part in a joint programme that will improve women’s
access to justice. It will focus on survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence and on building the capacity
of national institutions, while also deploying mobile

S/PV.7206

courts and holding perpetrators accountable. We note
the efforts of the International Commission of Inquiry
and the President’s recent request to the International
Criminal Court. Efforts to secure justice at all levels
must be supported, and UN-Women has offered to
provide dedicated gender-crime investigators.
We also welcome the Council’s recent decision to
establish a robust peacekeeping mission in MINUSCA,
building on the efforts of the Economic Community of
Central African States and the African Union, and on the
support offered by the French forces and the European
Union mission. This year’s initial deployment of gender
and women’s protection advisers must be strengthened
next year. That expertise must expand beyond Bangui
to the regions and be embedded in all of the Mission’s
priority areas. To build durable national security, we
need more women in the Mission’s military, police and
civilian components.
I am pleased to announce that, for the first time,
UN-Women and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will offer specialized predeployment
training on preventing sexual violence. I urge all
troop-contributing countries to take up the offer and
support the full implementation of this training in their
countries. I also urge the international community and
members of the Security Council to increase funding
for the safety and protection of women and girls, for
women’s economic empowerment and for education. We
know that women’s employment, entrepreneurship and
child care all have a significant impact on family and
community recovery and can be a powerful investment
for peacebuilding.
UN-Women will work with partners, including
the AU, to ensure that emergency employment
programmes include women as at least 40 per cent
of their beneficiaries. We encourage all international
partners to adhere to the United Nations policy on
earmarking 15 per cent or more of funding for women’s
empowerment and gender equality.
UN-Women is also partnering with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to respond to the urgent needs of women and girls in
refugee sites in Cameroon and to support women’s
access to humanitarian aid in the Central African
Republic.
To reiterate, I request the Council to ensure that
MINUSCA has the proper gender architecture to
fulfil its mission, that troop-contributing countries

14-439125/7

S/PV.7206

The situation in the Central African Republic

provide all troops access to training on the prevention
of sexual violence, that women be represented in all
processes that deal with peacemaking, peacebuilding
and reconciliation, that election preparations place
women’s representation and participation at their
centre, that efforts to rebuild the justice system
and secure accountability for grave crimes include
dedicated sexual and gender crimes experts and that our
humanitarian response be scaled up, both within and
outside the country, and that education and economic
well-being are addressed.
The women we met in the Central African Republic,
including interim President Samba-Panza, must be
supported to play their full and equal role as agents of
change, peace and security. Empowered women are the
best drivers of growth, the best hope for reconciliation
and the best buffer against the radicalization of youth
and the repetition of cycles of violence. Their voices
must be heard.
In going about my work, I have been touched by the
level of awareness among women around the world of
the Security Council’s decisions on women and peace
and security. This body has made very significant
promises to women, most recently in resolution 2122
(2013) and resolution 2149 (2014), on the Central
African Republic, and has included strong language
on women’s participation, leadership and protection.
UN-Women stands ready to support the Council to
implement those strong commitments and to keep its
promises.
Once again, Sir, I thank you for this opportunity,
and I look forward to our discussion.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Maliavo-Samba (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): At the outset, on behalf of
Mrs. Catherine Samba-Panza, President of the Republic
and Head of the Transitional State, and His Excellency
Mr. André Nzapayeke, Prime Minister and Head of the
Transitional Government, I would like to express my
country’s thanks for the ongoing attention the Council
has given to the crisis currently rocking our country.
I would also like to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women for everything that her organization has
done for our country. She has described the situation

6/7

24/06/2014

of women during the crisis in the Central African
Republic.
To respond to the crisis, our country must face
several challenges. There are the security crisis, which
must be addressed in order to guarantee the rights of
everyone living in our country, including women, who
are the main victims of the crisis. With respect to the
security challenge, today, as we know, the Central
African Republic does not have a national army to
guarantee security and the rights of individuals. The
Central African Republic is under embargo, which is
why we cannot fully shoulder our sovereign duties.
There is also the legal challenge. Today, the judicial
system in the Central African Republic is sick. The
police force needs to be rehabilitated. Judges must also
take up their work. But none of that can happen unless
there is security. Judges cannot return to their posts in
the back country due to security issues. Criminals thus
have free rein to commit harmful acts.
There is are also the challenge of governance. The
rebuilding of public State institutions is crucial, but
today, again because of security issues, the prefects
who represent the Government in the back country
cannot return to their posts. Therefore, the State is for
all practical purposes confined to the capital: the State
basically does not exist in the back country.
I would therefore very humbly ask for the Security
Council’s support so that all of the compassion that has
been expressed for the Central African Republic can
truly be translated into deeds. It is time for us to take
action to save all of the lives that are being lost with
every day, minute and second that pass.
I would also like to note that the current crisis in the
Central African Republic is not a sectarian crisis, as has
been widely broadcast. It began as an inter-communal
problem, and the sectarian aspect came about as a result
of political manipulation and — we must underscore
this here today — the negative influence of certain
media outlets, at both the national and international
levels.
I would like to express my satisfaction regarding
the mission to the Central African Republic led by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Today, in Geneva, the independent
expert, Ms. Keita Bocoum, presented her report on
human rights in the Central African Republic to me.
She will of course also present it to the Security Council
here in New York.
14-43912

24/06/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

Another mission also took place — that of the
Commission of Inquiry, also in Bangui. It will also
present its report to the Council shortly.
Given the limited means at the disposal of the
Central African Republic today, it is important for
the Government to receive support in order for it to
be able to bring to justice the criminals who continue
to practice sexism, rape and kill; for that to come to
an end in our country and for the entire population to
have its dignity restored. Therefore, on behalf of my
country, I call for action — and, I would emphasize,
swift, effective action — to be taken. The Executive
Director of UN-Women stated that only one third of
the funds necessary to meet humanitarian needs are
currently being provided. It is important that everyone
suffering in camps for internally displaced persons or

S/PV.7206

as refugees in neighbouring countries be taken into
account in the various efforts that will be undertaken.
What is at stake at the regional level as a result of the
Central African crisis is significant. It is also urgent
for the humanitarian aid that is to be provided to the
Central African Republic to also be provided to Central
Africans who are in neighbouring countries and who
are living in very difficult circumstances.
Those are, Sir, the few points that I wanted to
submit to the Council for its consideration.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

14-439127/7
