22
the various categories of stateless persons, and to submit these comments, with his observations, to the Economic and Social Council ;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
study, if possible at its sixteenth session, the text of
the draft protocol and the comments received from interested governments and, in the light of these comments, to take whatever action seems useful in order
that a text may be opened for signature after the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees has entered into force.
391st plenary meeting,
6 November 1952.
630 (VII). Convention on the International Right
of Correction
The General Assembly,
Considering that establishment of the right of correction on an international basis would help to curb
the dissemination of false news and to strengthen
peace,
1. Urges all Members of the United Nations and
the other States which were invited to the United
Nations Conference on Freedom of Information 8 to
become parties to the Convention on the International
Right of Correction, the text of which is annexed
hereto and consists of the provisions relating to the
right of correction contained in the preamble and articles of the draft Convention on the International
Transmission of News and the Right of Correction
approved by the General Assembly in resolution 277 C
(Ill) of 13 May 1949 with the deletion of articles
XVIII, XIX paragraph 2, and XXII paragraph (d),
of the latter draft Convention and with the introduction as a new article ( article IX), replacing the former
article XVIII, of the following text: "The provisions
of the present Convention shall extend to or be applicable equally to a contracting metropolitan State and
to all the territories, be they Non-Self-Governing,
Trust or Colonial Territories, which are being administered or governed by such metropolitan State.";
2. Decides that the said Convention shall be opened
for signature at the dose of the present session of the
General Assembly.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

ANNEX
Con.,endon on the ln1ernadonal R11la• of
Correction
PREAMBLE

The COfltracting Statt.r,
Dt.riring to implement the right of their peoples to be fully
and reliably informed,
1

See UKit,d Naliotu COflftrmct "" Fre,tlom of IKftwffl,(J-

liDK, held al Gfflftla, S'UIUurlOfJtl, from 23 March lo 21 .iOril,
1948, Final Act, United Nations Publication, Sales No.: 1948.

XIV.2.

D,.riri,,g to improve understanding between their peoplts
through the free ftow of information and opinion,
Dt.riring thereby to protect mankind from the scourge of
war, to prevent the recurrence of aggression from any source,
and to combat all propaganda which is either designed or
likely to provoke or encourage any threat to the peace, breach
of the peace, or act of aggression,
Con.ritltring the danger to the maintenance of friendly relations between peoples and to the preservation of peace,
arising from the publication of inaccurate reports,
Con.ritlerittg that at its second re~uhr session the Genera)
Assembly of the United Nations recommended the adoption
of rneasures designed to combat the dissemination of false
or distorted reports likely to injure friendly relations between
States,
Con.ritltring, however, that it is not at present practicable to
institute, on the international level, a procedure for verifying
the accuracy of a report which might lead to the imposition of
penalties for the publication of false or distorted reports,
Con.ritltring, moreover, that to prevent the publication of
reports of this nature or to reduce their pernicious effects,
it is above all necessary to promote a wide circulation of news
and to heighten tlte sense of responsibility of those regularly
engaged in the dissemination of news,
Considering that an effective means to these ends is to give
States directly affected by a report, which they consider false
or distorted and which is disseminated by an information
agency, the possibility of securing commensurate publicity for
their corrections,
Considering that the legislation of certain States does not
provide for a right of correction of which foreign governments
may avail themselves, and that it is therefore desirable to
institute such a right on the international level, and
Ha'll1ttg rt.rolv,tl to conclude a Convention for these purposes,
H a'Vt a{lrrttl as follows :
AlmCLE I
For the purposes of the present Convention:
1. "News dispatch" means news material transmitted in
writing or by means of telecommunications, in the form customarily employed by information agencies in transmitting
such news material, before publication, to newspapers, news
periodicals and broadcasting organizationL
2. "Information agency" means a P_reu, broadcasting, film,
television or facsimile organization, public or private, resalarly engaged in the collection and dissemination of news material, created and organized under the laws and regu1atiom
of the Contracting State in which the central organization ii
domiciled and which, in each Contracting State where it operates, functions under the laws and regulations of that State.
3. "Correspondent" mean• a national of a Contractinr State
or an individual employed by an information agency of a
Contracting State, who in either case is regularly engqed in
the collection and the reporting of news material, and who
when outside his State is identified as a correspondent by a
valid passport or by a similar document internationally acceptable.

Alma.a II
1. Recognizing that the professional responsibility of correspondents and information agencies requires them to report
facts without discrimination and in their proper context and
thereby to promote respect for human rights and fundamental

Reeolution• adopted on reporte of the Third Committee
freedoms, to further international understanding and co-operation and to contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security,
Considering also that, as a matter of professional ethics,
all correspondents and information agencies should, in the
case of news dispatches transmitted or published by them
and which have been demonstrated to be false or distorted,
follow the customary practice of transmitting through the
same channels, or of publishing, corrections of such dispatches,
The Contracting States agree that in cases where a Contracting State contends that a news dispatch capable of injuring its relations with other States or its national prestige
or dignity transmitted from one country to another by correspondents or information agencies of a Contracting or nonContracting State and published or disseminated abroad is
false or distorted, it may submit its version of the facts (hereinafter called "communique") to the Contracting States within
whose territories such dispatch has been published or disseminated. A copy of the communique shall be forwarded
at the same time to the correspondent or information agency
concerned to enable that correspondent or information agency
to correct the news dispatch in question.
2. A communique may be issued only with respect to
news dispatches and must be without comment or expression
of opinion. It should not be longer than is necessary to correct the alleged inaccuracy or distortion and must be accompanied by a verbatim text of the dispatch as published or
clisHminated, and by evidence that the dispatch has been
transmitted from abroad by a correspondent or an information
apncy.

23

the communique, together with the dispatch and the comments,
if any, submitted to him by the State complained against.
AllTlcL& V

Any dispute between any two or more Contracting States
concerning the interpretation or application df the present
Convention which is not settled by negotiations shall be referred to the International Court of Justice for decision unless
the Contracting States agree to another mode of settlement.

Arna.& VI
I. The present Convention shall be open for signature to
all States Members of the United Nations, to every State
invited to the United Nations Conference on Freedom of
Information held at Geneva in 1948, and to every other State
which the General Assembly may, by resolution, declare to
be eligible.
2. The present Convention shall be ratified by the States
signatory hereto in conformity with their respective constitutional processes. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Arna.z VII

1. The present Convention shall be open for accession to
the States referred to in article VI (1).
2. Accession shall be effected by the depoait of an instrument of acceuion with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.

Arna.& III

Alma.ii: VIII

1. With the least possible delay and in any case not later
than five clear days from the date of receiving a communique

When any six of the States referred to in article VI (1)
have deposited their instruments of ratification or ac:ceuion,
the present Convention shall come into force among them on
the thirtieth day after the date of the deposit of the sixth
instrument of ratification or accession. It shall come into
force for each State which ratifies ·or accedes after that date
on the thirtieth day after the deposit of its instrument of
ratification or accession.

transmitted in accordance with provisions of article II, a Contracting State, whatever be its OPinion concerning the facts
in question, shall :
(a) Release the communique to the correspondents and
information agencies operating in ita territory through the
channels customarily used for the release of news concerning
international affairs for publication ; and
( l,) Transmit the communique to the headquarters of the
information agency whose correspondent was responsible for
originating the dispatch in question, if such headquarters are
within its territory.
2. In the event that a Contracting State does not discharge
Its obli1ation under this article with respect to the communique of another Contracting State, the latter may accord,
on the buis of reciprocity, similar treatment to a communique
thereafter submitted to it by the defaulting State.
Arrrcu IV
1. If any of the Contracting States to which a communique
has been transmitted in accordance with article II fails to

fulfil, within the prescribed time-limit, the obligations laid
down in article III, the Contracting State exercising the
right of correction may submit the said communique, t01ether
with a verbatim text of the dispatch as published or disseminated, to the Secretary-General of the United Nationa and
shall at the same time notify the State complained against
that it is doing so. The latter State may, within five clear
days after receiving such notice, submit its comments to the
Secretary-General, which ■hall relate only to the allegation that
it has not discharaed its obligations under article III.
2. The Secretary-General shall in any event, within ten
clear days after receiving the communique, give appropriate
publicity through the information channels at his disponl to

Alma.z IX

The provisions of the present Convention shall extend to
or be applicable equally to a contracting metropolitan State
and to all the territories, be they Nm-Self-Governing, Trust
or Colonial Territories, which are being administered or governed by such metropolitan State.
Arncu: X

Any Contracting State may denounce the present Conftn•
tion by notification to the Secretary-General of the United
N11tions. Denunciation shall take effect six months after the
date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.

Arna.a XI
The present Convention shall cease to be in force u from
the date when the denunciation which reduces the number
of parties to less than six becomes effective.

Aana.BXII
1. A request for the revision of the praent Comention
may be made at any time by any Contractinc State by means
of a notification to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
2. The General Asse,ably sba1t decide upon the steps, if
any, to be taken in respect of such req\1elt.

General Assembly-Seventh Session

24
ARTICLE XIU

The Secretary-General c ~ the United Nat ions shall. notif Y
the States referred to in article VI ( l) of the following:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions received in accordance with articles VI and VII ;
(b) The date upon which the present. Convention comes
into force in accordance with article XIII;
(c) Denunciations received in accordance with article X
(1);

(d)
(e)

Abrogation in accordance with article XI;
Notifications received in accordance with article XII.
ARTICLE XIV

1. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, Englis~,
French Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic,
shall b~ deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit a certified copy to each State referred to in article
VI (1).
3. The present Convention shall be registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations on the date of its coming into
force.

631 (VII). Future work of the United Nations in
the field of freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that freedom of information is a fundamental human right and is the touchstone of all the
freedoms to which the lJnited Nations is consecrated,
the promotion of which is one of the fundamefltal
tasks of the United Nations,
Considering that in 1946 the General Assembly initiated' the study in the United Nations of the problems of freedom of information and continues to take
great interest in the said problems and to concern
itself with them directly,
Considering the continuing need for study, inquiry
and investigation with a view to positive action for the
removal of obstacles to the free flow of information,
Considering that the Third Committee has not studied the draft Convention 5 on Freedom of Information
during the sixth and seventh sessions of the General
Assembly,
Noting the decision of the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 442 C (XIV) of 13 June 1952
to appoint, for an experimental period of one year,
and in a personal capacity, a rapporteur on matters
relating to freedom of information,
N otitig that the rapporteur designated by the Council
has already undertaken, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, ~he speciali~ed age~cie~, in particular
the United Nations Educational, Sc1ent1fic and Cultural
Organization, and the professional organizations concerned, both national and international, the preparation,• for submission to the Council in 1953, of a sub-

stantive report covering major contemporary problems
and developments in the field of freedom of information, together with recommendations regarding pra~tical action which might be taken by the Council: m
order to surmount those obstacles to the fuller enJoyment of freedom of information which can be surmounted at the present time,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
the records of the Third Committee on the subject of
freedom of information to the Economic and Social
Council, in order that they may be taken into consideration by the Council during its studies and discussions;
2. Decides to consider further at its eighth session
the problem of promoting and safeguarding f~eedom
of information, including the draft Convention on
Freedom of Information, on the basis of the rapporteur's report to the Economic and Social Council in
1953 and after the Economic and Social Council has
had an opportunity to examine the rapporteur's report;
and accordingly,
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to submit to the General Assembly at its eighth session a
statement of its views and plans regarding future work
in connexion with freedom of information.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.
632 (VII). Sub-Commission on Freedom of In•
formation and of the Press
The General Assembly,
Considering the constructive work done by the SubCommission on Freedom of Information and of the
Press during its five sessions,
Considering that it has not hitherto had an opportunity to express an opinion on the work of the SubCommission,
I. Decides to express its appreciation for the work
which the Sub-Commission on Freedom of Information and of the Press has accomplished;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convey its
thanks for the service which the Sub-Commission has
honourably rendered in discharging its duties.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

633 (VII). Information facilities in underdeveloped regions of the world
The General Assembly,
C onsidenng that it is essential for the proper development of public opinion ii:t ~nder-deyeloped co~ntries that independent domestic mfonnat1on enterpnses
should be given facilities and assistance in order that
they may be enabled to contribute to the spread of information, to the development of national culture and
to international understanding,
Convinced that the development of infdrmation
media contributes greatly to the economic and social
progress of peoples,
1

• See resolution SP (I).
1 See document A/AC.42/7. anaa A.

• See doclllMDt E/2MS,
