UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIb
THIRTY-FIRST
.:

Y-EAR

.
MEETING:
,/-

xP

““’
I

29 MARCH. 1976
i’

NEW YORK
-

_’
,‘,

‘.

.’

CONTENTS
agenda (S/Agenda/ 190 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12007) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

S/PV. 1901
.

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resofutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

.

1901st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 29 March 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas

(Kenya), Mr. Rabetqfika (Madagascar), Mr. Ha&man
(Nigeria),
Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussen
(Somalia), Mr. PetriC (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kamana
(Zambia) took the places reservedfor them at the side
of the Council chamber.

S. BOYA (Benin).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l901)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint
by Kenya, on behalf of the African
Group of States at the United Nations, concerning
the act of aggression committed by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12007).
The meeting

2, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Furthermore,
I should like to inform the Council that
I .have just received letters from the representatives
of the German Democratic
Republic and Poland in
which they ask to be invited, under Article 31 of the
Charter, to participate without the right to vote, in
the Council’s debate. If I hear no objections, I propose,
in accordance with the Council’s practice and with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite
those representatives to participate without the right to
vote in the debate.

of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Neugebauer
(German Democratic
Republic)
and Mr. Jaroszek
(Poland) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker is the representative of Guinea, who
has addressed a second letter to me, in which she
asks to be invited to speak in her capacity as Chairman
of the Special Committee
against Apartheid.
So it
is both as representative of Guinea and as Chairman
of the Special Committee
against Apartheid
that
Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse will be addressing the
Council. I now invite her to take a place at the Council
table and to make her statement.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group
of States at the United Nations, concerning the act
of aggression committed by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007)

4. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSB (Guinea) (interpretation from French): In September 1975, when the attention of the Special Committee against Apartheid was
focused on the incursions of South African troops into
Angola from the Territory of Namibia, which South
Africa illegally occupies, the Committee expressed its
concern at this new act of aggression by the racist
regime of Pretoria. In its statements of 3 December
1975’ and 23 January 1976,* the Committee appealed
to all Governments and organizations to denounce the
aggression of the Pretoria regime, to support the
efforts of the United \Nations and the liberation movement of the Namibian people, in order to put an end to
South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia, and to
implement
the United Nations resolutions
on the
elimination
of apartheid from South Africa.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions adopted at the
1900th meeting, I invite the representative of Angola
to take a place at the Council table and the representatives of Cuba, Egypt, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Luvualu
(Angola) took a place at the Security Council table and
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cisse’ (Guinea),
Mr. Maina
1

5; On the recommendation
of the Special Committee,
the General Assembly, in its resolution 3411 G (XXX)
of 10 December 1975, ‘requested the Security Council

elsewhere, have been the accomplices of or encouraged
racist South African aggression. I will let history be
the judge. But we cannot fail to recall here the fact
that, in the face of South African aggression and the
rush of mercenaries to Angola, we witnessed the
encouraging example of the international
solidarity of
mankind against apartheid and racism. The people
of Angola, in its struggle against South African aggression, received assistance from States and peoples of
several parts of the world and even from the oppressed
people of South Africa, in spite of the terror and
oppression which have been instituted in South Africa
by the Vorster regime.

‘! to consider urgently the‘. situation in South Africa
and-the aggressive actions of the racist regime of
South Africa with a view to adopting effective
measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, to.resolve the grave situation in the
area and, in particular:
“‘(a) To ensure that all Governments implement
fully the arms embargo against South Africa”.
6: I should therefore like, in my capacity as Chairman
of the Special Committee,
to voice our satisfaction
at seeing the Security Council meeting at the request of
the independent States of Africa to examine the South
African aggression against i the People’s Republic of
Angola.

12. While we took measure at the scone of the solidarity with the heroic people of Angola,-we were very
distressed to see certain Governments
adopting
equivocal attitudes to the aggression against Angola
committed by the Pretoria regime. They closed their
eyes to that aggression and attempted to mislead or
divert public opinion by introducing
considerations
having nothing to do with the matter: We also
witnessed, with great regret, the concern of a group of
States with regard to assistance provided to the victims
of that aggression, without those States having said
anything whatever by way of condemnation
of the
aggressors.

7. May I, too, express our great satisfaction at seeing
the Council presided over by the representative of the
People’s Republic of Benin, an African State which,
faithful to the principles
of the Organization
of
African Unity and the United Nations, has firmly
condemned South African aggression and declared its
solidarity with the victims of the racist aggression of
the Pretoria regime.
i

13. May I remind the Council that this is not the first
act of aggression committed by the apartheid regime
of South Africa. The South African regime has already
committed
acts of aggression against Namibia
and
Zimbabwe. The Security Council already had occasion some years ago to examine South African aggression against Zambia.

8. The problem before the’Counci1 today is very clear,
and there can be no doubt. about the facts relating to
it, South African armed forces invaded the territory of
Angola on the eve of that country’s independence,
an independence won after a long and heroic struggle
for freedom. They committed
that aggression from
Namibia, a Territory which South Africa continues to
occupy illegally in violation of United Nations resolutions.
~

14. The criminal policy of apartheid pursued by the
racist regime is inseparable from brutal repression
against the opponents of apartheid in South Africa and
aggression against those who support the South
African liberation movements in accordance with the
decisions of the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity. The Special Committee
against
Apartheid felt it its duty last year to warn the intemational community
about the fact that South Africa’s
growing isolation, particularly
after the collapse of
Portuguese
colonialism,
might push the Pretoria
regime to desperate ventures, unless action was taken
by the international community. The aggression against
Angola, which took place immediately
afterwards,
is a warning to us about the prospects for even more
crises if the international
community
does not
immediately
adopt effective measures. The recent
promulgation
of the Defence Amendment Act by South
Africa, whereby the Vorster regime believes itself
authorized to send armed forces anywhere in the world,
is a clear indication of the imminent danger of inaction
on the part of the Security Council.

9. 1 do not want to go into detail about past events
because the task before the Council today is very-clear
and also because we want to look towards the future
-the future of the whole of southern Africa. However, some events are worth recalling and examining
in order to allow us to formulate a line of action that
could preserve peace, -freedom and human equality in
southern Africa.
.
10. In its resolution 3517 (XXX) of 15 December 1975,
the General Assembly stressed the need for individual
and collective action by Member States in order to put
an end to all forms, of foreign aggression and occupation, apartheid and colonialism and declared that it is
the duty of all States to support and provide assistance.
to the countries, territories and peoples concerned, so
as to restore their national sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and inalienable and fundamental rights.
,.
11. South Afric&n aggression against Angola was a
test of the loyalty of the Member States to this commitment. I shall not mention those who, in Angola and

15. The South African regime was able to commit
aggression against Angola thanks to the military equipment it had been able to obtain from certain countries
2

or to manufacture with their technical assistance. At
the same time, according to reports coming from
South Africa, that aggression revealed certain weaknesses in the South African military arsenal due to the
arms embargo against South Africa imposed by the
Security Council, and that even though the embargo
is only partially applied. In order to avert further acts
of South African aggression against Angola, it is
imperative for the Council to take appropriate measures, as requested by the General Assembly, in order
to ensure the total and full application
of the arms
embargo against South Africa, without any exceptions
or reservations, and the cessation of all military cooperation with the South African regime.

a field for ‘vast strategic maneuvres on the ‘part of
international
imperialism,
which, local reactionary
forces have exploited in order to intensify their under:
mining action and to consolidate
their positions.
Without formally refusing so-called dialogue or socalled detente, the racist regimes of southern Africa
have redoubled their onslaught against independent
Africa and, as the advance guard of the imperialist
Powers in this region, have served as a bridgehead
for the most barbarous acts of aggression against the
new People’s Republic of Angola.
23. A cynical objective of this shameful policy of
international
imperialism was to humiliate the Angolan
people, which had just won its national sovereignty,
to humiliate its liberation party, the MPLA [Popular
Movement for the Liberatioh
Of Angola]; which for
15 years fought against the worst kind of colonialism,
and to humiliate the people’s Government,
which that
party had just given its fighting people, by confiscating
its vast national resources.

16. I should like to make a serious appeal, on behalf
of the Special Committee,
to the Governments
of
France, the United Kingdom and the United States to
assure us of their full and complete co-operation in
this regard.
17. It has become essential for the international community ,also to take preventive measures by providing
all necessary assistance to the Governments
and
peoples of the countries bordering on South Africa to
help them to consolidate
their independence
and
resist South African aggression and pressure. We very
much hope that the recent unanimous decision of the
Security Council [resolution 386 (1976)] calling for
assistance to the People’s Republic of Mozambique
will be applied in practice and extended to other neighbouring countries if that proves necessary.

24. But fortunately,
since’the independence of most
of our countries, we no longer live in the tiines’when
imperialism
could shamelessly pursue its gun-boat
policy. The People’s Republic of Angola, its Government and the party which -freed it, the MPLA, are
today recognized by many countries in Pifricti and
throughout the world. The People’s Republic of Angola
has never been isolated. It will overcome imperialism,
even if the imperialist press attempts to represent as
civil war the aggression of which Angola has been a
victim. We know it is not civil war. But it .does
make it possible to clarify class positions in Angoia
and even in the Organization of African Unity.

18. There are times in history when a fundamental
problem facing humanity is the supreme test of the
integrity
of Governments
and organizations.
Our
generation is now living through such a time, and the
problem is apartheid and racism.

.

25. This situation was clearly revealed in Addis
Ababa, where the representatives
of progressive
Africa were able to outwit the tricks of the imperialists
and inflict upon the enemy camp a scathing political
and diplomatic defeat.

19. In this context, any Government which continues
directly or indirectly to encourage the South African
regime bears a grave responsibility.
The path that
will lead us to peace lies in the total isolation of the
racist tigime and in the effectiveness of international
solidarity with the oppressed peoples of South Africa,
Namibia land Zimbabwe and with the independent
African States of the area.

26. The Council will permit me to take this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the socialist countries that have made it possible for progressive Africa
to record this victory, because, as was statep by’the
supreme leader of the revolution;
Comrade Ahmed
SCkou Tour& in his message to the Afro-Asian People’s 1
Solidarity Organization Conference in Luanda:

20. The Special Committee
against Apartheid very
much hopes that the Security Council will take appropriate measures to provide all necessary assistance to
the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola in
its struggle against the aggression of the racist South
African regime.

“This political and diplomatic victory was made
possible only by the heroic sacrifices made primarily
by the USSR and Cuba in providing the MPLA and,
through it, all the African peoples, with the material,
military
and diplomatic’
assistance that was so
decisive. Although the USSR was doing nothing but
its international socialist duty, we‘thank that country
most sincerely on behalf of xthe people of the
Republic of Guinea and its State Party.” 1

21. In my capacity as representative of the State Party
of Guinea and on behalf of my Government I should
like, with the Council’s permission,
to make some
comments.
22. Because of political
over the last few months,

developments
in the world
southern Africa has become

27. That very well deserved tribute is justified by the
history of the liberation of oppressed peoples, because
3

in their long struggle against colonialism’the African
liberation movements have received the unconditional
support of the progressive forces of ‘the world,
primarily that of the socialist countries. Certain voices
of “African defence” which are at the moment raised
and uttering threats against our allies leave us rather
sceptical, because we can hardly believe in the sincerity
of the sentiments they express. Fortunately, as is
stressed in one of our wise African proverbs, ridicule
is not deadly.

make of them so-called refugees who could be sent
back to Angola, together with other mercenaries
stationed in the area, with a view to further aggression.
The South African hordes, plundering villages on their
way through, took everything that could be carried
with them, cars, agricultural machinery and so on,
and sacked houses and pillaged banks. ‘In his brilliant
statement, the representative of the People’s Republic
of Angola [2900rh meeting] enlightened us about the
damage done by South African troops, whose purpose
was to destroy Angola with all its human and economic
potential.

28. The new independent and sovereign State of
Angola, headed by a progressive revolutionary
Government such as that established by the MPLA,
constitutes a positive and dynamic factor for the
national liberation of the subjugated peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania and, furthermore, an
effective instrument for democratic and revolutionary
progress in all the States ‘of’ that part of Africa.
Hence it is a decisive instrument for the political,
economic, social and cultural liberation of all the
countries of the subregion--and that means the final
and radical elimination of the imperialist grip on the
area.
‘

31. To distract world opinion from the true problem
of aggression in Angola, South Africa took refuge
behind a guarantee for the safeguard of its energy
interests in the region. You will agree with me that no
frontier exists between South Africa and Angola.
Namibia is not South Africa. The dams of Calueque
and Cunene are very important elements in the Angolan
economy, and no error should lead to their destruction. So let us not hear talk of any contract about the
Cunene and Calueque dams.
32. What is true is that the revolutionary people of
Angola’will never be willing to link up with the racist
regime of South Africa to muzzle the valiant population
of Namibia. No agreement can silence the powerful
voices of those thirsting for freedom, dignity, sovereignty and independence.

29. In that struggle, the South African regime is still
our enemy number one. We all know that Mr. Pieter
Botha, Defence Minister of South Africa, has submitted a new Draconian bill to Parliament which, if
adopted, would legalize fascist aggression against
other countries and damp ‘the upsurge of criticism
inside the country. Also, it demonstrates that South
Africa is a military State. We see behind this bill of
Vorster’s an intention to annex the whole African
subcontinent. In Vorster’s view, it would give ‘his
racist regime the right to intervene in any country or
territory from Zanzibar to Cabinda. The clause relating
to invasion specifies that South African troops would
be sent “to prevent or stamp out any armed conflict
outside the Republic of South Africa which, in the view
of the President of the Republic of South Africa,
presents or might present a threat to its security.”
It is already very well known that Vorster was sending
troops and aircraft to Mozambique and Angola in order
to support the Salazar and Caetano regimes there. He
wilfully disregarded the resolutions of the United
Nations and illegally occupied Namibia. And Vorster
was avowedly present in Zimbabwe with the purpose of
maintaining the Ian Smith regime.

33. We are convinced that the international community, through the Security Council, will help the
People’s Republic of Angola recover its goods which
have been stolen or destroyed by South African
troops. The Republic of South Africa, guilty of murder
and killings, must pay dearly, very dearly, to repair
the economic damage it has caused. The South African
regime, in spite of all its wealth, will never be rich
enough to compensate for those lives taken in its
craze for invasion and destruction.
34. The Security Council, we are sure, will take
immediate and appropriate steps to demand compensation from South Africa for the acts of vandalism
committed deliberately to stifle Angola. Once again
Africa will know how to recognize its true friends in
its heroic struggle against Vorster’s racist regime.
35. In conclusion, we wish to repeat to our fighting
brothers in MPLA and to the revolutionary people of
Angola the expression of the unconditional support of
the State Party of Guinea for their just struggle for
liberty, justice and progress.

30. Permit me to stress that the withdrawal of South
African troops from the territory of Angola is very far
from ending the act of aggression committed by South
Africa. Indeed, on 23 October 1975 South African
armed forces invaded Angola and committed bestial
murders and outrageous massacresof women, children
and old people, and, what is more, in the course of
the armed aggression, South Africa destroyed
hundreds &bridges, roads, airports and radio stations.
In addition to massacring the civilian population, the
barbarous troops did not hesitate to kill cattle. They
drove survivors to the Namibian frontier in order to

36. The PRESIDENT (interprerufion from French):
I now invite the representative of Zambia to take a
place at the Council table and to address the Council.
37. Mr. KAMANA (Zambia): Mr. President, I had the
privilege and great pleasure of addressing the Security
Council under your able presidency only a few days
4

.

mitted at Iall, against an innocent newly independent
country. Secondly, it is serious because it was committed from Namibia, an international Territory
illegally occupied by South Africa. ‘Thirdly, it is
serious because the motive of South Africa was
clearly to subject the people of Namibia and Azania
to perpetual white minority racist domination, oppression and economic exploitation.

ago. The Council was then considering the question
of international assistance to the People’s Republic of
Mozambique, a victim of acts of aggression committed
by the illegal racist minority regime of Southern
Rhodesia and a principled and faithful Member of the
United Nations, one which decided to apply full
economic sanctions against the rebel colony. It is
again my privilege and pleasure to address the Council under your presidency. The-Council is again meeting
to consider aggression committed by yet another racist
and minority regime against an independent African
country. This time it is considering South African
aggression against Angola.

43. We have now been given to understand that
South Africa has withdrawn its forces of aggression
from Angola. Someone appears to have succeeded in
imparting to the South African regime what ought to
have been a matter of sheer common sense, namely,
the information that it has no right at all to be in
Angola. We note, however, and indeed it is not surprising, that true to its unrepentant self and its shameless’behaviour, the South African regime in Pretoria
is justifying its withdrawal from Angola on the pretext
that it has received certain assurances from Luanda.

38. That the Security Council should meet twice
within one month to consider acts of aggression committed against independent African States by the racist
and minority regimes of southern Africa is no coincidence. It is a clear indication of the serious threat to
peace and security in southern Africa, and indeed to
international peace and. security, that the continued
existence of white racist and minority regimes in the
region represents. These acts of aggression, moreover, demonstrate the blind and misguided determination of the racist and minority regimes to maintain,
at all costs, the starus quo in southern Africa.

44.. The statement of the representative of Angola
last Friday [ibid.] was clear and categorical in’regrird
to the status of the Cunane hydroelectric plant. He
made it clear that it was never the intention of his
Government to tamper with the project or to disturb
its normal functioning to the disadvantage of the people
of Namibia. In this regard, he pointed out that Angola
has a common border not with South Africa but with
Namibia, a Territory under South African illegal
occupation. He stressed that in the circumstances,
therefore, his Government could not legally enter into
any agreement with South Africa which affected
Namibia.

39. The regimes in Pretoria and Salisbury have just
awakened to a new reality. As I had occasion to stress
at the solemn meeting of the Special Committee against
Apartheid in observance of the International Day for
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the regimes
in Salisbury and Pretoria can no longer barricade
themselves behind the comfort of buffer ‘zones of
former Portuguese colonies. They can now sense their
own doom; for the independence of Mozambique and
Angola, right at their doorsteps, has more than ever
before exposed them to an onslaught from the liberation movements of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania.

45. It is clear from the foregoing that the South
African statement on the withdrawal of its forces from
Angola was couched in such language as to save
face. This purpose was probably achieved inside South
Africa, but internationally, the statement must be
exposed for what it really is: yet another attempt at
deception by the South African regime and an indication as to the extent South Africa is prepared to go to
in perpetuating its illegal occupation of Namibia. As
pointed out by the Chairman of the African Group in
his statement last Friday [ibid.], any agreement
regarding Namibia can only be made with the United
Nations Council for Namibia, the legal Administering
Authority of the Territory. An agreement between
South Africa and any country concerning Namibia
would clearly be illegal.

40. The acts of aggression they are perpetrating
against neighbouring independent African States are a
panic-stricken reaction characteristic of diehards.
Rather than accept the inevitable change honourabiy,
having read the writing on the wall, they have chosen
to continue living in a fool’s paradise, hoping that, by
some miracle, the tide can be halted or be made to
alter its course. This indeed is choosing to perish, for
surely the tide must reach them soon.
41. It is in the light of the foregoing that South African
aggression against Angola must be understood. It had
no other purpose than to attempt the impossible; it
was intended to stifle the wave of nationalism in
Namibia and in South Africa itself. There can be
absolutely no rational justification for it. It simply was
a repugnant and outrageous act.

46. As was made clear by the representative of
Angola in his statement, matters do not end with South
Africa’s withdrawal from that young country. The
Security Council must take full account of the .effect
of South African intervention in Angola, that is, the
damage caused both in human and material terms.
As this is obviously immense, the Council must
condemn South Africa in the strongest possible terms
for the aggression it committed and demand of it full
respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity ‘of Angola.

42. Any form of aggression is inadmissible and must
naturally be treated as a serious matter. But South
African aggression against Angola is serious in three
distinct ways. First, it is serious in that it was com5

47. South African troops may have withdrawn from
Angola, but have they gone to South Africa? There is
silence from the Pretoria regime on this. I wish to stress
here that Namibia is not part of South Africa. It is an
international
Territory South Africa has persisted in
occupying illegally in spite of numerous resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly
demanding its withdrawal. In the view of my delegation, therefore, it will be important for the Council
expressly to require South Africa to withdraw from
Angola, not into Namibia, but into South Africa itself.
We have devoted many years to seeking South African
withdrawal from Namibia. We are determined that this
objective be realized immediately
and that the people
of Namibia, who have suffered for so long, be enabled
to exercise their right to self-determination
and independence. Withdrawal of South African forces from
Angola into Namibia would only timpound
the problem of Namibia, and surely South Africa cannot be
exonerated, since it is under obligation to withdraw
from Namibia.

52. I shall try to be brief, since I do not have much
to add to the excellent statement made here last Friday
by Ambassador Luvualu and to what has been spelled
out by the previous speakers.
53. My delegation hopes that the debate on the item
on the agenda will deal only with the subject under
consideration,
namely,
South African aggression
against Angola, out of respect for the ardent wish of
the members of the Organization of African Unity and
to work towards a constructive draft resolution that
can be adopted unanimously.
54. True to the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, and to its historical traditions
and heritage in supporting all African brother countries and African
liberation
movements,
Egypt
believes that the struggle of the Government and people
of the People’s Republic of Angola is an integral part
of its own struggle. That is why Egypt recognized the
independence of Angola and recognized the Govemment of the People’s Republic of Angola under the
wise leadership of Mr. Agostinho Neto, President of
the Republic, as the legitimate authority representing
the people of Angola, a recognition which also falls
within the context of the principle of non-intervention
into the internal affairs of other States.

48. I should like to reiterate here Zambia’s full
solidarity with the independent people of Angola and
with the oppressed people of Namibia and Azania.
The South West Africa People’s Organization,
the
African National
Congress and the Pan Africa&t
Congress of Azania are gallantly waging a legitimate
struggle for the liberation of their countries. We shall.
forever stand together with them. The defeat of the
Portuguese colonialists in Africa must be a lesson for
the apartheid
rkgime of South Africa, whose fate
cannot be different. The independence of Angola and
Mozambique
in southern Africa presents new opportunities for the liberation struggle, and the victories
of their people must surely be a source of great
encouragement
to the freedom fighters of Namibia
and Azania.

55. My delegation is longing to see Angola occupy the
seat reserved for it as an active Member of the United
Nations very soon, just as it has occupied its welldeserved seat among its African sister countries in
the Organization
of African Unity. I said “its welldeserved seat” because the independence of Angola
and its appearance on the African and international
scene was and is a logical historical necessity which
should not be hindered by any obstacles.
56. With
the collapse
of the Lisbon-PretoriaSalisbury axis, racism was doomed to come face to
face with revolutionary
Africa. The old Portuguese
buffer ‘zones having collapsed, the forces of freedom
are at the very doorstep of the racists in Southern
Rhodesia and in South Africa itself. This is the main
reason why South Africa embarked on its most daring
adventure of sending an invading force into Angola.
It was frightened at the idea of the emergence of a
truly nationalist Government in Angola which insists
on all the sovereign rights of its people to control their
national resources on land and at sea.

49. Finally, let me say that in my short statement
I have confined myself to the question of South African
aggression against Angola, for that is the only item on
the Council’s agenda.
50. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
51. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): I should like,
in the name of the Government
of Egypt, to express
once again, through Ambassador Pascal Luvualu of the
People’s Republic of Angola, our highest esteem and
warmest congratulations
to the Government
and
people of the People’s Republic
of Angola, the
brotherly young African nation which recently joined
the group of free independent States after a period of
suffering and hardship and a long heroic struggle
against colonialism,
a struggle which has been finally
crowned by a victory to which history will dedicate
brilliant pages of glory and honour.

57. We all know that usually the period which follows
the accession to independence
of any new State
requires from its Government
and its people, and
also from the international
community,
as a whole,
positive
and intensive
efforts towards stability,
construction
and development,
especially if independence is gained after a large-scale civil war
preceded by a lengthy period of colonialism,
as is the
case in Angola. But in the case of Angola there is
another factor to which all previous speakers have
6

withdrawing, it has to do so immediately
and unconditionally,: in accordance with United Nations resolutions, not .only from occupied Angolan territory but
also from Namibia.

referred and which not only represents an obstacle
to stability and development but is also a cause of the
perturbation
of peace and security in Angola, in all
Africa and in the world as a whole. I mean the intolerable aggression by the troops of the racist and fascist
regime of South Africa against Angola. I need not
repeat the expose of Ambassador
Ltivualu in this
regard.

63. With regard to assurances relating to the Calueque
dam, my delegation
appreciates
what has been
announced here by Ambassador Luvualu, and we are
sure that such assurances should be given by the
Government
of the People’s Republic of Angola to
the Namibian
people through the United Nations
Council for Namibia.

58. As an African country, Egypt considers this
aggression against Angola by South Africa as directed
against Egypt, and in accordance with the resolution
on Angola adopted by the Organization
of African
Unity at its twenty-sixth regular session last February
at Addis Ababa, Egypt considers it its duty to contribute effectively
to the defence of the national
independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the People’s. Republic of Angola.

64. Egypt believes that the resolution which, it is
hoped, will be unanimously
adopted by this body
should be clear and strict on the following:
first,
condemning South Africa for its unspeakable aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola and the
occupation of part of its national territory; secondly,
demanding
South Africa’s immediate
unconditional
withdrawal not only from Angola but also from Namibia; thirdly, demanding that South Africa respect the
independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the People’s Republic ‘of ,Angola; fourthly, requesting
South Africa to pay to the People’s Republic of
Angola indemnities
in .compensation
for the human
and economic injury which resulted from its illegal
occupation
of Angolan; territory;
fifthly, urging all
States to co-operate fully .with the Government of the
People’s Republic of Angola in order to defend its
independence, territorial integrity and national sovereignty; and, sixthly, requesting all Member States to
lend, individually and collectively, political, economic,
technical and material assistance to the newly independent State.

59. For manv years EavDt has exmessed its utmost
concern and Garm at theiliegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa and the launching by that racist regime
of large-scale military operations against the Namibian
freedom fighters. Since August 1975, Egypt has
expressed its utmost concern at the increasing South
African military intervention
in Angola. The South
African intervention in Angola was not only an attempt
at consolidating its racist policies but also a prelude to
the extension of its pernicious policies of apartheid,
exploitation
and oppression over southern Africa, as
bluntly announced by the South African Minister of
Defence.
60. As a member of the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Egypt condemned
and will continue to
condemn South Africa’s continued illegal occupation
of and military build-up in Namibia and also the racist
regime’s direct aggression launched through Namibia
against the newly independent State of Angola.

65. I shall end my statement by repeating
before this body on 16 March:

what I said

“ . . . the battle for liberating southern Africa from
the racist regime has begun, and there will be no
turning back. The struggle may be long and bitter,
but history has assured us that victory is certain.”

61. The racist Government
in South Africa should
realize that the South African presence in Angola and
Namibia is illegal and that it has no right whatsoever
to occupy either a part of independent Angolan territory or Namibia,
which is under the administration
of the United Nations.

[1890th meeting,

para.

The meeting

62. The Government
of Egypt regards with great
doubt and astonishment
Mr.- Vorster’s
statement
regarding the withdrawal of South African troops from
Angolan territory. If South Africa has the intention of

140.1
rose at 12.20 p.m.
:
Notes’

’ Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session,
Supplement No. 22, vol. I, para. 33.
2 Ibid., para. 34.

i

. ..
,

7

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS &ES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences d&ositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous & : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gen&e..
KAIC

HOJIY’IHTb

Tki3Aaum
3xxax
camera

HauaR,

HB/JAHHZI

OPI-AHEI

3AnLIII

OB’bEASfiIEHHhIX

HAI&Hli

Opramisasm
H are?xTCTBax

CnYbeAmietmbm
Has&i
~02~~0
xynwrb
B xcmixmblx
maraao acex
pafiOHaX
xupa.
HaBOAHTe
CnpaBKH
06 HSAaHHRX
B
KRW)KBOMMarazwme
HIIH nnmHTe no anpecy : OpraHn3aqHsi OtVbenmienHbrx
Cexq~fl no nponaxce HSAaHHR. Hbm-Fiopa
WIN %zHeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

8360801-August

1984-2,200
