UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
TH

-

IRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

248Jd

MEETING:

NEW

.

RECORDS

24 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2483)

. ... .. ... .. ... ... .. ... ... .. ... ... ...

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a........

1
1

The: !situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);

(4

Ku-ther report of the Secretary-General concermng the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

::

WPV.2483
_
_’
.‘,-,

_

,’

_

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R&oIutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2483rd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,

24 October

1983, at 10.30 a.m.
__

President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH

(Jordan).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interoretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of the
Council to take places at the Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitQtion of the President, Mr. hsQkQ (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2483)
1. Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.

of the agenda

2. tie situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed to. the President. of the
Security Council (S/l 6048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (s/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/15943)
The meeting was called to order at II.30

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decisions taken at the 2481st and
2482nd meetings, I invite the representatives of Angola,
Botswana, Canada, Cuba, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic
of Germany, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South Africa, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

a.m.

At the invit&ion of the President, Mr, de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Pelletier (Canada)),
Mr. ROQ KoUn (Cuba), Mr. Wolde (Ethiopia), Mr. van Well
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr.
Treiki (Zibyan Arab Januzhiriya). Mr. dos SQntos (Mozumbique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone),
Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Rupia (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mrs. Coronel de Rodriguez (Venezuekz), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kunda (Zambia)
took the places reservedfor them Qt the side of the Council
chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda WQSadopted
The situation in Namibia:
(Q) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/16048);
(4 Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943)

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Algeria,
the German Democratic Republic, Kenya, Kuwait, Mexico, Sri Lanka and Tunisia in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the ite? on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

(interpretation from Arabic): In
1. The PRESIDENT
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the representative of Senegal to take a place at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S~rr6 (Senegal)
took Q place at the Council table.
I

I

At the. invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria)),
Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Wabuge
(Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Mtioz Ledo (Mexice), Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka) and Mr. Slim (Tunisia) took
the pIaces reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

before his visit that South Africa only accepted resolutions
435 (1978) and 532 (1983) as the basis for further discussion, and that it was prepared, without prejudice to its
position on other regional issues, to discuss the two
remaining outstanding issues relating to the electoral system and 2:: United Nations Transition Assistance Group
(UNTAG j.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 21 October from the Acting
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
which .reads as follows:

12. We are now informed by the Secretary-General mat,
during hi consultations, agreement was reached with the
South African Government on those two outstanding
issues. Thus, the last remaining hurdles were cleared. But,
in characteristic fashion, the South African Government
now says that in spite of the resolution of all outstanding
issues pertinent to resolution 435 (1978), further progress
on the implementation of the Namibia independence plan
on the basis of resolution 435 (1978) is no longer possible
without the prior withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola. ‘It is South Africa’s precondition
which now
makes it impossible for the Secretary-General to fulfil his
mandate on the implementation of the Namibia indepcndence plan.

“I have the honour to request the Council to permit
me, on behalf of the Special Committee against Apartheid, to participate, under the provisions of rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, in the
Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’.”
7. On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice,
therefore, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Acting Chairman of the Special Committee against
Apartheid.

13. Quite rightly, the Secretary&neral
promptly rejected
the injection of this extraneous issue as not only outside
the scope of his own mandate, but of resolution 435 (1978)
as well. We are not surprised at South Africa’s injection of
a totally irrelevant issue into the resolution of the Namibian question. Year after year, South Africa has found
one pretext or another for obstructing the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). Since 1978 it has consistently
reneged on its commitments. Its record on Namibia is one
of broken promises. The plain truth is that South Africa
never had, and does not now have, any intention of cooperating with the United Nations in the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). Any claim to the contrary is false
and will not stand the test of South Africa’s appalling
record of broken promises on the Namibian question.
After wringing concession after concession from all the
parties concerned, including the Security Council, the
racist regime of South Africa has simply asked for more
concessions. First, it was the so-called impartiality of the
United Nations; then South Africa later demanded the
participation of the so-called internal parties; then it raised
di!Eculties regarding the composition of UNTAG and the
electoral system. Now, after agreement has been reached
on all those issues, South Africa is demanding a further
concession-this time, one that it knows is well outside the
scope of resolution 435 (1978), and that it is not within the
power of either the Council or the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO), to give.

It was so decided
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
frst speaker is the representative of Nigeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

_:
;::.::::

9. Mr. FAFOWORA
(Nigeria): First, I have much pleasure in extending to you, Sir, my delegation’s warmest
felicitations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of October. We also join the preceding speakers in expressing our deep gratitude to your
predecessor for so skilfully and ably,guiding the deliberations of the Council in September.
IO. My delegation has read with great care and interest
the report of the Secretary-General [S/15944 on his visit
to South Africa and his contacts there. It was a courageous
mission for which we are extremely grateful to him. The
Secretary-General’s visit, it may be recalled, was undertaken at the request of the Council in its resolution 532
(1983) which also required South Africa to make a firm
commitment regarding its readiness to comply with Council resolution 435 (1978) on Namibia’s independence.

:_
_-:
:__-_”
.
.-_-_
_-_-_
-_-_
:-k.-.
::_-_-_-.
:;:I:‘

::.
.‘-‘.:,
. . -.

14. The response of the Council to this arrogant demand
should be swift and clear: it should be rejected outright as
a further pretext to obstruct Namibia’s independence. The
demand represents a serious affront to the authority of the
Council. It is time for the Council to call South Africa’s
bluff by invoking punitive measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. Failure by the Council
to act swiftly by telling South Africa that enough is enough
will only encourage the racist regime of South Africa to
persist in its intransigence.

11. But from the outset, even before he went to South
Africa, it will be seen from the Secretary-General’s report
that the South African Government tried desperately to
introduce extraneous and irrelevant issues to the primary
question of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
Nor was South Africa willing to give the necessary assurantes regarding its fm commitment and readiness to
comply with that resolution. Instead, representatives of the
South African Government told the Secretary-General
2

15. I-want to say, with all due sense of responsibility, that
‘it is not simply the Government of South Africa that is on
trial here today; it is the Security Council as well, for the
people of Namibia and the entire international community
are waiting impatiently to see whether the Council will
now act decisively in defence of its own decisions and
responsibilities. Namibia has remained on the agenda of
the Council for nearly four decades, during which the
people of Namibia have looked in vain for justice and for
exercise of their inherent right to self-determination. Since
the official revocation of its Mandate in 1966, South Africa
has continued to maintain control over Namibia, in
defiance of the people of Namibia, the United Nations, the
Security Council, the International Court of Justice and
world opinion. In that year, the United Nations assumed
the responsibility of defending the rights and interests of
Namibia and its people. Yet the United Nations has been
unable to fulfil this responsibility, to apply the principle of
selfdetermination
to Namibia and to end South Africa’s
illegal occupation of the Territory.

million people. .Unfortunately, this ,rather clear objective
has become entangled in a web of false solutions and
extraneous issues, while the Namibian people continue to
suffer terribly. Some 100,000 Namibians, or 10 per cent of
the total population of the Territory, have been forced into
exile by the brutal repression of the racist South African
authorities.
20. What has the response of the Council been to South
Africa’s arrogant defiance of its authority? Every effort by
the Council to act decisively against the racist regime of
South Africa has been repeatedly blocked by some of its
own members. In 1974, a resolution to expel South Africa
from the United Nations for its failure to cooperate with
the United Nations was defeated by the triple veto of some
permanent members of the Council. The following year, a
resolution for a mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa was again blocked by the same Powers. In 1976,
another sanctions resolution was vetoed by the three Powers. The failure of the Council to act decisively has only
served as an encouragement to South Africa in its persistent
refusal to cooperate with the United Nations over Namibia. Persistent obstructions by some permanent members
of the Council to the application of international pressure
and sanctions against South Africa have strengthened the
racist regime’s resolve to pursue an internal settlement in
Namibia, contrary to the provisions of Council resolution
435 (1978).

16. Over the years, the United Nations has tried in various ways to get South Africa to accept a Namibia settlement plan through negotiations. But, using one pretext
after the other, the racist regime .has obstructed all such
efforts to, secure Namibia’s independence by peaceful
means. Council decisions and General Assembly resolutions on Namibia have been flouted flagrantly and with
complete impunity by the racist regime. South Africa’s
open defiance of the decisions of the Council has inflicted
serious and perhaps irreparable damage to the moral
authority and prestige of this body. The persistent refusal
of the Government of South Africa to respect the decisions
of the Council is not a matter to be treated lightly, for it
touches on the whole foundation of the United Nations as
the primary instrument for the maintenance of intemational peace and security. .

21. It is sometimes conveniently forgotten that resolution
435 (1978) was itself the result of intensive negotiations
initiated by the Western contact group with South Africa,
SWAP0 and the front-line States. But since then, South
Africa has proved only its commitment to avoiding implementation of that resolution at all costs while proceeding
with its efforts to impose an internal solution.
22. In May 1978, the South African army and air force
attacked a SWAP0 refugee camp at Cassinga, in Angola,
killing some 700 people, mostly women and children, and
injuring another 1,500. That action was clearly intended to
prevent SWAP0 from accepting the settlement plan. But in
July 1978, despite its reservations, SWAP0 accepted the
settlement plan. South Africa immediately raised new
objections about the size of the military component of
UNTAG, the powers of the United Nations police and the
dates for the elections. In December 1978, despite the objections of the United Nations, South Africa held its internal
elections in Namibia. Yet the failure of the Western initiative and the attempted internal solution still did not persuade the contact group to put pressure on South Africa
through the imposition of sanctions. There was little or no
response from the Western Five to South Africa’s obstinacy. It was the crucial failure of the Western Five to
contemplate sanctions seriously that encouraged South
Africa in its delaying tactics. From that point on, they lost
the only real leverage they had in getting South Africa to
co-operate.

17. The story of Namibia is a tragedy not only for the
people of Namibia but also for people of conscience
throughout the world. It is the tragic story of a peaceful
but proud people who have been subdued by force and
subjected to institutionalized racism. It is the story of a
racist colonial Power that has failed to live up to its trust
and to accepted norms of international law and behaviour.
18. It is perhaps necessary to bring to the attention of the
Council the magnitude of the suffering that racist South
Africa’s rule has inflicted on the Namibian people. The
system of apartheid transplanted to Namibia not only
represses the legitimate rights of the people to political
participation, freedom from detention without trial and
from summary execution, and their inherent right to participate fully in the life of their country; it also creates economic and social disparities which make the indigenous
people of Namibia among the poorest in the world.
19. The story of Namibia therefore must focus on the
legitimate rights of its people. It is not simply the tragic
story of diplomatic manoeuvrings and protracted negotiations. Since the termination in 1966 of South Africa’s legal
control over Namibia, the Territory’s future has presented
a relatively clear question of self-determination for its one

23. In the intervening period all collective efforts by the
Council, the contact group, the front-line States and
SWAPO, and, more recently, by the Secretary-General
himself, to achieve an agreement on implementation
of
3

. .
:\.
:.
.*.
:\

respiution 435 (1978) have met with continued objections
from South Africa. Yet even resolution 435 (1978) represented a major conces& to South A?&-by weakening
most of the provisions of Council resolution 385 (1976),
which first established the mechanism for the independence of Namibia. It was a significant departure in several
important respects. None the less, South Africa demanded
more concessions. Initially its objection was focused on the
presence of SWAP0 bases in neighbouring countries. A
proposal for a SO-kilometre-wide demilitarized zone along
Namibia’s borders made by the late President Neto of
Angola removed that particular obstacle temporarily.
South Africa then demanded that the socalled internal
parties in Namibia receive equal recognition and an active
role in the negotiations. Next, South Africa demanded an
end to all United Nations financial contributions to
SWAP0 and Namibia programmes.

more than a de facto alliance between the United States and
South Africa. Other evidence of growing rapprochement
between the two countries includes: expansion of United
States military ties with South Africa; permission for South
Africa to establish more consulates in the United States;
changing of export controls to permit sales to South African
military and police; and training of South African nuclear
technicians at United States Government facilities.
27. The front-line States and Nigeria have worked in
good faith with the contact group in the expectation and
hope that their initiatives would continue to be balanced,
But recent events have been most disappointing to us and
call into serious question the utility of the contact group,
for its uneven diplomacy is certainly detrimental to the
attainment of a negotiated settlement in Namibia.

24. Later, South Africa suggested that the UNITA
(National Union for the Total Independence of Angola)
bandits, being openly funded by South Africa, be included
itithe negotiating process. Throughout all these South African stalling tactics, the United States and some other
members of the contact group defended their opposition to
sanctions against Pretoria by arguing that its objections
could be overcome through negotiations. However, it was
usually SWAPO, and not South Africa, that made concessions on several of these issues, in hopes of actually moving
forward on implementation.
South Africa consistently
found new issues to raise as obstacles to the settlement plan,
until the pre-implementation
meeting at Geneva, in January 1981, when South Africa, after assailing what it alleged
to be the partiality of the United Nations, walked out,
refusing to sign even a declaration of intent. South Africa’s
disgraceful performance at Geneva was not surprising to
many who had rightly anticipated another dilatory tactic by
Pretoria to impede Council resolution 435 (1978).

28. In the summer of 1982, formal negotiations between
the contact group and the front-line States led to an agreement on virtually all outstanding issues. All that remained
was for South Africa to choose between the two electoral
systems. A letter was in fact prepared that would call on
the Council to pass an enabling resolution to begin implementation. But that letter was never sent. Instead, we were
confronted by a new demand, orchestrated by both the
United States and South Africa, that implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978) could not begin unless the Cubans
first withdrew from Angola-a
demand that is now also
being made to the Secretary-General by South Africa.
29. It is not necessary to identify the paternal origins of
this gratuitous demand,as this does not alter its unacceptability. The Government of South Africa has simply
embraced it as the most recent in a long list of objections
to implementation.
This issue of linkage or parallelism is
neither part of resolution 435 (1978) nor within the mandate of either the contact group or the front-line States in
negotiating the United Nations settlement plan. Angola
has stated consistently that the Cuban forces would, be
withdrawn once Namibia. became independent and the
South African threat to its security was removed. On 4
February 1982, Angola and Cuba- issued a joint communique that Cuban forces would withdraw as soon as South
Africa withdrew its troops from Angola. The communique
further recalled that the Cubans were first invited to
Angola after South African troops and mercenaries
invaded Angola. Underscoring Angola’s security concerns
was the third massive invasion in August 1982, deep into
Angolan territory, by South African forces and the continued occupation of southern Angola by South Africa.
Instead of meeting Angola’s security concerns, a despicable attempt is being made by allies of the racist regime to
portray Angola as the uncompromising
party and an
obstacle to Namibia’s independence. They now seek to
place on Luanda the responsibihty for the failure to impiement resolution 435 (1978), while seeking to legitimize the
South African occupation of Angola.

25. Since 1981 nothing positive has happened to give
anyone a glimmer of hope that South Africa will ever
co-operate with the United Nations without punitive measures being taken against it. In the intervening period, the
contact group has sought to prod South Africa to move
forward by accommodating it, through concession after
concession. It is this new policy that has become known as
“constructive engagement”, which maintains erroneously
that it would be far easier to exercise influence on South
Africa to co-operate on Namibia by building a closer
friendship with the white minority regime. This is the logic
of the close amity between the United States and South
Africa, a situation which has been denounced by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) as an extremely
dangerous development.
26. There is no longer any doubt or question about the
abject failure of the policy of constructive engagement. It
has done nothing to restrain South Africa. Rather, it has
encouraged South Africa to be even more intransigent than
ever before. In 1981, following the massive invasion of
Angola by South Africa, the United States cast the only veto
against a mild Council resolution condemning the invasion.
It instead blamed SWAP0 and Angola for the South African raid. The policy of constructive engagement is nothing

39. The Cuban issue is simply a red herring to buy some
more time for the.racist South African regime. It is simply
being proposed as a diplomatic curtain behind which
4

South Africa can hide to deflect international dforts to
secure Namibia’s independence. The Council must reject
this gratuitious and arrogant demand as completely unjustified and extraneous to resolution 435 (1978). It must
refuse to legitimize this objection, by actively contemplating sanctions against the racist regime in the event of its
continued intransigence. The Council must prove its commitment to the independence of Namibia by finally and
firmly rejecting the linkage with the withdrawal of Cuban
forces.

consensus of nations, namely, the independence of Namibia in full sovereignty and complete territorial integrity.
36. The Secretary-General, on the one hand, and
SWAPO, on the other, have diligently carried out the tasks
assigned to them. The front-line countries have given the
Secretary-General their support with the exemplary
resolve to do everything in their power to assist the United
Nations in carrying out its work of dccolonization.

31. In 1935, when Fascist Italv invaded Abvssinia.
Emperor Hailk Selassie’s plea to the League of Natibns for
action was treated lightly. It was one of the events that led
to the demise of the League and to the Second World War.
Nearly half a century later, the Namibian people now
make a similar plea to the Council for action against an
aggressor. If it fails to act, it will have lost all its moral
authority. It will be a tragic omission, the full consequences of which may not be foreseen today. The Council must
not repeat the mistake of 1935.

37. Only South Africa continues to put forward new pretexts to perpetuate its occupation of Namibia. First, there
was a so-tailed partiality on the part of the United
Nations; then there was an undesirable voting procedure.
Today, there is a supposed linkage between the principle of
Namibian independence and the attempted limiting of the
rights and sovereignty of a neighbouring State. It would be
utterly ridiculous were it not so serious. What is even more
serious is that the representative of Pretoria stated, in this
very chamber a few days ago, that the position of his
Government was irrevocable and that it enjoyed support
within the international community.

32. The PRESIDENT
(intetpretafion from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

38. Drawing a lesson from the experience of two world
wars, Arnold Toynbee wrote in 1950:
“What the situation manifestly demands is a voluntary
association of the peace-loving peoples of the world in
sufficient force and cohesion to be unassailable by any
who reject their pact of collective security or who break
itr’.2

33. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, your accession to the presidency of
the Council affords me the pleasure of addressing to the
representative of a fraternal country the warmest congratulations of the Algerian delegation and to tell you, an experienced and able colleague, that I am convinced that you
will guide the work of the Council in a calm and skilful
manner. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana.

39. Indeed, that minimum cohesion is lacking, since
South Africa is able to come here to defy our institution,
Allowing the process of the decolonization of Namibia to
be worked out through the distorting prism of East-West
relations and permitting it to be viewed within the framework of conflicting power politics deals a severe blow to
the collective effort towards Namibian independence that
the community
of nations has organized with faith,
patience and perseverance.

34. The impasse with respect to the question of Namibia
that some insist on describing with a bitter feeling of impotence is not really an impasse at all. An impasse is a dead
end. That is what South Africa, which has created that
situation, would have us believe in order that it can perpetuate its domination over Namibia. The Secretary-General,
to whom we express once again our appreciation for his
unceasing efforts pursuant to the mandate entrusted to
him by resolution 532 (1983), .has correctly assigned
responsibility in the conclusion to his report, in which he
stated that “the position of South Africa regarding the
issue of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola as a
precondition
for the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) still makes it impossible to launch the United
Nations plan.” [Z&i., para. 2.5.1

40. Hence the enormous responsibilities before history
that have been assumed by those who, by their role, their
influence and their position in the contact group, have a
particular duty to participate in collective action to see that
in Namibia force may give way before legality and justice
be meted out in the struggle for freedom.
41. This situation has fuelled Pretoria’s intransigence and
abetted it in its defiance. It furnishes it with reasons for
persisting in its rejections and excesses.Clearly, the responsibility of linking the decolonization of a Territory, upon
which the international community is in unanimous agreement, with the national sovereignty of another State is a
heavy one. The establishment of such a linkage distorts all
the enshrined and accepted facts with regard to the question of Namibia. It is a dangerous change of course. It is
illegitimate, groundless and unnatural.

35. The question, therefore, is how to compel South
Africa to implement the United Nations plan. It will soon
be nearly 20 years-it was in 1966, to be precise-since the
General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate
over Namibia. It will soon be nearly 10 years since the
International
Court of Justice declared South Africa’s
occupation of Namibia to be illegal.* It was exactly five
years ago that the Council, this important United Nations
body, adopted resolution 435 (1978) that clearly paved the
way for the attainment of the objective hallowed by the

42. Have we forgotten or is there an attempt to conceal
the fact that the real problem is the illegal occupation of
Namibia by force, and that in order to continue that occu5

’

_ .- _
,‘.’
‘_

an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United
Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures
necessary to maintain international peace and security.”

pation, on the one hand, and to subjugate African countries, on the other, South Africa itself brought war to
neighbouring countries as soon as its ally, Portuguese colonialism, was forced to withdraw? Only a few weeks after
the liberation of Angola’, in October 1974, South African
troops penetrated into Angolan territory and, on 11
November 1975, when the Central Committee of the
Movement0 Popular de Liberta$o de Angola (MPLA)
proclaimed the creation of the People’s Republic of
Angola, the forces of Pretoria were in control of the whole
of southern Angola up to the Lobito-Luena axis, in other
words, several hundred kilometres north of the Namibian
frontier. That was in fact what led the Security Council to
take up the issue in March 1976 and, in its resolution 387
(1976), to demand unanimously that South Africa respect
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity ofAngola and desist from using Namibia as a base for aggression against neighbouring countries. Furthermore, in the
course of that same year, 1976, the Council was to meet on
three occasions to condemn South Africa. It met in July
again 11944th to 1948th meetings], following the fierce
attack by the racist forces of Pretoria against the village of
Sialola, 30 kilometres inside Zambia, which left 24 dead and
45 seriously wounded, once again, using Namibia as a base;
and, filly,
in December, following Pretoria’s coercive
actions against Lesotho [198lst and 1982ndmeetingsj. Not a
single year elapsed, from 1976 to 1980, that the Council did
not meet for the sole purpose of condemning acts of aggression perpetrated against Angola, calling for the cessation of
such acts and for respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola, and demanding compensation for all
the damage caused. The South African raids have never
stopped, and it will be recalled that, on 30 November 198 1, a
South African commando unit attacked the refinery at
Luanda from the sea and, had it not been for the speedy
action of the refinery workers, a terrible catastrophe for the
people of Luanda would have ensued. Was that South
African commando unit searching for Namibian refugees in
the Luanda refinery as well? Such arguments no longer
deceive anyone.

‘_

45. It is therefore up to the international community, and
first .and foremost the Council, to demand that South
Africa put an end to these acts of aggression and to take
the necessary measures to maintain international peace
and security. If South Africa can come here before the
Council and claim support within the international community and defy the Council itself, it is because it has
observed elsewhere, in another region, how, thanks to that
same support, the archetype of that same expansionist policy could with impunity perpetuate illegal occupation and
commit massacres and acts of destruction. We might therefore reflect on this further quotation from Arnold
Toynbee:
.“Like other evils, War has an insidious way of appearing not intolerable until it has secured such a stranglehold upon the lives of its addicts that they no longer
have the power to escape from its grip when its deadliness has become manifest.“3
Racist’ militarism

is well and truly doomed everywhere.

46. The preceding speaker, the representative of Nigeria,
recalled how the various initiatives taken with a view to the
adoption of sanctions against South Africa have failed
because of the opposition of certain Powers that enjoy the
right of veto. I shall not take up this point. I shall simply
say that in Namibia a struggle for national liberation is
being waged and strengthened; and it is bound to be successful, whether we like it or not. Elements foreign to the
Namibian national liberation struggle are being introduced. That struggle is ours and, in the first place, that of
the Council, which has proclaimed Namibia’s right to
independence and defined the modalities through which it
should enjoy that right in an accepted framework of resolutions and decisions. The Council must work towards the
unalterable implementation of those resolutions and decisions. Let the Council speak clearly of legality, the conditions of its reinstatement and, above all, the means to
restore it.

43. In fact, all of this is part of a vast plan aimed at
destabilizing all the countries of the region. On I7 October
last-on the eve of the convening of this series of meetings
of the Council-more
raids were carried out against
Mozambican territory; and Lesotho is courageously confronting similar acts of aggression committed daily against
it, in the face of the passivity and indifference of the international community.

47: In this wide-ranging action, the Council plays an
essential part. Its resolutions are too often ignored, its
authority too often defied and its roie as the primary guarantor of international peace and security yet to be
assumed, and, if this continues, the Council runs the risk
of losing its credibility and its greatness.

44. The armed forces of the racist @me of Pretoria
announced just a few days ago that powerful defoliants
would be used along the border between occupied Namibia and Angola. Thus; while defoliants and chemicals
are prohibited by international conventions, South Africa
continues cynically to use them in areas that are inhabited
by civilians. Given this situation, we can agree that the
countries neighbouring on South Africa have every right
to invoke Article 51 of the Charter, which stipulates, inter
alia, that:

48. In Namibia, it is the very raison G&e of the Council
that is at stake. The Charter has provided the Council with
every measure that should be taken against Pretoria in
order to restore legality and to have the rule, of law triumph
in Namibia.
49. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the Chairman of the Special Committee on
the Situation with Regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial _

“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if
6

Countries and Peoples, Mr. Abdul G. Koroma. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

withdrawal of Cuban internationalist forces from Angola.
The Committee emphasized unequivocally that the persistence of such attempts would only retard the decolonization process in Namibia and constitute interference in the
internal affairs of Angola.

50. Mr. KOROMA: On behalf of the Special Committee
on the Situation with Regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, I wish to express my appreciation
for this opportunity to address the Council in connection
with its consideration of the critical situation with which
the Organization is confronted in respect of Namibia.

55. In condemning the repeated acts of aggression perpetrated by the South African racist minority regime in Pretoria against sovereign neighbouring States, the Special
Committee recommended that the Security Council, in the
light of the serious threat to international peace and security posed by South Africa’s actions, respond positively to
the overwhelming demand of the international community
by imposing comprehensive mandatory sanctions against
that country, under the terms of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

51. For the second time in five months the Council is
meeting specifically to consider the question of Namibia.
This series of meetings of the Council, however, comes at a
moment of deep crisis. This is so, not only because the
efforts of the international community to bring about
genuine independence for Namibia by peaceful means
have been at a standstill owing to the intransigence of the
aggressive minority &me in Pretoria but also because of
the deteriorating international situation in southern Africa
brought about by the repeated armed attacks, acts of
aggression and destabilization by the South African racist
regime against the neighbouring independent African
States. This policy of aggression obviously entails the
potential for a wider conflict in the area with indeterminable consequences.

56. That, in brief, is the principled position of the Special
Committee with regard to this all-important matter of Namibia. South Africa’s continued defiance of the will of the
international community, as exemplified by the recent blatant breach of international law against sovereign independent Mozambique,
underscores the validity of that
position of the Committee, which is based on its conviction that the United Nations is duty-bound to do everything possible to terminate South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia. Indeed, all that has happened during the five years since the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 435 (1978) reveals a consistent and calculated
policy of dissembling and delay-indeed, a policy of fraud.
All of these manoeuvres have, clearly unmasked the true
intent of the Government of South Africa. This has been,
under the guise of negotiations, to earn time to consolidate
its domination over the Territory through the proxy of a
puppet regime and to deny the Namibian people their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence.
South Africa’s attitude throughout has been characterized
by inflexibility and confrontation, by broken promises,
false assurances and outright duplicity. The developments
since 1978 are ample proof that South Africa is not prepared willingly-I
repeat, willingly-to
accord the Namibian people their right to genuine freedom and
independence.

52. In Namibia today there is open military conflict and
repression. South Africa’s illegal occupation is maintained
only with the aid of tens of thousands of South African
troops. The Council cannot ignore this serious threat to
international peace and security in the region; nor can
we-except at our own peril--continue to remain inactive
in the face of so much injustice and human suffering. We
must be equally mindful of the fact that the open defiance
by South Africa of the will of the international community
is a damaging affront to the Organization, since it calls into
question the very principles on which the United Nations
was founded.
53. Guided bv its mandate to ensure that the neooles of
colonial Territ&ies and countries are enabled to exercise
their right to self-determination
and independence, the
Special Committee has given high priority to the important question of the decolonization of Namibia. In a decision adopted at its 1248th meeting, on 13 October,’ the
Special Committee condemned South Africa’s continued
illegal occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the
Namibian people and its persistent violation of’ their
human rights, as well as its efforts to destroy the national
unity and territorial integrity of Namibia and its persistent
refusal to comply with the related resolutions and decisions
of the United Nations.
I

1

57. Throughout the ensuing negotiations, the leadership
of SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the
people of Namibia, has conducted itself with outstanding
statesmanship and dignity as clearly demonstrated in its
sincere willingness and steadfast commitment to effect the
full and speedy implementation
of the United Nations
plan. The Special Committee pays a warm tribute to the
SWAP0 leadership for its manifest spirit of accommodation, patience and responsiveness. In the same context, the
Special Committee pays a particular tribute to the leaders
of the front-line States for the crucial role they have played
throughout, in support of the cause of the people of Namibia.

54. The Committee deprecated any attempt to undcrmine the international consensus embodied in Security
Council resolution 435 (1978) and other relevant United
Nations resolutions, which constitute the acceptable basis
for a peaceful transition of Namibia to independence, and
it rejected the persistent attempts by the United States of
America and South Africa to establish any linkage or parallelism between the independence of Namibia and the

58. In his report, which is before the Council, the
Secretary-General states that his recent consultations
“have resulted, as far as UNTAG is concerned, in resolving virtually all the outstanding issues’*, and concludes
that: “In fact, we have never before been so close to finality
7

on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978):’
[See S/15943, para. 24.) In expressing the Special Committee’s appreciation of his tireless endeavours, I wish to
express our confident hope that the Secretary-General will
now be able to move forward with dispatch with a view to
the full implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978)
and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) with respect
to the international Territory of Namibia.

hardware as well as its military call-up system. It has
strongly militarized white South African society.
65. Moreover, South Africa has recently opened a new
road in the northern part of the country near the borders
of Zimbabwe and Botwswana for military use. The road
can also be used as a landing strip for military aircraft, and
it is reported that similar road/airstrips are scheduled for
other parts of the country.

59. The PRESIDENT
(intermezation from Arabic): The
next speakersis the Acting Ch&rnan oi the Special Committee against Apartheid, Mr. Uddhav Deo Bhatt, to
whom the Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

66. In Namibia, about <Omilitary bases and over l&$OO
South African and South African<ontrolled
troops are
used to suppress the freedom struggle and to commit acts
of aggression against Angola and Zambia. In fact, a large
part of Angolan territory is under South Africa’s occupation. Also, according to recent reports, soldiers and police
in Namibia have commited untold atrocities against the
civilian population.

60, Mr. BHATT: Since its inception in 1963, the Special
Committee against Apartheid has been dealing with the
question of apartheid in South Africa and the ramifications
in the region of that country’s racial policies. The.Council
itself has been seized of this problem since 1960. Since
1966, when the General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia, both the Council and the
Assembly have adopted numerous resolutions declaring
South Africa’s presence in Namibia to be illegal and calling on it to withdraw.

67. Recently, South Africa has brutally oppressed Lesotho and caused much hardship to its citizens and economy.
It demanded that Lesotho return South African refugees
on the alleged grounds that they posed a security threat to
South Africa; Lesotho was obliged to appeal to the United
Nations and international community to persuade South
Africa to desist from such inhuman demands.
68. While in Namibia the South African regime intends
to impose an “internal settlement’* through a so-called
Council of State, in total disregard of the United Nations
and world opinion, in South Africa it is fomenting civil
strife through constitutional changes propagated as constitutional reforms. These sham reforms, which have been
passed by the unrepresentative Parliament, are going to be
the subject of a referendum to be held on 2 November
next, that is, in about 10 days, among whites alone.

61. Ignoring all these resolutions, including Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), which provide for general elections and self-determination for the Namibian
people, the South African regime has continued its illegal
occupation of the Territory and prevented the United
Nations from carrying out its responsibilities in this
regard.
62. As is well known, the Secretary-General held ‘discussions last August in Cape Town with the South African
regime, only to find that the racist minority regime had
come up with further excuses to protract consultations and
deny self-determination
to the Namibian people. The
apartheid regime now demands the withdrawal of the
Cuban troops from Angola as a pre-condition for the
implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978), which
that regime itself had accepted.

69. Briefly, the constitutional changes propose to give
limited representation to Coloureds and Indians in a
racially segregated Parliament, with the exclusion of the
Africans, who constitute 72 per cent of the country’s population. Basically, it is designed to entrench racial discrimination in the Constitution, to preserve white minority rule
and to’ perpetuate apartheid.
70. It does not seem that the South African ‘regime
intends to eliminate apartheid or to withdraw from Namibia peacefully. On the contrary, that regime seems bent
on military solutions to preserve white minority rule both
in South Africa and in Namibia. Even political decisionmaking at the highest level in South Africa has of late been
greatly militarized. Indeed, several recent studies have concluded that military considerations have become central in
political decision-making and that it is the inner cabinet,
composed of military men close to the Prime Minister, that
makes political decisions, rather than the Cabinet of Ministers. Faced with a growing crisis at home, the apartheid
regime is trying to extend the conflict to the whole region.

63. Regrettably, the South African regime finds support
for its new extraneous demand in the so-called linkage,
parallelism and “constructive engagement” policies of the
United States. The rest of the world has expressed dismay
at this so-called linkage that makes the Territory’s independence a captive of the strategic and economic interests or
demands of a couple of countries.
64. Earlier this year, the Special Committee conducted a
fact-finding mission in southern Africa, where it verified
that South Africa’s acts of aggression and other efforts at
destabilization in the region had shown a marked increase
in the last few years. Only last week, South Africa attacked
the office of the African National Congress of South
Africa (ANC) in Mozambique,
causing a number of
deaths and injuries. And only about 10 days ago it displayed its military might in a huge military parade at Pretoria. Recently, it has expanded the export of its military

71. No doubtthe situation created bv South Africa in the
region is a threat to, and even a constant breach of, international peace and security. Because self-determination
and decolonization in Namibia and peaceful transition to
8

majority rule in South Africa are obstructed by the intransigent South African regime, which has lost all legitimacy,
the United Nations has no alternative but to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions on that defiant and
illegitimate regime: Earlier this year, the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence adopted the Paris Declaration on
Namibia and a Programme of Action on Namibia.5 The
Special Committee against Apartheid is convinced that
the Declaration and Programme of Action should be
implemented without delay.

77. It was in May this year that the members of the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 532 (1983). After
reaffiiing
the legal responsibility of the United Nations
over Namibia and repeating that resolution 435 (1978)
remained the sole basis for a settlement of the Namibian
problem, the resolution called upon South Africa to cooperate with the Secretary-General to expedite the independence of Namibia. To mark the urgency and the particular
interest the Council attaches to a solution of the Namibian
problem, it called upon the Secretary-Generalto report to it
on the situation not later than 31 August 1983.

72. Therefore we strongly urge the Council to reject the
socalled linkage or parallelism, to impose comprehensive
sanctions on South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter and to strengthen the existing arms embargo in order to
compel South Africa to withdraw from Namibia and to
establish majority rule in South Africa itself.

78. My delegation would like, in passing, to pay a welldeserved tribute to the Secretary-General for the manner
in which he carried out his task on this occasion. He did
not confine himself to establishing contacts from his office
on the 38th floor. He went to the lion’s den in person, both
in Pretoria and in Namibia. Furthermore, as a subtle
diplomat and a faithful servant of the United Nations, he
was able to avoid the traps that South Africa set for him,
trying to induce him to stray from the terms of his
mandate.

73. The Special Committee firmly rejects all manoeuvres
and attempts to defer the independence of Namibia. In its
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session
and to the Security Council, it states, inter alia:

79. As was the case in May, the report he has submitted
to us deserves praise because of its clarity, its conciseness
and its impartiality-so
much so that South Africa, a
country which over the years has constantly accused the
United Nations of partiality and partisanship, was unable
to find fault with it.

“The persistent attempts by the United States and
South Africa to establish the so-called linkage or parallelism between the independence of Namibia and
extraneous issues, in particular the withdrawal of
Cuban forces from Angola, represent little respect for
the resolutions of the Security Council. The socalled
linkage or parallelism was resolutely rejected by the
OAU, the Non-Aligned Movement and various United
Nations organs, including the General Assembly itself,
and was qualified as an attempt to retard the decolonization process in Namibia and as interference in the
internal affairs of Angola.“6

80. After the adoption of resolution 532 (1983), the African and non-aligned members of the Council, and with
them the vast majority of peace-loving and freedom-loving
people, entertained the hope that, this time at least, South
Africa might heed the message of history and the voice of
reason. In other words, they hoped, without really believing it, that South Africa would be able to implement resolution 435 (1978) without too much procrastination. This
proved to be only one further illusion,

74. While pledging the Special Committee’s solidarity
with the heroic and struggling people of Namibia and their
national liberation movement, SWAPO, I congratulate the
United Nations Council for Namibia, the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, on its tireless efforts towards
achieving the independence and freedom of Namibia and
its people.

8 1. Of course, South Africa did declare that all the problems had been resolved and that it would henceforth no
longer oppose the independence of Namibia. However,
that assertion was soon contradicted by South Africa making it conditional on the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola.

75. Mr. UMBA di LUIETP
(Zaire) (interpretation from
Z+ekh): Mr. President, first of all it is my pleasant duty to
extend to you the congratulations of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. Many previous speakers have emphasized your wealth of experience as a diplomat, your probity
and your skill, which augur well for the success or -our
work. My delegation willingly associates itself with that
’ appreciation and wishes you every success in your important and delicate task.

82. One does not have to be very clever to realize that
that was nothing but a pretext. Indeed, ti has so often
been stressed, the Cuban presence in Angola is an issue
that has nothing whatsoever to do with resolution 435
(1978). What is more, the Cuban troops are in Angola, a
sovereign country, at the request of the authorities of that
country. Furthermore, the Cuban troops are not in occupation of either Namibia or South Africa. On the contrary,
it is South Africa which has continually committed aggression against Angola and is occupying its territory. Also, as
the representatives of Angola and the United Republic of
Tanzania stated, the first attacks by South Africa against
Angola began well before the arrival in Angola of Cuban
troops. Similarly, when South Africa committed aggression against Lesotho, it was not to fight Cuban troops on
its soil.

76. I should like to take this opportunity to pay a welldeserved tribute to Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana, who so
competently and efficiently conducted the proceedings of
the Council during the month of September, which was a
rather difIicult month.
9

83. However that may be, if we still have any illusions
about the true intentions of South. Africa, the most recent
statement of its representative, on 20 October [2481st meering3, before the Council, would serve to dispel them. We
witnessed the same intransigence, the same arrogance, the
same threats, the same defiance, the same lack of moderation. According to South Africa, any statement that does
not fall within the terms of its diktat is irresponsible.

Nothing can come of negotiations now. It is perhaps
understandable that poor, nearly defenceless States such as
ours should be defied by South Africa; what is incompre-,
hensible is that so many Powers-indeed super-Powersrepresented here in the Council, can continue to swallow
such an affront. Even those who continue to support
South Africa in its madness should drop an ally that is so
embarrasing and can only compromise them.

84. In the course of the Council debate in May on the
same subject, as we recall, South Africa all but said, in
effect, that all the members of the Security Council, in fact
all the Members of the United Nations, were rogues.

93. First of all, however, to avoid any confusion, it is
urgent for the Council to reject categorically any attempt
to link the independence of Namibia with the presence of
Cuban troops in Angola. If we follow the present course,
there is nothing to prevent South Africa tomorrow from
asking African States or the United Nations not to recognize SWAP0 ar ANC any longer-or
simply to stop.
breathing.

85. Finally, with everything that we know, I affirm, for
my part, that by dealing with South Africa as we are
doing, we are wasting our time, for we do not speak the
same language and therefore, obviously, we cannot possibly understand each other.
86. The proof of this is, first, that when the United
Nations affirmed that the Mandate of South Africa over
Namibia no longer existed, South Africa claimed, on the
contrary, that it still enjoyed all rights over that Territory,
that it did not recognize the term “decolonization”
and
that, in any case, the United Nations did not count in its
opinion. It was only the contact group which had any
importance for it.
87; Secondly, when we assert that South Africa was
wrong not to grant independence to Namibia, South
Africa shamelessly proclaims in the Council that it is not
isolated and that, as a matter of fact, it is supported in this
by friends.
88. Thirdly, as far as the United Nations is concerned,
SWAP0 is the sole representative of the Namibian people,
while South Africa claims that SWAP0 is a terrorist
organization.
89. Fourthly, South Africa, furthermore, claims that it
has the right to identify and destroy all those who, in
independent African countries, issue hostile propaganda
against it.
90. According to this logic, South Africa, which has proclaimed its hostility to certain Powers, should also therefore be attacked by those Powers for reasons of
self-defence.
91. But ultimately, who is the true terrorist here? Is it not
South Africa, which is occupying without any legal title
thereto a Territory that does not belong to it? Who is
acting in self-defence? Surely, it is the martyred people of
Namibia, terrorized by a country which knows neither
morality nor law.
92. In the view of my delegation, the present way of
dealing with the Namibian problem is wrong and even
contains an element of contradiction on our own part,
because the position of South Africa in Namibia is like
that of a thief, a usurper, a taker of hostages, at bay.

94. Since South Africa believes ‘in and defers only to the
contact group, which promised to convince the Pretoria
authorities, the member countries of the group have thus
lost face. But we are sure, nevertheless, that the members
of .the contact group are jealous of their honour and their
credibility, which has been so profoundly besmirched by
the bad faith of their ally, which has exposed them.
95. The Council should call South Africa and the contact
group to account. Indeed, we should be tempted to appeal
for the enactment of coercive enforcement measures as laid
down in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
were the Security Council not divided. Alas, however, it
has neither the boldness nor the clear-sightedness nor the
courage, to condemn acts of aggression, acts of force or
even violations of the norms of law, so, if we did make
such an appeal, we should only be indulging in wishful
thinking to suppose a resolution of that sort could be
adopted.
96. Let us not forget that ail the victims of the wars in the
Middle East; Lebanon, Chad, Afghanistan, Namibia,
South-East Asia and Angola, as well as those who lost
their lives aboard the South Korean Boeing air liner, are
members of our human race.
97. Who is to blame? All of us here in the Council, in a
sense. I am not answering the question myself, but I should
like to put this question to all the members here. What is
sure is that the Council must also shoulder its responsibilities if it wants to retain a scrap of credibility.
98. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Kenya. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
99. Mr. WABUGE (Kenya): Mr. President, I should like,
first of all, to express my thanks to you and to the other
members of the Council for giving our delegation the
opportunity to participate in this important debate on the
question of Namibia.
IOO. Secondly, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on your
assumption of the hight office of President of the Council

proved right_- last
Our
and .-.apprehensions
__-.._fears
..~--.-.---..were
.
summer, when we thought the five cot%tr&%f&e
Westem contact group had prevailed on South Africa to accept
the United Nations plan. Our hopes were raised with great
expectations that at last the United Nations plan would be
put into motion. We were not surprised at all when, soon
after the so-called negotiations with South Africa, we
started getting different signals from what we had been
given to understand by the countries of the Western contact group. It hen became clear that, as before, South
Africa was just playing its usual game of delaying tactics.
Instead of implementing
the Council resolution, South
Africa has now made an urealistic, unrelated and unacceptable demand on an independent State, Angola.

for the month of October. We have no doubt that under
your guidance, coupled with your diplomatic skill, this
debate will be led to a successful conclusion, making significant steps towards the independence of Namibia. I should
also like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute, through
you, Mr. President, to your predecessor Mr. Noel Sinclair.
101. This is the second time we are meeting this year on
the question of Namibia. In May of this year, the Council
once again took up the issue of Namibia [2439+ to 2444th
and 2#46th to 2451st meetings]. The Council then adopted
resolution 532 (1983), in which it condemned South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia and mandated the Secretary-General to undertake consultations
with the parties to the proposed cease-fire, with a view to
securing the speedy implementation
of resolution 435
(1978). My delegation would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for the way in which he
has shouldered his heavy responsibilities.

I06. It is very pertinent at this point to say that Africa
welcomed the initiatives of the Western Five in their negotiations with South Africa. However, we stress that those
who have assumed the responsibility of negotiating with
South Africa and have received the co-operation of
SWAP0 should do so genuinely and stop sending confusing and conflicting signals to South Africa.

102. In the 38 years of the United Nations’ existence we
have acquired voluminous records of the sad history of
South Africa’s brutal occupation of Namibia and the
repressive administration it has set up to maintain its illegal occupation of Namibia. It is not our intention in this
debate to dwell on the history of South Africa’s aggression
in southern Africa. The records speak for themselves, and
we do not see the need to labour the point. Even the
friends and natural allies of South Africa agree with us
about the sad history of events perpetrated by the racist
@me. We have come here today not to recite the history
of the illegal and brutal occupation of Namibia, but to
examine why Council resolution 435 (1978) has not been
implemented and what course of action the international
community must take to fulfil the mandate of the Council.

107. In his most recent report [S/259433, the SecretaryGeneral, pursuant to Council resolution 532 (1983), confirmed that all the outstanding issues relevant to resolution
435 (1978) had been resolved. In the same report, he stated
that he had made it clear to the Pretoria rkgime that the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) did not include an
irrelevant and extraneous issue-namely,
the linkage of
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola to the independence of Namibia.
108. The plan for the independence of Namibia was
clearly outlined in resolution 435 (1978). The plan needs
no modification or any other conditions. We therefore
cannot and will not accept any notion of linking the implementation .of the plan with the internal affairs of Angola.
Namibians are fighting for self-determination, to liberate
their own country. Angolans are fighting to preserve the
territorial integrity of their own country against brutal
aggression by South Africa. We must concede to the
Angolans the right to seek help whenever they feel they
need it.

103. It is now five years since the United Nations plan for
the independence of Namibia was approved by the Council in resolution 435 (1978). At that time we shared the
general optimism about Namibia’s independence, which
we thought was just around the comer. But, to our dismay
and horror, in those five years since the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), we have witnessed grave tension and instability in the region, resulting from South Africa’s
continued utilization of Namibia as a springboard for
aggression against, and destabilization .of, the neighbouring independent States.

109. The Council recently witnessed the sinister arrogance displayed by the representative of the racist rkgime
of South Africa, who claimed that the linkage of the withdrawal of Cuban troops and the independence of Namibia
had the support of the international community. That is an
absurd statement. To which international community is
South Africa referring? It is certainly not the international
community that we know. Maybe South Africa is a
member of another community not known to us.

104. As I said earlier in my statement, we have come
before the Council with one objective-the implementation
of the Council plan for the independence of Namibia, as
called for in its resolution 435 (1978). We have agreed that
the plan remains the only basis for a peaceful transition
towards the independence of that country. Since the adoption of the plan, Africa and, indeed, the rest of the world
have waited impatiently for the implementation of the plan.

110. Kenyans are very familiar with such threats and
intimidation.
In our struggle for independence we were
constantly threatened in such a way by a racist minority
group that tried to block our independence. In fact, when
we won our independence some members of the racist
group ran to South Africa. Such threats will never stop the
people of Namibia from struggling for their independence.

IOS. We were told by those close to South Africa and by
those who had offered to negotiate for it that it was ready
to accept implementation of the plan. On our part, we had
no illusions about South Africa’s sincerity in the negotiations. Africa, together with SWAPO, has serious doubts
regarding South Africa’s sincerity in all these negotiations.
11

111. To the representative of the racist regime, we say the
regime has no mandate at ail to speak on behalf of the
people of Namibia. It is not for the racist regime to determine who the friends of Namibia are. Namibians of their
own free choice will determine their own friends, who cannot accept such cheap ideological propaganda as the allegation that the presence of Cuban troops in Angola is the
destabihzing factor in the region.
112. We all know that the destabilizing factor in the
southern region is the racist apartheid regime. This racist
regime is the source of all political unrest in the region, and
it is this regime and what it stands for that must be
changed if political stability is to prevail in the region.
113. Who is constantly attacking Mozambique, Angola,
Lesotho, Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana? Who is illegally occupying Namibia? Who is oppressing and repressing over 20 million Africans in South Africa? Not the
Cuban troops in Angola. It is the racist regime of South
Africa. We repeat: this regime is the source of most of the
political unrest in the southern region.
114. The international community ‘is faced with a serious
challenge and must respond to this challenge squarely. The
Council should now move to adopt a ,resolution rejecting
South Africa’s insistence on linking the independence of
Namibia to irrelevant and extraneous issues that are
incompatible with resolution 435 (1978) and other Council
decisions on Namibia. The Council should, for the benefit
of South Africa, once more reiterate that resolution 435
(1978), outlining the United Nations plan for Namibia,
remains the only basis for the peaceful settlement of the
Namibian problem.
115. In the same resolution, the Council should set a date
on which the implementation of the United Nations plan
will begin and ask South Africa to cooperate in the implementation of the plan as envisaged in resolution 435
(1978). In the event of non-co-operation by South Africa
as regards the implementation
of the plan, the Council
should meet to consider the necessary measures to be
taken against South Africa. At that stage, clearly, there

will be no doubt on the part of any State concerning the
international community’s demanding the application of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations against
South Africa. It is quite clear that we are approaching the
end of the road as far as South Africa’s illegal occupation
is concerned. The situation is extremely desperate, and its
solution may as well be desperate.
116. Before I conclude I must say that South Africa’s
misbehaviour, arrogance and defiance of Council resolutions is encouraged by a certain relationship it has with
certain Western countries. The South African demand for
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola has the sup
port and encouragement of some States that have been
negotiating on its behalf. Despite Council resolution 418
(1977), which imposed a military embargo against South
Africa, we find in reliable newspapers reports of military
collaboration between South Africa and Western countries
and, worse still; collaboration in the nuclear field.
117. We strongly urge those countries not to encourage
South Africa in any way but to use their influence to
induce South Africa to comply with the Council resolution
and, secondly, to refrain from any attempt, through use of
the veto, to protect South Africa in its non-comphance
with the decisions and resolutions of this body.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

NOTES.
l Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibii (South West Afrfci) notwithstanding SecurityCouncil
Resolution 276 (19701.
I.C.J. Reoorts, 1971, D._ 16.
. _ Advisorv_ OMdon.
_
* Arnold J. Toynbee. War and Civililation (Oxford University Press,
New York, 1950), prefa&, pp. xi and xii.
’ Ibid., p. viii.
’ OJj+iciaI Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 23, chap. VIII, sect. B. para. 17.
5 Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(AKONF.
120/13), part three.
6 O/ficiaal Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 22, para. 252.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences dtpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous auplps de votre libraire ou adressez-vous il : Nations Unies,
Section des venues, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC I-lOJIYWlTb

H3&4HM54

OPl-AHH3A~W

.OEYb~%iHEHHbIX

HAI&iti

&‘I3An;ulWl
opraHH3aUHH
OBwneHemusx Haunt3 MOXCAO RynUTb B KHUXCHMX MiWaWHaX
H WaTCTBM
80 BCeX p&iOHitX
MHpa.
HaBOAKTe
CQWBKK
06 ti3AaMiBX
B BSUUeM KHHXWOM
Mara3mre mm nsituHTe no anpecy: GpratWtsat~ 06~AKHCIiHb~X
Ha&i, CeKWfK no
l’tpOAaXCe
H3A;uISiti,
Hb!O-hpK
SiJlH XeHeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACXONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estAn en venta en librerfas y cams distribuidoras en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consuhe a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

90-60205-February

.

1992-2,050

. ._
