United Nations

S/PV.4222

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4222

nd meeting
Tuesday, 14 November 2000, 3.55 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. van Walsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Moglia
Mr. Amin
Mr. Angell
Mr. Chen Xu
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Misran
Mr. Toure
Mr. Uanivi
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Yel’chenko
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-74620 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4222

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria) and Mr. Mladenovic (Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In the absence of objection, I
shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. I now
give the floor to Mr. Guéhenno.
Mr. Guéhenno (spoke in French): With the
Council’s permission, I shall confine myself to
reporting on the outcome of the most recent elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, because the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Klein, may come to New York in December, at which
time he will be able to meet with the Council himself.

2

On 11 November, the third general elections since
the signing of the Dayton Accord took place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the supervision of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Elections were held to the House of
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Federation House of Representatives, the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska and various other
bodies. Some 2.5 million voters were registered to
vote — 1,335,032 in the Federation and 1,102,913 in
the Republika Srpska. They voted at 3,600 polling
stations across the entire territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
monitored by 760 international
supervisors and 5,500 local monitors. Final
certification of the elections results is not expected
before 17 November, the deadline for the receipt of
postal ballots.
Turning to the activities of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) during
the elections, the Mission helped monitor the detailed
security plans of the local police and oversaw their
implementation during the elections. In general, this
was done in an exemplary and professional manner. All
police officers from the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) received training on how to cooperate with the
local police in this situation. Similar close cooperation
was fostered — and took place — with the OSCE and
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR). On election day,
IPTF officers made it clear to the local police that
freedom of movement had to be ensured, that voters
were not to be intimidated and that polling stations had
to remain free of incidents that could disturb the proper
conduct of the elections. As a result, the atmosphere of
the elections was relatively calm. That was a tribute to
the fine work of the IPTF and to the ability of the local
police to act professionally.
Voter turnout appears to have been somewhat
higher than in the April municipal elections, when it
was 65 per cent. This time it has been estimated at 70
per cent of registered voters. Turnout varied from
region to region within Bosnia. Estimated voter turnout
in the eastern Republika Srpska seems to have reached
80 per cent; that is expected to provide an additional
boost for the Serb Democratic Party (SDS). Voter
turnout is estimated to have been lower in the western
Republika Srpska — about 50 per cent in Banja Luka.
Turnout among Bosnian Croats varied, although we
have indications that it was fairly high in the west part
of Mostar and the Posavina canton, but lower in the

S/PV.4222

Livno, West Herzegovina and Herzegovina-Neretva
cantons.
A number of irregularities occurred. The main
one, of course, was the Bosnian Croat “referendum”, to
which I shall return later. Apart from that, other
irregularities appear to have taken place in Srebrenica,
where some double voting was noted, coordinated by
the local branch of the SDS, and possible intimidation
of some voters by an SDS official, who had in fact
been barred from public office. The OSCE will draw
the double voting to the attention of the Elections
Appeals Subcommission to seek corrective action.
Other complaints and incidents of which we were
informed were relatively minor.
(spoke in English)
I would now like to turn to the situation in the
Federation, on the one hand, and in the Republika
Srpska, on the other.
In the Federation, as I just mentioned, the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) carried out the
Bosnian Croat so-called referendum despite a warning
from the OSCE Provisional Election Commission that
it considers the expression of opinion to be a party
activity subject to its rules and regulations. The HDZ
failed to provide OSCE with a list of the locations for
the referendum polling stations, of which there were
389, placed beyond 50 meters from election polling
stations. The case has now been submitted to the
Elections Appeal Sub-Commission for adjudication.
Barring unforeseen developments, it is not expected
that the holding of the so-called referendum will result
in the invalidation of the elections.
The rhetoric of the President of the HDZ, Mr.
Jelavic, has intensified. After the polls closed, he
announced that HDZ was victorious, which, he
claimed, signals the end of the missions of the OSCE,
the Office of the High Representative and UNMIBH.
He also added that the Bosnian Croats no longer
recognized the administration of the international
community because it wanted to transform Bosnia and
Herzegovina “from a State of three equal nations into a
State without the Croat people.” Jelavic claimed that
70 per cent of Bosnian Croats voted overwhelmingly
for the HDZ.
Though support for the Party of Democratic
Action (SDA) is shrinking, preliminary results show
that the party may not suffer the dramatic decline that

some had expected. Gains by the Social Democratic
Party (SDP) may not be as high as they were in the
municipal elections, and the Party for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (SBiH) may have experienced a strong
boost in support. It appears likely that Silajdzic will
play an important role as a coalition broker in many
parts of the Federation — particularly in Sarajevo —
and in the Federal institutions.
In the Republika Srpska, even though 80 per cent
of voters stated prior to the elections that they were
mostly concerned about economic issues, the Serb
Democratic Party, which did not put forth an economic
programme, stands to make great gains. This reflects
the disillusionment of Republika Srpska voters with the
performance of Prime Minister Dodik. Though the SDS
is expected to have a strong showing in the Republika
Srpska National Assembly, it is not expected to win an
absolute majority. The Party of Democratic Progress
(PDP) will again play a pivotal role. Its President, Mr.
Ivanic, is a strong candidate to be the next Republika
Srpska Prime Minister. Ivanic has openly precluded
cooperation with Silajdzic’s SBiH.
What conclusions should we draw from these
results? Well, it had been hoped that this third set of
general elections since Dayton would produce local
political authorities who would work constructively to
consolidate a sovereign and multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Regrettably, that has not yet been fully
achieved. On the positive side, the multi-ethnic SDP
polled well, but not as well as many in the international
community had hoped. Smaller parties such as the PDP
and the SBiH also gained ground and will certainly
occupy a pivotal position as brokers and king-makers,
although in neither case is their true political
orientation clearly known. The Croat opposition
parties — the New Croat Initiative (NHI) and the
Croatian Peasants Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(HSS) survived.
As a counterpart to that not-as-good-as-expected
performance of the SDP, the traditional nationalist
parties have done better than expected. In the
Federation, the SDA remains a potent political force,
which nonetheless will go through a period of internal
reform that may see it adopt an even more conservative
posture. The HDZ has managed to consolidate its
supporters, and also the supporters of more right-wing
parties, under a banner of fierce criticism and open
defiance of the international community. The High
Representative and the OSCE are currently considering

3

S/PV.4222

taking measures against President Jelavic in view of his
defiance.

coalitions. We will continue to urge that obstructionists
be kept out of the Government.

In the Republika Srpska, the SDS is indeed
buoyant with its victory. It has run a campaign of not
antagonizing the international community through
nationalist rhetoric. It remains to be seen whether that
approach will continue after the elections. Perhaps
more significant is the closer alignment now between
the likely Republika Srpska Government and the new
Government in Yugoslavia.

We have reports of illegal campaign activity by
the SDS in Srebrenica. This only reinforces our belief
that the SDS continues to be controlled by those who
are committed to seeing Dayton fail. We hope that over
time the political situation in the Republika Srpska will
change. It will take time for the Republika Srpska to
recover from the scars of Milosevic’s years of
propaganda and mischief-making.

The priority for the Office of the High
Representative and the OSCE is now to convene the
elected legislative bodies. This will enable the cantonal
assemblies to elect the Federation House of Peoples,
which will in turn elect members of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Peoples. The Republika Srpska
National Assembly must also form a new Government
and elect members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
House of Peoples. These processes are complex and
will take time, though hopefully not the six months it
took following the last general elections, in 1998.

The dramatic political changes in the region over
the past months bode well over the long term, but we
will have to continue to work for further progress. In
the meantime, as we try to take best advantage of the
inexorable larger trends in the region, we cannot allow
Dayton
implementation
to
be
blocked
by
obstructionists and undermined by corrupt elements
working behind the scenes. It is critically important for
the High Representative and the international
community to be prepared to act forcefully to ensure
that those who are opposed to Dayton are not in a
position to block the full implementation of the peace
accords.

The President: I thank Mr. Guéhenno for his
detailed briefing.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for
his excellent briefing.
We welcome reports that this election was free
and fair, apart from some disturbing incidents in
Srebrenica and the illegal campaign activity by the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ).
We are encouraged by the early results in the
Federation that show slow and steady progress for their
moderate, multi-ethnic parties, which continue to
improve their position at the expense of nationalist
parties. It appears that the influence of the hard-line
parties in the Federation has continued to decline, as
we have seen in each successive election in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since 1996.
Unfortunately, though, it appears that the results
in the Republika Srpska are more disappointing,
although that was not unexpected. The Serb
Democratic Party (SDS), which has expressed its
virulent opposition to the Dayton accords since 1995,
appears to have won the presidency of the Republika
Srpska. The situation in the Republika Srpska
Assembly, however, is more mixed and important
decisions remain to be made about governing

4

Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of
all, we would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for his very extensive briefing.
We welcome the successful holding of elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and appreciate the large
amount of work done by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the parties
concerned, with joint efforts by the three sides in
Bosnia. They were the third elections since the signing
of the Dayton Peace Agreements, and they represent an
important step in the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that the elections will help the
early realization of self-reliance and self-sustainability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, so as to enhance peace and
stability in the Balkan region.
Only through tolerance and reconciliation among
the Muslims, Croats and Serbs, and the restoration of
confidence and joint development efforts, will goodneighbourly relations and peace be guaranteed for the
Bosnian people. We sincerely hope that the leaders of
the three groups will proceed on the basis of the
fundamental interests of their people and safeguard the
hard-won peace, leading to the achievement of
economic independence and prosperity at an early date.

S/PV.4222

Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too are grateful to Mr. Guéhenno for his
briefing on the results of the elections.
Russia, as one of the guarantors of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, attaches great
significance to further progress in the peace process in
that country. We are convinced that the basic objective
of the Bosnian settlement must be assistance in the
establishment of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united,
fully fledged and viable democratic State, comprising
two units which are on an equal footing.
We believe that an encouraging signal in terms of
development of the situation in Bosnia has been seen in
the most recent changes in Yugoslavia.
We share the concept of moving responsibility for
advancing the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and for the situation in that country, to
the Bosnian sides.
We believe that relying on “pushing through”
Dayton, which often destroys the compromise variants
achieved
by
the
Bosnians
themselves,
is
counter-productive. The way out, obviously, should be
found through drawing up approaches acceptable, first
and foremost, to the Bosnian sides and not by putting
pressure on them. Such a policy cannot, as practice has
demonstrated, lead to a real breakthrough in a Bosnian
settlement.
International structures cannot, and must not,
replace the legitimately elected organs of power in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in both entities. Basic
efforts must be channelled towards focused work with
Bosnian political forces, encouraging their cooperation
between each other and with the international
community. That approach seems particularly relevant
after the general elections held on 11 November. We
believe that their results will be of decisive
significance for the fate of the peace settlement. We
believe that a guarantee of success and the
irreversibility of a Bosnian settlement is full and
consistent implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The time has come, apparently, to ask the
question: What is more important strategically — to
ensure stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina or to push
for progress towards its unitarization, despite the
provisions of the Peace Agreement, which might lead
to the loss of all those gains accumulated with such
great difficulty over the last four years? We believe

that there is no alternative. Of the many factors which
determine the solid basis of Dayton, the most important
is the balance of these two entities on an equal footing.
We cannot allow a situation in which, because of
ignoring the interest of one, the whole structure
collapses. The most important thing now, in our view,
is to ensure real stability in the country and in each of
its entities. Today this is the most important basis for
moving the peace process forward. We hope that it will
also be promoted by the results of the recently
concluded elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): Since the
representative of France will be speaking on behalf of
the European Union, I will make just a few points.
My delegation welcomed the successful and
peaceful conduct of the elections in Bosnia last
Saturday. They were a testament to how far its people
have come since the Dayton Accords were signed five
years ago. The elections were efficiently organized and
well run. Even the nationalist parties focused on jobs,
the economy and corruption.
The official results will not be available for some
time, but we expect all those elected to take forward
the Dayton agenda, including refugee return, anticorruption measures and economic reform. All the
nationalist parties know what is expected of them. With
Governments in Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia committed to the Dayton Accords, there has
never been a better time for progress.
Miss Moglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to express my thanks to the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Guéhenno, for the very detailed information he has
given us.
The fact that elections were held in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 11 November is, in our opinion, a
valuable tool that can be used in strengthening
democracy. We are pleased that the elections were
carried out in an orderly manner, respecting secret
balloting and without any violence. However, there
were incidents during the electoral campaign, including
speeches and declarations encouraging hatred, as well
as a referendum having no legal basis whatsoever,
clearly indicating that the Council and the international
community as whole must follow very carefully
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that
the Dayton Accords are fully implemented.

5

S/PV.4222

Mr. Angell (Canada): I wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his very thorough
briefing.
We join other members of the Council in
expressing our pleasure at the positive showing of the
non-nationalist, multi-ethnic Social Democratic Party
(SDP), which received the greatest support within the
Federation. We are concerned, however, at the
continuing strength of the nationalist parties of each
community and at the effect that this continuing
strength may have on the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement.
I have two questions for Mr. Guéhenno, and
recognize that it may not yet be possible to answer
either of them. First, we listened very carefully to Mr.
Guéhenno’s comments about Mr. Jelović and are
wondering whether Mr. Guéhenno has a sense of
whether the international community present in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, including the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, will respond in
any way to the extreme views that were expressed by
Mr. Jelović. Secondly, we would ask whether Mr.
Guéhenno has any more detailed sense of the likely
timing of the presidential elections.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
having organized this briefing on the general elections
that were held on 11 November in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his clear and useful statement on
developments in the situation in that country.
The population of Bosnia and Herzegovina
participated in the third general elections since the end
of the war five years ago. These elections are all the
more important because they are being conducted in a
climate marked by important events throughout the
region. The democratic developments in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which was recently admitted
to the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as well as the
encouraging events in Croatia, are factors promoting
the development of peace and reconciliation in that
country. We are confident that the establishment of
close diplomatic relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will lay the foundation for good-neighbourly relations

6

and for constructive cooperation that is mutually
beneficial to the two peoples.
We welcome the good conditions in which the
elections took place and the strong voter participation.
Although we do not yet have the final results, we
continue to hope that the moderate parties will make
significant gains and that the final outcome will be in
keeping with the expectations of the international
community regarding the establishment of a multiethnic, tolerant and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is now up to the newly elected officials
to redouble their efforts to improve the living
conditions of the citizens and to channel their energies
in order to curb unemployment and create good
prospects for young people.
In conclusion, I am pleased to pay a tribute to the
OSCE for its commendable efforts in supervising the
elections, and to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which continues to work for the full
implementation of the Peace Agreements.
Mr. Uanivi (Namibia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his useful briefing on the
elections held on 11 November in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
When we look at what has been achieved in
Bosnia and Herzegovina five years after the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords with the
assistance of the international community, we all agree
that there is peace and progress in that country,
however limited it may be. Indeed, our assessment is
that overall progress has been very slow and that
political will has been lacking in the leadership in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, the ground has
been shifting, albeit slowly, in favour of those who
wish to see a multi-ethnic, democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Therefore, my delegation urges the
authorities in both entities to take their responsibility
seriously and to cooperate fully with the institutions
and representatives of the international community to
make sure that their country does not revert to war.
The international community has spent a great
deal of time and effort in Bosnia in order not to allow
62 per cent of young Bosnians to think that their future
lies elsewhere in Europe, rather than in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We think that the assistance of the
international community is vital in convincing those

S/PV.4222

young Bosnians that their future in Europe depends on
their ability to bring a united, democratic and multiethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European table.
In this context, we are grateful to hear that the
elections have proceeded smoothly, and we hope that
all parties will respect the outcome.
Finally, we believe that the new political climate
in the region will be able to provide wisdom and
ultimately free those who have become hostage to their
own narrow interests — those who believe that their
interests will be protected by hatred and intolerance.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his detailed briefing
on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular on the conduct of the general elections held
on 11 November. The smooth conduct of these
elections and the fact that they proceeded without
incident demonstrate the level of engagement of the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their
commitment to the development of their country. We
see these elections as a positive step forward for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the further
consolidation of democracy.
Every effort must now be made to focus on the
building of the country and its institutions and on
creating a society based on peaceful, multi-ethnic
coexistence. Those in authority must bear this in mind
in addition to the focus on the imperatives of economic
reconstruction and on sustained economic and social
development.
On 26 October, the High Representative, Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, briefed the Council. At that time,
my delegation mentioned a number of priority areas
which we believe are of critical importance to the
process under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
points which we stressed in that briefing remain
relevant, particularly in the light of the recent general
elections. Taken together with the recent positive
political developments in the region, they augur well
for the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We maintain that the following must be taken into
consideration as the various administrations take up
their duties: first, the full implementation of the New
York Declaration; secondly, the return of refugees and
further work on refugee-related matters, including
documentation, employment, education, pensions and
access to utilities; thirdly, judicial reform, which we
see as critical for the creation of a democratic society;

fourthly, the creation of a multi-ethnic society with
multi-ethnic institutions; fifthly, the importance to the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
activities related to the Stability Pact for South-Eastern
Europe, which provides a broad regional framework for
further progress, and in this regard, we emphasize the
need for continued international support for institutionbuilding in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and last but by no
means least, the full involvement of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in charting their own future.
My delegation hopes that the outcome of the
recent general elections will serve as a springboard for
the consolidation of the gains made over recent years
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and will ensure its
functioning as an integrated and multi-ethnic State.
Mr. Misran (Malaysia): My delegation is
grateful for the useful briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno on the partial results of the national
elections that were held in Bosnia and Herzegovina last
Saturday.
We have certainly followed the 11 November
elections very closely and with deep interest. We
commend the Bosnian people and the international
community, in particular the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for the successful
conduct of the elections. That the elections were held
in a relatively free and fair manner, with the exception
of some irregularities mentioned by Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno, is a strong tribute to the
international community and the Bosnians themselves.
We look forward to the final and official outcome of
the elections, which we believe will have a very
significant impact on the peace implementation process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are hopeful that whoever is eventually elected
by the Bosnian people in these elections will be
committed to pursuing the peace process. We call upon
the elected leaders to work together among themselves
and with the international community to strengthen the
political, economic and social foundations for national
reintegration and reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is the paramount and pivotal
responsibility that is expected of those leaders, under
the clear provisions of the Peace Agreement, and by
the international community, which is working hard to
bring about its full implementation.
At this juncture, we should like to say that we
share the serious concern about the illegal referendum

7

S/PV.4222

that was organized by the Croat nationalist party, the
Croatian Democratic Union. That referendum is clearly
illegal and represents a serious threat to the integrity of
the Peace Agreement. It should therefore be rejected by
the international community.
Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I should first of all like to thank Mr.
Guéhenno for his update on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My delegation hails to and supports the
commendable efforts of the High Representative to
implement the Dayton Peace Accords. We call on the
parties to abide strictly by the Accords. We welcome
the holding, on 11 November, of the third general
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
development of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina bodes well for economic reform and
national reconciliation. We should like to pay a welldeserved tribute to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for organizing the elections and
to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Finally, the Council must follow the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina very closely so as to promote
peaceful coexistence in that country.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): We, too, are grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his
presentation. Only a few weeks ago, the Council heard
an open briefing on the general situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the High Representative, Wolfgang
Petritsch. At that meeting, my delegation presented in
full its assessment of the latest developments in
Bosnia. In view of that, I will confine my comments to
the few following points.
Ukraine welcomes the holding of general
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 11 November
as a new and important event in the context of the
further development of democratic freedoms, political
pluralism and the building of common State institutions
in the country. Although we should not overestimate
the significance of these elections, it would be
incorrect to underestimate the results, too. We praise
the efforts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for assisting the people of
Bosnia to hold these elections in a free and democratic
manner. My country was pleased to learn that the
elections were well organized and proceeded smoothly,
with only a few minor incidents recorded.

8

My delegation would like to recognize the
constructive role played by the local police under the
supervision of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in securing the elections in both
entities. At the same time, having heard the preliminary
reports about the results of the elections, we feel only
cautious optimism. Regrettably, the history of the years
after Dayton testifies to the fact that nationalist parties
in both entities have not always been known as the
strongest proponents of the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. We therefore share certain concerns
that their victory in the elections could impede further
efforts towards that end. At the same time, we believe
that no one can overrule the will of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which should be respected.
In this regard, in our view it is important for the
international community to send a clear message to the
winners of the 11 November elections, indicating that
their victory means, first and foremost, that they have
the additional responsibility for making further
progress in the pursuit of the Dayton process, in full
cooperation with the international community. In this
context, we have also taken note, with some concern,
of the reports on the holding by the Croatian
Democratic Union of a parallel referendum, which was
treated as illegal by the OSCE, on greater autonomy for
Bosnian Croats. In our view, such actions contradict
the spirit of Dayton and might not only break up the
Federation but also create an irreparable breach in the
whole process of national reconciliation in the country.
We are firmly convinced, therefore, that no excuses for
attempts to revise the Dayton Agreement should be
tolerated. The resolute stance of the High
Representative and the OSCE on this matter has our
full support.
My delegation also believes that the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina should again be
called upon to redouble their efforts aimed at the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords as soon
as possible, in order to change the culture of
dependency on the international community to a
culture of self-sustainability. Nonetheless, it is our
sincere hope that if that message is heard, the results of
the general elections held in Bosnia on 11 November
will contribute to the further stabilization of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and be conducive to the strengthening
of the new political environment brought about in the
whole region by the recent democratic changes in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

S/PV.4222

For its part, Ukraine stands ready to continue to
contribute to the peace process in Bosnia through its
participation in the activities of the Peace
Implementation Council, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Security Council.
Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): We are grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for
updating us on the current situation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We appreciate the detailed information
and analysis with which he provided us on the general
elections. This morning, we had an opportunity to
deliberate on this issue in plenary meeting in the
General Assembly. Our main focus was on the
economic development of the war-ravaged country. We
believe that that is the key to the future of the country.
In a few days, we will be observing the fifth
anniversary of the signing of the Dayton Peace Accord.
It was that Accord that allowed the establishment of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign State. The new
leadership is therefore expected to pursue the Dayton
agenda, as our colleagues have said, with renewed
commitment and vigour. The peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have worked hard in recent years to
restore their war-torn country to normalcy. Not all of
their efforts have been rewarded with success, although
some notable progress has been achieved.
Much of the slow pace at which the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord has
proceeded has been attributed to a lack of commitment
by the local leadership — or, at least, by part of it — as
well as to the surrounding political environment. This
is now changing, or expected to change. We have
reasons to be optimistic that the Dayton
implementation process will now gather new
momentum and proceed at a faster pace. Our optimism
cannot but be guarded, however, as other speakers have
pointed out, in view of the disposition of the nationalist
forces.
With this backdrop in mind, we have several
points to make. First, with regard to elections, we
welcome the successful completion of general elections
on 11 November in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Bosniacs, Serbs, Croats and other minorities deserve
our praise for the peaceful conduct of the democratic
process. We also appreciate the efforts made by the
High Representative, as well as by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission,
in the holding of these elections. From the preliminary

information and assessment, it appears that political
pluralism in Bosnia and Herzegovina is putting down
roots. This is likely to usher in a new era in which,
hopefully, the leaders will rise above their ethnically
driven political agenda and be able to work for the
well-being of the common citizen. It will now be the
duty of all leaders representing their people at different
levels to work hard for political stability and the
economic development of the country.
Secondly, with regard to the political
environment, new leaders have emerged this year in
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This is
likely to change the political dynamics of the region
and facilitate a resolution of the long-standing issues of
the return of refugees, detained and missing persons,
war crimes and other related matters.
Thirdly, with regard to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, there has recently been an
increase in the return of refugees to their pre-war
homes. The High Representative, in his briefing to the
Security Council last month, mentioned the return of
about 30,000 minorities this year. This relative increase
in the rate of return is a positive development, and it
should be sustained. The most important aspect of
these returns is that they took place in or near the
towns of Srebrenica and Foca, which are synonymous
with mass killing and wild destruction. Much credit is
owed to the tough measures taken by the High
Representative for implementation of property laws,
which have facilitated an increase in refugee returns.
Fourthly, on the issue of economic reform, we
started by saying that we put emphasis on the economic
reconstruction of the country. The new leadership must
create conditions for self-sustained economic growth.
The country must move beyond the legacies of the past
era and make the transition to a dynamic civil society
and a healthy, market-driven economy. The need for
continued support by the partners of the peace
implementation process is vital. This will set the stage
for success, despite the many hurdles that might be
erected by the obstructionist political forces.
Fifthly, attention should particularly be directed
to capacity-building, including the modernization of
the judiciary, strong and independent courts, the
training of police and border service personnel, and
support for key legislation projects.
The priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina remain
in the areas of economic reform, the return of displaced

9

S/PV.4222

persons and refugees and the building of common
institutions — areas already identified by the High
Representative as the three main priorities. Although
progress has been slow, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
come a long way towards attaining these goals. We
applaud the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
their continued efforts to rebuild a well-functioning
sovereign State.
We are fully cognizant of the many obstacles
standing in the way of progress. The need for the world
to stand by the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
provide the necessary support, assistance and
encouragement is now greater than ever. We hope that
Bosnia will soon be on a definite course towards
economic and institutional recovery and that it will
register achievements which will pave the way towards
its ultimate integration into the rest of Europe.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the European
Union. The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association country member of
the European Economic Area — Norway — align
themselves with this statement.
The briefing we have just heard from Mr. JeanMarie Guéhenno reaffirms that the general elections
that were held on 11 November in Bosnia and
Herzegovina proceeded smoothly, without significant
incident. This represents noticeable progress as
compared to the 1996 and 1998 elections. These
developments reflect a better acceptance by the voters
of the rules of the democratic game.
In this respect, the High Representative, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), by carrying out substantive
action for several years now to promote
democratization and respect for human rights in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, have significantly contributed to this
process. We should be gratified by this and
congratulate them.
We would like also to thank the OSCE in
particular for effectively organizing the voting. The
OSCE’s
Election
Appeals
Subcommission
is
continuing its efforts to determine what took place in

10

the polling stations in which localized problems have
been identified.
Regarding the results, it is clear that at this stage
we can speak only on the basis of partial and
preliminary data. That data shows the dominance by
the nationalist parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which we deem regrettable. On the territory of the
Federation, it would seem that the multi-ethnic parties
did not achieve the hoped for gains. In Republika
Srpska, the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) will probably
be the major victor in those elections.
Moreover, it should be recalled that the so-called
referendum organized by Croat nationalists in certain
sectors of Bosnia and Herzegovina was declared illegal
by the OSCE. That referendum, which put forward the
creation of new institutional structures based on
ethnicity that would benefit only the members of one
community, has no legal validity. Fortunately, the
majority of the voters wisely rejected it.
As the Peace Implementation Council emphasized
in Brussels last May 23 and 24, the promotion of joint
operational and responsible democratic institutions is
among the highest priorities of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Members of
the Security Council had an opportunity to show their
support for this objective on 26 October, in the
presence of Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch.
In these conditions, it is essential that the elected
authorities from both entities contribute, in a spirit of
cooperation, to the formation of an effective central
executive body. In a general manner, the Bosnian
political officials bear responsibility for working to
strengthen
joint
institutions
in
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, to promote good governance there in all
of its aspects, and to fully implement the Dayton
Agreements. This will be the key to reconciliation and
economic development.
Continued efforts to change mindsets are also
needed in order for voters to stop making decisions on
the basis of ethnic criteria. Bosnian political officials
have an essential role to play in this respect, as does
the international community, in order to promote the
long-awaited changes.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Austria. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

S/PV.4222

Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak in Austria’s capacity as Chairman-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). My statement will be very brief.
Three days ago we witnessed peaceful and
orderly elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
OSCE
Mission
in
Bosnia-Herzegovina
had
meticulously prepared this election, which required
well-coordinated efforts on the part of the international
community.
The
OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office,
Austrian Foreign Minister Benita Ferrero-Waldner,
expressed her gratitude and appreciation to the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Office of
the High Representative, the Stabilization Force, the
European Community Monitoring Mission and other
international agencies involved.
Although
the
OSCE
retained
overall
responsibility for the elections, the local municipal
election commissions and the more than 4,000 polling
station committees carried out most of the work on the
ground. In addition to more than 750 international
supervisors and 200 international observers, the
elections were monitored by nearly 5,500 domestic
observers in polling stations throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All in all, more than 40,000 Bosnian
citizens assisted in the organization of these elections,
and the local police successfully ensured that they were
peaceful.
The local interest in and support for the election
is documented by the satisfactory voter turnout and by
the smooth voting procedure. Only minor incidents
were reported. Nearly all polling stations opened and
closed on time. The voter lists appeared to be generally
correct. There are indications of certain problems in
Srebrenica, the only municipality in which municipal
elections were also held. In general, however, the
observers agree that the voting procedure was a success
with a majority of the population voting in a fair and
free manner. It is now up to the authorities to ensure an
efficient and orderly transfer of power and to guarantee
that the public resources and funds of the country are
protected during the transitional process.
This is not the place and time for the OSCE Chair-inOffice to comment on the results of the elections. The
official results have yet to be released. Clearly, the
international community hopes that the outcome of the
elections will strengthen the Dayton Process. Let me
reiterate in this respect that the OSCE will continue its

efforts to strengthen civil society and support the economic
reforms, the rule of law and the return of refugees in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Irrespective of the outcome, however, it is
necessary to emphasize that the elections constitute a
milestone in the realization of the concept of ownership
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 11 November the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina demonstrated that
they are prepared to shape their political destiny in a
democratic, free and peaceful manner. It is up to the
newly elected officials to prove that they are worthy of
the trust placed in them.
The President: I invite the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr.
Mladenović
(Federal
Republic
of
Yugoslavia): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno for his briefing on the elections in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Soon it will be five years since the signing of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement, the key document for
the maintenance of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It reflects a delicate balance of the interests of its three
peoples and two entities. It is therefore of great
importance for its successful implementation and for
the preservation of peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that all signatory parties and guarantors of
the Dayton/Paris Agreement respect their obligations.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is one of the
signatories and guarantors of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement. Following the major democratic changes in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, conditions are
being created to view the problems and outstanding
issues related to the implementation of the Agreement
in a new, democratic way.
The President of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Vojislav Kostunica, and the new Federal
Government pointed out on a number of occasions that
they accept the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement and that
they would call for its successful implementation. This
Agreement is the only realistic basis on which a
sovereign and democratic State in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be built. I would like to stress that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has no territorial
claims against its neighbours, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina. One of our main foreign policy priorities
is the normalization of relations with all former

11

S/PV.4222

Yugoslav republics. We are ready to conclude, as soon
as possible, an agreement on the establishment of
diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to demonstrate our commitment to the pursuit of a
foreign policy based on peace, good-neighbourliness
and constructiveness. I would like to recall that Bosnia
and Herzegovina was the first country President
Vojislav Kostunica visited upon his election. On 12
October he conducted talks with the members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I wish to point out that the most important issue
at this moment is to secure a consistent and full
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.
Various requests or proposals aimed at changing or
revising the Agreement are unacceptable for the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is therefore very
important for the international community to
unequivocally support the implementation of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement.
The victory of democratic forces in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the strengthening of
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina will help
strengthen our mutual relations. The Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia will also work towards establishing
special relations with Republika Srpska, which is in
accordance with the Dayton/Paris Agreement.
Naturally, as one of the constituent peoples in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Serbs have every right to
maintain close links with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. I assure you that those links will not be
detrimental to the respect of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
the establishment of diplomatic relations.
We are pleased to note that the general elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina were held in a safe
environment, without incidents, and that they could be
called truly democratic, free and fair. All three
constituent peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
proved that they are ready to assume responsibility for
democratic development, for their own future and for
the commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina to Europe.
We are convinced that normalization of relations
among the countries of South-East Europe is a conditio
sine qua non for peace, stability and development in
the region and the shortest way for all its countries to
take their rightful place in the European family of
nations.

12

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia considers
that one of the first priorities in the implementation of
the Dayton/Paris Agreement is the return of refugees
and displaced persons. I emphasize that in view of the
fact that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is the
country that provides shelter to the greatest number of
refugees in Europe today. There are currently 286,600
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, 337,000 from
Croatia and 269,500 internally displaced persons in
Yugoslavia
receiving
humanitarian
aid.
This
humanitarian, economic and political problem can
hardly be solved without support, cooperation and
understanding by the international community.
Therefore, all existing means and possibilities should
be used, and new solutions should be sought, in order
to alleviate this problem. Above all, this approach
serves the interests of refugees and displaced persons
and is aimed at strengthening stability in the region.
The question of the economic reconstruction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the success of the
transition process is also very important for the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in view of the complementary
and interdependent nature of the economies of the two
countries. We are convinced that significant
breakthroughs will soon be made in this area as well.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is a strong
advocate of an open market economy. Economic
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore
very high on its agenda.
As I already stated, in a few days we are to mark
the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement. The five years of peace have shown
all the advantages of peace over war, conflict and
division. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia calls,
therefore, on all sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
recommit themselves, with new enthusiasm, full
openness and dialogue to an efficient implementation,
primarily of the civilian part of the Dayton Agreement.
As a signatory and guarantor of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
prepared to render its full support to the democratic
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, by the same
token, to the stabilization of the region of South-East
Europe as a whole.
The President: I shall now give the floor to Mr.
Jean-Marie Guéhenno to respond to the comments and
questions raised in the debate.

S/PV.4222

Mr. Guéhenno: There were two questions from
the Canadian representative, one on President Jelović’s
remarks. It is, I think, the understanding of the
international organization present in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that those remarks should not go
unanswered. At the moment there is discussion with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe on what the appropriate answer
is, and that has not been finalized yet.
On the second question, the timing of presidential
elections, this is indeed a very political issue, and we

do not have information at this stage as to when they
could take place.
The President: I thank Mr. Guéhenno for the
clarifications he has provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

13
