S/2007/382

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 June 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 26 June 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report of 14 March 2007 (S/2007/147) on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). In its presidential
statement of 17 April 2007 (S/PRST/2007/12), the Security Council endorsed my
suggestion to evaluate the situation along the entire Lebanese-Syrian border and
invited me “to dispatch at the earliest, in close liaison with the Lebanese
Government, an independent assessment mission to fully assess the monitoring of
the border ... and to report back to the Council ... on its findings and
recommendations in this regard”.
As I informed the President of the Security Council in my letter dated 23 May
2007, I decided to establish such a mission, referred to as the Lebanon Independent
Border Assessment Team. I have received the mission report from the Team leader,
Lasse Christensen (Denmark). I fully support its recommendations and will provide
further substantive comments in my next report on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006).
In the meantime, I have the honour to attach the mission report and should be
grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-39621 (E) 090707

*0739621*

S/2007/382

Report of the Lebanon Independent Border
Assessment Team
Summary
By paragraph 14 of its resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council called
upon the Government of Lebanon to secure its borders and all entry points to
prevent the entry into Lebanon without its consent of arms or related materiel. At
the request of the Government of Lebanon a United Nations team of border police
experts was dispatched to Lebanon in September 2006 and February 2007 to assess
the situation along the border and provide the Security Council with its findings and
recommendations. By its presidential statement of 17 April 2007 (S/PRST/2007/12),
the Council invited the Secretary-General to dispatch at the earliest, in close liaison
with the Government of Lebanon, an independent mission to fully assess the
monitoring of the border and to report back to the Council on its findings and
recommendations in that regard.
The United Nations Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team visited
Lebanon from 27 May to 15 June 2007. The Team worked in close cooperation with
the Government of Lebanon and border security authorities and received unimpeded
support in its efforts to assess all aspects of Lebanese border security with special
emphasis on preventive measures against arms smuggling. The Team held talks with
Government officials and the directors of the four agencies directly involved in
border security management: the Lebanese Armed Forces, General Security, the
Internal Security Force and General Customs.
All four land border crossing points and another one to be made operational in
July 2007 were visited as well as the international airport of Beirut and the Beirut
seaport. A number of locations along the “Green Border” with the Syrian Arab
Republic were visited in order to assess the diverse conditions of the border,
including the different forms of terrain, the extraordinary conditions created by the
Palestinian cross-border military strongholds and areas affected by border
delineation disputes.
The Team observed during talks and field visits that the level of cooperation
and coordination, particularly in terms of inter-agency information sharing and joint
planning, was rather low. As a natural result of the long period in which there was
no traditional land border and consequently very limited border security
management, the four agencies have acquired little experience or expertise in this
domain. One example is the deployment of forces along the Green Border, where
observation posts and checkpoints appear to be operated according to traditional
military doctrines and aimed more at territorial defence than the establishment of
border surveillance to prevent smuggling.
The design and layout of the border crossing points do not fully meet the
requirements of a controlled area designated for border security activities. In
addition, there is a lack of prescribed procedures for the activities related to a border
crossing point, resulting in an unregulated flow of passengers, vehicles and cargo
within the facilities.
Training in traditional border security skills would provide the agencies
involved with the necessary know-how to reverse or remedy these conditions.

2

07-39621

S/2007/382

The Team found widespread professional will to secure the borders of
Lebanon. It also found that the border security agencies had introduced some
measures to improve border management efficiency, utilizing the previous United
Nations assessment teams’ recommendations, the bilateral assistance provided by
the Government of Germany and the equipment donated by other nations.
However, the Team also assessed that the present state of border security was
insufficient to prevent smuggling, in particular the smuggling of arms, to any
significant extent. The assessment was further strengthened by the fact that not a
single on-border or near-border seizure of smuggled arms was documented to the
Team.
There is still substantial room for improvement in Lebanese border security
management, some of which can only be achieved through assistance and support
from the international community.
It is, however, also worth pointing out that a number of recommendations from
earlier assessments as well as the current can be implemented by the Lebanese
authorities on their own without significant financial implications and without
changes in the organizational structure of the border management agencies.
On the basis of its observations, assessment and conclusions, the Team
presents the following recommendations:
(a) A multi-agency mobile force focusing on arms smuggling should be
established with the purpose of ensuring efficient arms seizures through its
intelligence and rapid interception capabilities. An additional purpose would be to
serve as a role model for the other border security agencies and as a platform for a
possible future dedicated border guard agency;
(b) An intelligence and analysis component should be established within the
multi-agency unit with the purpose of gaining access to all relevant intelligence
from the four agencies, analysing it and providing the four agencies and the multiagency force with targets identified as highly susceptible to apprehension;
(c) International border security experts should be deployed to the multiagency unit and its embedded intelligence and analysis cell; to all four agencies on
all levels, in particular on the operational level, to advise on non-military border
security aspects and follow up on the training provided; and to an advisory
secretariat consisting of both international advisers and representatives from the
Lebanese border security agencies;
(d) A dedicated border guard agency should be established as part of a longterm strategy to streamline border security procedures and gather all expertise,
information and intelligence in one agency;
(e) Full and absolute control should be established over border crossing
points by creating standard operating procedures, including regulations for any
movement inside the control area of persons, vehicles and goods, standardized
compulsory measures for checking compliance and anti-corruption mechanisms; and
by modifying the infrastructures where appropriate;
(f) Measures should be instituted to separate legal and illegal near-border or
border-crossing activities so as to create a transparent and unambiguous
environment, such as restricting movements in some areas, marking the borderline,

07-39621

3

S/2007/382

establishing additional local border crossing points, relocating crossing points to the
borderline and providing socio-economic programmes as an alternative to families’
reliance on smuggling;
(g) Training programmes should be established for the four agencies at all
levels to transform the border security concept and doctrines into a highly
professional and skilled civilian approach, where possible building on or drawing
from the training experience of the northern border pilot project and implementing
practical aspects of the internationally agreed integrated border management
concept relating to cooperation and coordination, intelligence gathering, technical
and tactical skills and risk analysis;
(h) The provision of border-specific equipment to all agencies should be
enhanced for the purpose of increasing efficiency and serving as a force multiplier,
including air and land surveillance equipment, communications equipment, vehicles,
scanners, other inspection devices and all required computer hardware and software;
(i) Cooperation with Syrian counterparts should be established, in particular
at the operational level, making border security management a joint effort to secure
the border and prevent illegal cross-border activities.

4

07-39621

S/2007/382

Contents
Page

I.

Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–7

7

II.

Mandate, approach and methodology of the Lebanon Independent Border
Assessment Team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8–15

8

III.

IV.

A.

Mandate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

8

B.

Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9–11

9

C.

Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

10

D.

Support offered to the Team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

10

E.

Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14–15

10

Situation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16–39

11

A.

Border description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16–21

11

B.

Agencies in charge of border management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22–28

12

C.

The situation as seen by the key Lebanese players in border management . .

29–37

14

D.

International support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38–39

17

Facts and findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40–181

17

A.

Official border crossing points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40–108

17

1.

Land border crossing points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40–86

17

(a) Description and procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40–46

17

(b) Facts and findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

47–74

19

(c) Partial assessment, analysis and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

75–81

24

(d) Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

82–86

25

Beirut airport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87–98

26

(a) Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87–92

26

(b) Facts and findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

93–97

27

(c) Conclusions and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

98

27

Beirut seaport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

99–108

28

(a) Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

99

28

(b) Facts and findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

100–106

28

(c) Conclusions and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

107–108

29

Green Border . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

109–166

29

1.

Description and procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

109–122

29

2.

Facts and findings on locations visited by the Team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

123–151

32

3.

Partial assessment, analysis and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

152–166

37

2.

3.

B.

07-39621

Paragraphs

5

S/2007/382

C.

Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

167–169

39

D.

Assessment of the implementation of the recommendations of the expert
mission dispatched by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations . . . . . . .

170–181

40

Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

182

41

I.

Visits and meetings of the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45

II.

Map of border crossing points and field visits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48

III.

Terms of reference of the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

V.
Annexes

6

07-39621

S/2007/382

I. Background
1.
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) of 11 August 2006 marked an end to
the war between Israel and Lebanon that had erupted on 12 July 2006 as a result of
the kidnapping of two Israeli soldiers by Hizbullah. A ceasefire came into place on
14 August, 33 days after the start of the war. The resolution called for the
withdrawal of Israeli forces, the observance of a ceasefire, the deployment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces south of the Litani River and the strengthening of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
2.
Several components of resolution 1701 (2006) have a direct relation with the
notion of border control and border security. In paragraph 8, the Council calls upon
Lebanon and Israel to respect, inter alia, the principles of no foreign forces in
Lebanon without the consent of its Government and no sales or supply of arms and
related materiel to Lebanon except as authorized by its Government. In paragraph
14, the Council calls upon the Government of Lebanon to secure its borders and
other entry points to prevent the entry into Lebanon without its consent of arms or
related materiel, and requests UNIFIL to assist the Government of Lebanon in so
doing at its request.
3.
In response to the request addressed by Fouad Siniora, Prime Minister of
Lebanon, to Angela Merkel, the Chancellor of Germany, on 25 August 2006, a joint
Federal Police/Customs project office was set up in Beirut on 7 September 2006 on
the basis of a bilateral agreement. A team of five experts each from the German
Federal Police and Customs arrived in Lebanon with the following mission: to
advise the Lebanese security authorities tasked with border protection and customs
duties on formulating a national border control strategy; to evaluate the standards of
the equipment currently in use and supply equipment where appropriate; and to
provide incident-related training to the Lebanese security authorities in charge of
border protection and customs where appropriate.
4.
As part of the bilaterally agreed mandate, the Federal Police/Customs project
office carried out an evaluation of the situation of the Lebanese security authorities
in charge of border control and collection of customs duties, with the exception of
the borders south of the Litani River under the mandate of UNIFIL. On the basis of
the findings, the project office formulated a proposal for Lebanese integrated border
management. As a starting point, a pilot project was launched in the northern region,
involving improvements to the facilities at the international airport and the seaports.
The overall objective of the pilot project is to enable the Lebanese authorities to
develop an integrated border management strategy for the entire country. The
implementation phase of the project will run from September 2007 to the end of the
year and might be extended afterwards to the eastern border.
5.
In September 2006, a border police expert team from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations conducted a brief assessment of the security measures in
place at Lebanon’s borders. The assessment report highlighted the coordination
structures put in place by the Government while pointing to a number of
shortcomings in matters of coordination, equipment and training. From 25 February
to 3 March 2007, the expert team made a return visit to Lebanon to assess whether
the changes recommended in its report had been implemented. In the team’s view,
the second assessment revealed both “encouraging and disappointing findings”. But
the team also acknowledged that the time available to the Government of Lebanon

07-39621

7

S/2007/382

between the submission of its first report and the second assessment, in some cases,
did not allow for full implementation of the recommended measures.
6.
The report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), dated 14 March 2007 (S/2007/147), mentioned increased
reports of regular smuggling of arms across the border from the Syrian Arab
Republic to Lebanon and the measures put in place by the Government of Lebanon
to improve its management of the border. The report mentioned that the assessment
team from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had suggested a follow-up
mission within four to six months to allow the Government of Lebanon adequate
time to implement the recommended improvements.
7.
In its presidential statement dated 17 April 2007 (S/PRST/2007/12), the
Security Council welcomed the Secretary-General’s intention to evaluate the
situation along the entire border and invited him to dispatch at the earliest, in close
liaison with the Government of Lebanon, an independent mission to fully assess the
monitoring of the border, to keep the Council informed on its contacts with the
Government and to report back to the Council on its findings and recommendations.

II. Mandate, approach and methodology of the Lebanon
Independent Border Assessment Team
A.

Mandate
8.
Following the recommendations of the second police expert mission report and
the presidential statement of the Security Council (see paras. 5 and 6 above), the
Department of Political Affairs was entrusted to gather experts in customs, border
police and military issues and establish the Lebanon Independent Border
Assessment Team. On 27 May 2007, the Team, comprising Lasse Christensen, Team
Leader (Denmark), El Hadi Salah (Algeria), Franz Vogl (Germany), Sherrone Blake
Lobban (Jamaica) and Gilbert Barthe (Switzerland), convened in Beirut for a threeweek field mission with the following mandate:
(a) To fully assess current border security and the monitoring of the “Green
Border”, including its official crossing points;
(b) To provide specific recommendations to the Secretary-General on
measures and assistance strategies leading to the enhancement of security along the
entire length of Lebanon’s border with the Syrian Arab Republic, some 320 km;
(c) To review the roles of all the agencies involved in border security, 1 with
particular attention to current national customs and border monitoring capacities, as
well as progress made by security and customs agencies in strengthening their
control of the border in compliance with resolution 1701 (2006), and identify major
obstacles hindering the effective strengthening of that control;
(d) To analyse the findings of the previous Department of Peacekeeping
Operations border police expert team’s two visits to Lebanon (in September 2006
and February 2007) and build on its recommendations, with specific focus on the

__________________
1 The Internal Security Forces, General Security, General Customs and the Lebanese Armed

Forces.

8

07-39621

S/2007/382

design of an integrated border management project and possible training and
development opportunities, working in close consultation with the above-mentioned
agencies and with German experts currently conducting a bilateral assistance pilot
project on border security enhancement in the north of the country;
(e) To liaise closely with the aforementioned German team and Lebanese
agencies and develop a set of standards for border entry points, including
recommendations on the reconstruction and refurbishment of critical infrastructure
along the border.
The Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team is expected to report to the
Security Council on its findings and recommendations prior to the submission of the
June report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006).

B.

Approach
9.
As a starting point, the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team found
it appropriate to do research on the notions of border security and integrated border
management, in order to clearly define the focus and scope of its mandate. Border
security and integrated border management are essential to the promotion of open
and secure borders. The challenge is to find ways of enhancing border security to a
level proportional to the threats of illegal cross-border activities, while facilitating
legitimate travel and commerce, protecting human rights and promoting human
contacts. 2 The latter is essential when considering the close linkages border
populations enjoy at the Lebanese-Syrian border.
10. The concept of integrated border management has a variety of interpretations.
The Justice and Home Affairs Council of the Council of the European Union, for
example, agreed on the following dimensions as constituting the conceptual
framework of integrated border management: 3
(a) Border control (checks and surveillance) including risk analysis and
crime intelligence;
(b) Detecting and investigating “cross-border crime” in cooperation with all
the relevant law enforcement authorities;
(c) The four-tier/filter access control model, which as stipulated in the
European Union Schengen Catalogue of 2002 includes measures in third countries
of origin or transit, cooperation with neighbouring countries, measures on border
control at the external borders and control measures within the common area of free
movement;
(d) Inter-agency cooperation in border management including border guards,
customs and police, national security and other relevant authorities;
(e)

Coordination and coherence at the national and transnational levels.

11. Integrated border management relies on full professionalism and interinstitutional coordination. Furthermore, its proper implementation requires a clear
__________________
2 See www.osce.org/activities/13030.html.
3 Council of the European Union, 2768th meeting, Brussels, 4 and 5 December 2006.

07-39621

9

S/2007/382

definition of the respective powers, functional responsibilities, roles and missions of
police, customs authorities and military, as well as the conditions for the transfer of
responsibilities from the military to the civilian authority as soon as the situation
permits. It also includes the enhancement or establishment of appropriate
mechanisms for regular exchange and joint assessment of information at bilateral
and regional levels. 4 The German team implementing the capacity-building project
in northern Lebanon has based its strategy on the conceptual framework of
integrated border management.

C.

Methodology
12. The Team carried out its mandate in close partnership with the Government of
Lebanon and all its security agencies. This approach was greatly facilitated by the
Government’s total readiness to receive and support the mission and to benefit from
the mission’s advice and recommendations and from the potential support to border
management that the Team’s report could generate. At the highest level, the Team
met with the Prime Minister. It consulted regularly with Lebanese security
authorities in their Beirut headquarters, meeting with the commanders or directors
of the four security agencies, and, as the need arose, with their officers in charge.
The Team carried out field visits to all official border crossing points and many
specific areas of the Green Border. In addition, it was able to observe a large part of
the Syrian border during a helicopter flight. Its assessment focused on the technical
aspects of border security and border management. Nevertheless, the Team could
not ignore some specific political/security situations at a few locations on the border
which have a direct impact on the ability of the Lebanese authorities to manage and
control the border.

D.

Support offered to the Team
13. The Team’s activities in Lebanon benefited from the outstanding support of
both the Lebanese authorities and the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon (UNSCOL). The Team consulted closely with the Special
Coordinator of the Secretary-General for Lebanon and his political advisers. A close
protection unit provided personal and movement security and logistical support. At
the same time, the Lebanese security agencies offered the highest level of
cooperation to the Team and accommodated all of its requests to visit specific
locations and meet with officials.

E.

Constraints
14. Beside the extremely positive notes of the previous paragraphs, the Lebanon
Independent Border Assessment Team faced some constraints of different levels or
nature. During its visits to the field (border control points and Green Border), the
Team was escorted by the United Nations, and provided with a close protection unit
and vehicles from the Internal Security Forces, complemented by military
intelligence officers and regional commanders of the Lebanese Armed Forces. The

__________________
4 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, common platform of the Ohrid Regional Conference on

Border Security and Management, 22 and 23 May 2003.

10

07-39621

S/2007/382

Team’s convoy consisted of at least six black four-wheel-drive vehicles plus two
Lebanese Armed Forces military vehicles from the area. Approximately 10 persons,
including the Team’s 5 experts and army commanders, would meet in the offices of
the various authorities in charge at the border. This made the interaction of the
mission with local officials formal and rigid. On some occasions, they appeared to
be careful and almost defensive in their discussions in front of such a high-level
audience.
15. In general, the time available to the Team did not allow for building real
working relations with the local authorities in charge at the borders, and offered
little possibility to verify or cross-check some statements made to the Team and its
entourage. The fact that the Syrian Arab Republic had closed its border operations at
the three northern border posts, following the armed operations against the
Palestinian camp of Nahr-el-Bared, prevented the Team from witnessing the border
authorities performing their duties. Also, the time spent at some locations near
Palestinian strongholds at the Syrian border was rather short, for security reasons.

III. Situation
A.

Border description
16. Lebanon covers an area of 10,452 square kilometres and borders on the Syrian
Arab Republic in the north and in the east and on Israel in the south. The coastal
waters of the Mediterranean Sea mark off the Lebanese territory in the west. The
responsibility for supporting the Government of Lebanon in the surveillance of the
sea border and the area south of the Litani River has been placed on UNIFIL and
therefore the assessment of security at this section of the border is not included in
the mandate of the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team.
17. The border to the north, follows the Nahr el Kabir River from its source in the
area of Sahlet el Bqaiaa to the Mediterranean Sea. This small river, sometimes only
a few metres wide and with many shallow points, describes the course of the
borderline along its length of approximately 65 km. East of the source of the Nahr el
Kabir River the border area is marked off by the foothills of the sharply rugged
Mount Lebanon (up to 3,083 metres high) extending to the north-eastern border. The
border area adjacent to the coastal waters can be described as flat and densely
settled. Further inland the terrain becomes hilly with scattered settlements and dense
vegetation of bushes and trees. Further to the east the terrain is slightly inclined and
finally reaches the foothills of Mount Lebanon (up to 830 metres high).
18. The land border to the east follows the arid Anti-Lebanon mountain range and
Hermon Mountain to a maximum height of 2,629 metres and 2,814 metres
respectively. The terrain is very rocky and partially inaccessible with very sparse
vegetation at higher altitudes. The lower altitudes have thin vegetation of bushes
and cedar trees. Settlements can be found only at the base of mountains or in the
hinterland. The land borders with the Syrian Arab Republic in the north and the east
extend to approximately 320 km in all. The border is partially marked off by natural
boundaries, e.g. the Nahr el Kabir River in the north and banks of earth up to

07-39621

11

S/2007/382

2 metres high in the east, but so far no delineation or demarcation of the LebaneseSyrian land has been made. 5
19. Legal entry into and departure from Lebanon takes place through four official
land border crossing points at Arida and Aboudieh in the north and Kaa and Masnaa
in the east. Further border crossing points are the Beirut airport and the seaports of
Beirut and Tripoli. Another border crossing point in the north-east, Bokayaa, will
open in July. Numerous trails and pathways cross the “Green Border” in the north
and the east, making it possible for smugglers and foreign infiltrators/terrorists to
cross the border while avoiding the official border crossing points. These trails and
pathways are suitable for both small-scale and large-scale smuggling activities.
20. On the eastern border, inhabitants rely heavily on cross-border commerce,
technically illegal but neither controlled nor prevented by the Lebanese or Syrian
border authorities. For example, in the village of El Qasr Lebanese farmers cross the
border in order to cultivate fields on the Syrian side. Lebanese children living on the
Syrian side cross the border to attend schools on the Lebanese side. These
movements are technically illegal and require solutions at the political level and
appropriate measures from the Lebanese border authorities as well.
21. A major concern in terms of border security lies in several heavily armed
Palestinian military strongholds covering both sides of the borderline. These camps
constitute pockets of territory where the Lebanese security forces are denied the
possibility to exercise their mandate. The Lebanese Armed Forces confine
themselves to controlling and sealing off the surroundings of these camps, as in
Haloua, south-east of Masnaa.

B.

Agencies in charge of border management
22. The management of the border is shared by four different security agencies:
the Lebanese Armed Forces, the Internal Security Force, General Security and
General Customs. General Customs is divided into the Customs Office and the
Customs Brigade, with specific and complementary tasks. The overall staffing of the
Lebanese Armed Forces is 64,000, 6 of whom 15,000 are deployed along the Israeli
border and 5,000 to 8,000 are engaged in border security along the Syrian border.
Lebanese Armed Forces
23. The mission of the Lebanese Armed Forces, as indicated on their website, 7 is
the following:
“(a) Facing the Israeli occupation and its perpetual aggression in South
Lebanon and West Bekaa and supporting the steadfastness of Lebanese citizens
to ensure the complete withdrawal of the Israeli forces to internationally
recognized borders;

__________________
5 A United Nations cartography unit is working on this issue for the stretches of the border for

which an understanding exists with the Syrian Arab Republic. For the disputed parts (e.g. Jabal
el Mazar, near Deir el Aachayer and Halimet Quarah), a Lebanese-Syrian intergovernmental
committee has been established, however no indication was given of when results could be
expected.
6 According to the Jaffee Center’s Middle East Military Balance.
7 www.lebarmy.gov.lb.

12

07-39621

S/2007/382

(b)

Defending the country and its citizens against all aggression;

(c)

Confronting all threats against the country’s vital interests;

(d) Coordinating with Arab armies in accordance with ratified treaties
and agreements;
(e)

Maintaining internal security and stability;

(f) Engaging in social and humanitarian activities according to national
interests;
(g) Undertaking relief operations in coordination with other public and
humanitarian institutions.”
On several occasions, when discussing with the Team the role of the units based
along the border area, brigade and regiment commanders of the Lebanese Armed
Forces in the field described their mission in terms of (a) defending the country
against “foreign aggression”; (b) maintaining internal law and order; and
(c) assuring border control for personnel and goods (or preventing the smuggling of
people/arms/goods from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanese territory).
Internal Security Force
24. The Internal Security Force is a police force subject to the authority of the
Minister of the Interior, but following military laws and rules in general. Legislative
Decree No. 139 dated 12 June 1959 broadly defines the Force’s mandate as
contributing to the general security by controlling the land, sea and air borders and
by monitoring foreigners in Lebanon. Law No. 17 dated 6 September 1990 defines it
as a public armed force whose jurisdiction covers the whole Lebanese territory, the
territorial waters and airspace. The parts of the Force’s mission related to border
security are (a) to keep order and security; (b) to assure public order; (c) to
implement the missions of the judicial police; and (d) to support the public
authorities in carrying out their duties. More specifically, the Force can execute its
mission by (a) requesting identity documents; (b) searching persons; (c) arresting
persons (in application of a legal judgement or warrant or immediately in the act);
(d) entering houses; (e) seizing prohibited substances; (f) establishing checkpoints;
and (g) using arms when arresting suspected persons under certain conditions and
specified situations. The Force members also have the duty to report any crime they
are witness to or those reported to them.
General Security
25. The agency known as General Security operates on the basis of Legislative
Decree No. 139 dated 12 June 1959, which defines its general tasks as gathering
information for the Government, in particular political, economic and social
information and carrying out criminal investigations of violations committed against
the internal and external State security. General Security supports the Internal
Security Force in controlling the land, sea and air borders, issuing entry visas for
foreigners and monitoring foreigners residing in Lebanon. It controls the entry of
foreigners into the country, their residence, their departure and their movements,
and organizes and delivers travel documents for the Palestinian refugees living in
Lebanon or coming from foreign countries. It describes its security functions as
(a) collecting political, economic and social information for the benefit of the

07-39621

13

S/2007/382

Government; (b) evaluating, analysing and exploiting information in different
domains; (c) participating in judicial investigations within the frame of offences
committed against the internal or external security of the State; (d) supervising the
preparation and implementation of security measures; (e) cooperating in different
functions on security matters; (f) preparing wanted notices and the prosecutions
related to wanted persons, travel bans and entry restrictions to the country; and
(g) participating in the control of the land, sea and air borders.
General Customs
26. Lebanese Customs is headed by a High Council of Customs which acts as an
overall legislative and nominating authority. It is part of the Ministry of Finance but
acts as an independent authority, forwarding the collected customs duties and value
added tax to the Ministry. The execution of the Lebanese Customs mandate is
entrusted to General Customs, managed by the General Director. General Customs
comprises two main departments, the Customs Office with 470 civilian staff and the
Customs Brigade with 1,320 uniformed staff. The Customs Office includes a
division of smuggling control. Both departments have requested a higher number of
staff, 2,635 for the Customs Brigade and 591 for the Customs Office. The current
economic crisis has not allowed for sufficient funding for the recruitment of
additional officers.
27. The Customs Office is in charge of the following tasks at the legal border
crossing points: (a) collection of customs duties, excise taxes and value added tax in
a fair and accurate manner; (b) prevention of smuggling and detection of fraudulent
practices against customs and related laws; (c) clearance of persons, their baggage,
cargo and mail; (d) protection of the general welfare of Lebanon by enforcing
import and export restrictions and prohibitions; and (e) provision of accurate
international trade statistics for the public and trading community.
28. The Customs Brigade and its units, in charge of controlling the borderline,
have the following mandate: 8
(a) Controlling the land, sea and air borders and other territories which are
subject to Customs control in order to implement the laws, customs regulations and
different rules that handle the import, export and ownership of goods;
(b) Detecting fraud, according to the law of customs and other regulations,
and establishing checkpoints in order to scrutinize people’s movement;
(c)

Providing support to the civilian Customs Office;

(d) Assisting all the military forces and the official administrations in
accordance with the rules and cases mentioned in the laws in force.

C.

The situation as seen by the key Lebanese players in
border management
29. During the nearly 30 years of Syrian presence and influence inside Lebanon,
no concept of border security at the Lebanon-Syrian border was ever implemented.

__________________
8 According to Decree No. 2868 dated 6 December 1959 and Decree No. 4461 dated 15 December

2000.

14

07-39621

S/2007/382

Consequently, this situation led to the arrival of a significant Syrian workforce in
Lebanon and the creation of politico-commercial networks across the border for
which there was no real obligation to abide by the legislation on movements of
goods and persons. Along the same line, border agencies were not encouraged to
cooperate under the Syrian presence. This situation generated a low working ethic,
morale and motivation among the agencies’ personnel. The Government of Lebanon
and its security forces and authorities began to be really involved in border
management on the eastern border only in 2005, after the withdrawal of the Syrian
troops from Lebanon.
30. The ceasefire with Israel in 2006 and the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) required the revamping and deployment of elements of all security agencies
on the Syrian border. All of the security agencies acknowledged a lack of experience
and historical best practices in real-life border security management. A Joint Border
Security Committee, comprising all the heads of the security agencies and chaired
by the Internal Security Force, was created as an advisory body to the Government.
The committee meets once a month; its short-term strategy is to improve the current
border management system. At the same time, the Committee was quite interested in
any consideration pertaining to the creation of a specialized border security agency.
31. The various agencies were able to demonstrate to the Team their current efforts
to manage and control border security at the Syrian border. In order to comply with
the terms of resolution 1701 (2006), the Lebanese Armed Forces assigned a total of
8,600 staff to control the northern and eastern borders. This staffing includes a
contingent of 240 Internal Security Force personnel under the command of the
Lebanese Armed Forces. The internal events of May-June 2007 in the Palestinian
camp of Nahr-el-Bared required, however, a reduction of 30 per cent in the number
of Lebanese Armed Forces units in charge of border security and their redeployment
to the inside. For the remaining approximately 5,000 Lebanese Armed Forces
members in charge of border security, such a non-traditional mission for an army
necessitates some level of coordination with the other agencies traditionally in
charge of border security, the Internal Security Force, General Customs and General
Security.
32. In his meeting with the Team, the Prime Minister of Lebanon described the
land border with Syria as a major issue of concern and expressed the desire that
efforts in improving border management be carried out in the framework of
tightening security against armed threats, such as smuggling of weapons and
personnel for terrorist purposes. He added that the Government deplored the
non-recognition by the Syrian Arab Republic of their common border and the
non-existence of diplomatic relations between the two countries. Such a situation
had a negative impact on cross-border security issues. Parts of the Lebanese borders
were considered free of arms smuggling, namely the southern part, owing to the
heavy presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL, and the coastal line,
owing to the International Maritime Task Force.
33. The Joint Border Security Committee and the agencies described their priority
as improving control over security-threatening cross-border violations such as the
smuggling of illegal aliens with criminal/terrorists intentions and deliveries of
significant weaponry systems. The Committee and agencies could not, however,
present to the Team a single case of intervention on such targets during or
immediately following their crossing of the border. In their view, the management of

07-39621

15

S/2007/382

the border by all the different agencies had proven to be quite efficient, and the
display of control points possibly a good deterrent to potential offenders.
34. Border security agencies indicated that the smuggling of daily commodities
between the border communities had always existed and that agencies were rather
tolerant when the quantities of goods smuggled indicated a mere personal use. It
was also pointed out to the Team that powerful cartels were still involved in
lucrative smuggling of commodities like cigarettes and fuel. Agencies were
therefore working along a thin line of compromise, not wishing to alienate the
support said to be received from the border communities in reporting important
cases of smuggling. Those communities had always lived from cross-border trade,
taking advantage of price differences between the two countries. Local authorities
pointed out that most of the Bekaa population had been involved in the culture of
cannabis and poppies but had stopped it when the Government intervened under the
pressure of the international community. The alternative development projects
promised by the latter had not materialized and communities had thus increased
their involvement in smuggling.
35. Agencies in charge of border security acknowledged a lack of experience in
implementing several tactical and technical aspects of their mission. For the official
border posts, the Lebanese authorities acknowledged a need to review processes and
the current infrastructure. As for the Green Border, they indicated a lack of proper
border surveillance equipment. The Lebanese authorities warmly welcomed the
support and equipment provided so far by the donor countries, and especially the
partnership with Germany for the project of integrated border management, whose
pilot phase was currently ongoing. On the other hand, the need for cross-border
cooperation with their Syrian counterparts was at several times pointed out,
although some strategic bilateral meetings were reported to happen from time to
time at a higher level, mostly on border delineation and customs issues. As an
example, the Governor of Bekaa met with his Syrian counterpart, the Governor of
Rif Dimajq through a joint Syrian-Lebanese committee dealing with land ownership
issues along the border.
36. Border security agencies, especially the Lebanese Armed Forces, were very
specific in highlighting the fact that the presence of Palestinian military strongholds
on the Syrian border represented a considerable obstacle to border management. It
diverted units in charge of border surveillance and anti-smuggling missions to
military deployment around such camps, reducing the number of troops available for
surveillance of the rest of the border. The Lebanese Armed Forces, however,
considered the issue of armed Palestinian strongholds to be of a political nature,
therefore requiring a political solution.
37. Owing to specific political and security-related events in Lebanon in the past
two years and budgetary considerations, General Customs had not been able to
obtain authorization from the Council of Ministers to fulfil its identified recruitment
needs. That was quite relevant when considering that its uniformed and armed
brigade, 1,320 staff mostly deployed at the border outside the official border posts,
was working at only 50 per cent of its required staffing level. At the same time, the
Lebanese Armed Forces acknowledged the need to train their border units in proper
border security strategies to replace the purely military defence tactics currently in
use. On several occasions, security agencies and the Joint Border Security

16

07-39621

S/2007/382

Committee pointed out the long-term need for a dedicated border security agency,
instead of allocating such task to the Lebanese Armed Forces.

D. International support
38. In resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council called upon the international
community to take immediate steps to extend financial and humanitarian assistance
to the Lebanese people and also to consider further assistance in the future to
contribute to the reconstruction and development of Lebanon. In the framework of
resolution 1701 (2006), the international community committed itself, inter alia, to
support Lebanon’s security sector. An international donor coordination group
(Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, the United Kingdom,
the United States and the European Commission) has been established to facilitate
the coordination of the various capacity-building projects in the Lebanese security
sector. Those projects aim at enhancing judiciary capabilities and the capacity of the
Lebanese security forces (General Security, General Customs, the Internal Security
Force and the Lebanese Armed Forces) by providing training and funding for
equipment.
39. Within the international donor coordination group, a “border management”
sub-group (Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, United Kingdom and United
States) has been established to facilitate the coordination of the members’
engagements in the field of border security. Against the background of the German
project to implement integrated border management in Lebanon, the border
management sub-group is chaired by the head of the German project. Regular donor
sub-group meetings facilitate the coordination of projects and activities in terms of
capacity-building (training and equipment) for the benefit of Lebanon’s border
authorities, thus enhancing border security beyond the area of responsibility of
UNIFIL.

IV. Facts and findings
A.

Official border crossing points

1.

Land border crossing points

(a)

Description and procedures
40. Passengers and goods entering Lebanon by land must travel through one of the
four current border entry points: Arida (north of Tripoli along the coast) and
Aboudieh (north-east of Tripoli) in the north and Kaa (at the northern edge of the
Bekaa Valley) and Masnaa in the east (on the Beirut-Damascus highway). Another
border crossing point, located at Bokayaa (northern border), is currently under
construction and expected to be operational by the beginning of July 2007. All
border crossing points are classified by Lebanese border security authorities into
categories “A” and “B”, depending on the dimensions of the perimeter and premises
of each border crossing point and the volume of corresponding transborder traffic
(passengers, vehicles and goods). Statistics received from the offices of the Director
of Customs show that Masnaa handles the largest number of incoming and outgoing

07-39621

17

S/2007/382

vehicles daily, while Aboudieh handles the second largest, Arida the third largest
and Kaa the least number of vehicles daily.
41. In general the premises of the border crossing points are not located close to
the borderline; they are located at a distance of up to 13 km from it. Most of the
perimeters of the border crossing points are neither fenced nor secured by access
gates. The separation of incoming and outgoing vehicles and cargo within the
premises of all of these border crossings is inadequate, which makes it difficult to
exercise control over the flow of passengers within the perimeter. In general, arrival
and departure checks are not separated; they take place in the same terminal. A
forward post occupied by staff from the border security authorities could be found
close to the borderline at each border crossing point except for Arida.
42. Border security authorities performing immigration checks and customs
clearance at the border crossing points are General Security, General Customs
(Customs Office and Customs Brigade) and an intelligence cell from the Lebanese
Armed Forces, which attempt to identify terrorists crossing the border and
supervises the operations of the agencies. The clearance procedures follow a general
pattern, in that border crossers are cleared first by General Security and their goods
then processed by General Customs. Al Maasna is exceptional, because passengers
are required to stop first at General Customs for inspection and then go to General
Security for entry into Lebanese territory. There are no female officers at any of the
border crossing points. Customs clearance documentation is sent to Beirut for final
logging.
43. Passengers, vehicles and goods passing through a border crossing point have
to undergo a three-stop process. First, General Security staff stop the
passengers/vehicles individually and request all passengers to report to General
Security inside the arrival terminal for an immigration check. Counters for
diplomats, foreigners and Lebanese passengers separate the passenger stream. The
immigration check is computerized with regard to passports. Customs clearance
processes, however, are not computerized and documentation is sent to Beirut for
logging. Data insertion for Lebanese and Syrian identification cards is done
manually. Arriving Syrian nationals are registered with the help of a form
(“entry/exit-card”). 9
44. Vehicles have to queue until the process of checking the vehicle in front is
completed. Once the immigration check is performed, the passengers return to their
vehicles and proceed to the customs clearance of goods and cargo, which takes place
in small terminals with separated lanes for vehicles and buses. 10 Finally the
passengers proceed to a “re-check position” where staff from General Security make
sure that they have passed through all the positions and the forms are correct.
45. There are no defined and obvious procedures at all border crossing points that
govern the selection and inspection of goods. Therefore, decisions are largely based
on personal trust and intuition. Authorities did not present the Team with reports on
seizure of weapons or ammunition at any of the four official border crossing points
__________________
9 One half of the form is issued to the passenger, the other half remains at the border crossing

point for registration purposes (saved for 6 months).
10 Customs clearance of trucks takes place at separated cargo checking areas either within the

perimeter of the border crossing point or at defined locations far away from the border crossing
point (e.g. at Tripoli for cargo entering at Arida and El Aboudieh).

18

07-39621

S/2007/382

since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006). However, officials at all levels
informed the Team that they were aware of cases of smuggling of gasoline, clothing
and other consumer items, and that to a large extent that type of smuggling had been
tolerated and treated as relatively unimportant.
46. At none of the border crossing points does cooperation between officials from
the two sides of the border take place (sometimes the heads of the Lebanese border
security agencies do not know the names of their Syrian counterparts); nor is interagency cooperation and coordination very discernable (e.g. day-to-day operational
contact at the border crossing point, addressing practical questions such as the
alignment of policies and practices where relevant, the development of new
infrastructure, the possibility of sharing buildings or information services or the
development of common training for present and new staff).
(b)

Facts and findings
Arida 11
47. The Arida border crossing point is located near the coast north-west of the
border with Syria. The premises are close to the borderline. The stretch from the
Syrian border crossing point to the Lebanese border crossing point is fenced. An
access gate to this border crossing point exists but the perimeter is only partially
fenced. The premises are squeezed into a small location which is not large enough
for trucks and cargo. However, separate exits and entrances exist for arriving and
departing passengers. The immigration check for arriving and departing passengers
takes place in the same terminal with no separation between them and is performed
by 38 officers from General Security (3 junior police officers and 35 police
officers). Immigration checks are performed in conformity with the workflow
described in paragraphs 42 to 44 above. Passengers and vehicles then proceed to the
customs clearance.
48. According to General Customs, Arida clears an average of 88 trucks per day
for import and 120 for export. An average of 1,137 cars and buses passes through in
both directions. Trucks carrying cargo are selected and sent to Tripoli for inspection.
The Team was not able to learn the procedure or process for earmarking trucks for
inspection. The Team was informed that there were not enough motor vehicles to
conduct the relevant patrols and that officers often took taxis when returning from
escorting trucks to Tripoli.
49. The premises of General Security and General Customs are outdated and
poorly furnished; the conditions in the small terminal for the customs clearance of
vehicles and buses are satisfactory. General Security and General Customs at this
border crossing point are in general poorly equipped (e.g. lack of vehicles, radio
equipment, scanner, cameras and explosive detectors). Customs operations are not
computerized. Equipment donated by Germany for the detection of forgeries (DocuBox and document examination toolkits) was present and working. All General
Security staff reportedly had passed further training courses in the detection of
forgeries conducted by the German project office in Beirut.

__________________
11 At the time of the Team’s visit, no border crossing activities were seen due to the closure of the

Syrian border post on the adjacent side, which is believed to be a result of the fightings in the
Nahr-el-Bared camp in Tripoli. Despite this, the Lebanese border crossing officials had reported
to work and informed the Team that they continue to patrol the area.

07-39621

19

S/2007/382

50. With regard to discovered criminal offences, the heads of General Security and
General Customs stated that only small-scale smuggling (diesel, clothes and food)
took place at Arida. No smuggling of arms or ammunition had been discovered in
the past three years except for a small number of sidearms found in an Iraqi truck.
No forgeries had been discovered in the one year and seven months since a General
Security lieutenant interviewed by the Team had taken up his post
51. There appears to be no local cooperation between officials from the two sides
of the border at Arida.
Aboudieh 12
52. Aboudieh is the main border crossing point (classification “A”) at the northern
border with an average 123 trucks entering and 192 exiting per day and an average
of 1,015 cars and buses in both directions. The premises of Aboudieh are situated
approximately 1 km from the borderline, with a village lying between the border
and the perimeter of the border crossing point. There is a narrow road immediately
after leaving the Syrian border and a few metres before the Lebanese Customs
advance post. Therefore persons may deviate before approaching the Lebanese
advance post. Near the borderline, an advance post staffed by Lebanese border
authorities has been established to escort Syrian buses and vehicles with passengers
on a narrow road to the premises of the border crossing point, on a case-by-case
basis, in order to prevent passengers from avoiding the immigration check at the
border crossing point (the village between the borderline and the border crossing
point being a risk factor). However, the stretch between the forward post and the
premises of the border crossing point can be surveyed neither from the forward post
nor from the premises of the border crossing point. Any deviation of passengers
from the route is supposed to be detected by the Lebanese Armed Forces; General
Security restricts its responsibility to the border crossing point.
53. The terminals for immigration check and customs clearance are situated in
different locations. The border crossing point has no access gate, its perimeter as
well as the way to the borderline are not fenced. The premises of the border crossing
point are squeezed into a small location not being large enough for trucks and cargo,
in particular when trucks are queuing as seen during the Team’s visit. Nevertheless,
separate lanes for vehicles and trucks exist for arrival and departure.
54. The immigration check for arriving and departing passengers takes place in the
same terminal (no separation of arriving and departing passengers) and is performed
by 72 officers from General Security (1 junior police officer and 23 police officers
per shift, three shifts).
55. There appears to be no visible control mechanism within the customs area,
which is unfenced. Trucks are escorted to the border crossing point and selected
trucks are sent to Tripoli to be inspected. Some passenger cars are checked, but
generally cars with Lebanese licence plates are not subjected to inspection. There
appears to be no standard procedures followed by all officers for the inspection of
vehicles or passengers. Some report that they examine the cargo based on intuition.
56. The premises of General Security and General Customs are out of date and
poorly furnished; the conditions in the small terminal for the customs clearance of
__________________
12 Similar situation to that explained in note 9 above.

20

07-39621

S/2007/382

vehicles and buses are satisfactory. General Security and General Customs at this
border crossing point are in general poorly equipped (e.g. lack of vehicles, radio
equipment and inspections equipment). Equipment donated by Germany for the
detection of forgeries (Docu-Box and document examination toolkits) was present
and working.
57. All General Security staff reportedly have passed further training courses in
detection of forgeries conducted by the German project office in Beirut.
Immigration checks are performed in conformity with the workflow as described in
paragraphs 42 to 44 above.
58. The only criminal offences as indicated by the heads of General Security and
General Customs related to small-scale smuggling (diesel, clothes, medicine and
cellular phones). No local cooperation between officials from the two sides of the
border was reported to take place.
Bokayaa
59. The Bokayaa border crossing point will become operational in July 2007,
making it the third post on the northern border. It is located approximately 25 km
east of the Aboudieh border crossing point. The premises are situated approximately
500 metres from the borderline. The establishment of a forward post similar to
Aboudieh is planned and a preliminary forward post has already been established.
There were signs that villagers live and conduct business alongside the road that
joins the border crossing point to the borderline. The municipality has been
demolishing shops and houses along the unpaved road to the borderline that have
kept busy (illegal) cross-border commerce going; during the Team’s visit only a few
shops remained. The Lebanese authorities informed the Team that they are in the
process of removing all the shops and erecting fencing along this part of the
roadway. A narrow riverbed that can be crossed easily in the summer, when it is dry,
delineates this area of the borderline.
60. The terminals for immigration check and customs clearance will be situated at
different localities inside the city. The premises of the border crossing point are
squeezed into a narrow location that is probably not large enough for trucks and
cargo. The premises of General Security (a previous post of the Syrian forces) have
been refurbished but are neither furnished nor equipped. They are located at the
centre of a seemingly busy thoroughfare where villagers move freely on foot and in
vehicles and conduct commercial activities. The perimeter is not yet fenced, nor is
there an access gate. Facilities to house General Customs have not yet been
provided. The entire layout of the area designated for receiving cargo and
passengers lacks a level of control that would ensure that outgoing passengers and
cargo remain separated and that the travellers do not interact with the villagers.
61. The Team was informed that there is a plan under way to eventually move this
border crossing to the actual borderline, where the current customs advance post is
situated. The Lebanese authorities are in dialogue with their Syrian counterparts to
build a border crossing point adjacent to the area earmarked for this new border
post. The Team observed no sign on the Syrian side to indicate that such activity is
taking place.

07-39621

21

S/2007/382

Kaa
62. The Kaa border crossing point is one of two along the eastern border with the
Syrian Arab Republic and is located approximately 10 km south-east of the city of
El Hermel. The premises are situated approximately 10 km from the borderline with
approximately 3,000 people living permanently in the zone. Near the borderline a
forward post operated by Lebanese Armed Forces staff checks for suspicious
arriving and departing passengers and vehicles. 13 Kaa processes an average of four
trucks per day for import and eight for export, while the number of cars and buses
passing through in both directions averages 303 daily.
63. The perimeter of the border crossing point is partially surrounded by a wall; an
access gate does not exist. Cross-border traffic arriving at the perimeter is not
separated into lanes for cars, buses and trucks, resulting in inadequate control over
the movement of passengers and their cargo within the customs area. The customs
area is small and there are no facilities for body search or hand-held equipment for
detecting concealments of prohibited items. The terrain however would be spacious
enough to extend the infrastructure and the facilities for a satisfying organization of
incoming and outgoing traffic.
64. The premises and furniture of General Security at Kaa are in good condition.
The immigration check for arriving and departing passengers takes place in the
same terminal (no separation of arriving and departing passengers) and is performed
by eight officers per shift from General Security (1 junior police officer and 7 police
officers). There are no female officers at Kaa.
65. General Security at this border crossing point is poorly equipped (e.g. lack of
vehicles and radio equipment). Equipment donated by Germany for the detection of
forgeries (Docu-Box and document examination toolkits) was seen in operation.
Eighty per cent of General Security staff reportedly passed further training courses
in detection of forgeries conducted by the German project office in Beirut.
66. Immigration checks are performed in conformity with the workflow described
in paragraphs 42 to 44 above. With regard to customs inspection, there seems to be
an absence of standard procedures based on unbiased reviewing and profiling of
cars, passengers and cargo. This border crossing point lacks a computer to link the
customs operations to the main system in Beirut. With regard to discovered criminal
offences, the shift leader of General Security stated that one person had been caught
by the Lebanese Armed Forces on 30 May 2007 attempting to illegally sneak into
the country. Smuggling, in particular smuggling of arms and ammunition, was said
not to take place at Kaa.
67. Inter-agency cooperation does not take place between General Security at the
border crossing point and the Lebanese Armed Forces at the forward post, nor is it
the case with customs. Cooperation and coordination requests have to be channelled
through the headquarters of the military intelligence. Criminal offenders
apprehended by the Lebanese Armed Forces along the border are handed over to
General Security at Kaa for further investigation. There is no local cooperation
between officials from the two sides of the border.

__________________
13 Lebanese exit stamps of passengers staying for more than one day in the zone between the

border crossing point and the borderline cease to be valid.

22

07-39621

S/2007/382

Masnaa
68. Masnaa is the main border crossing point (classification “A”) at the eastern
border and is the most important point for cross-border traffic to Damascus. Trucks,
passenger buses, taxis and private cars use this crossing point to transport people
and cargo across the border. The daily number of truck crossings averages 194 for
import and 180 for export. An average of 905 buses and cars pass daily in both
directions. An advance customs post is situated at this borderline and the Customs
Brigade is responsible for ensuring that cargo and suspicious passengers are
escorted to the official crossing point. Lebanese officials estimate that 3,000
individuals are living in villages situated between the borderline and the official
crossing point.
69. The premises of Masnaa are situated approximately 8 km from the borderline.
The perimeter of the border crossing point is partially enclosed by a wall and a
fence. The cargo area where trucks are located is not fenced. There is no
infrastructure or equipment for the inspection of cargo. The authorities have
acknowledged that the current flow of traffic and the logistics of the compound are
inadequate. The premises of the border crossing point are located within a small
area. Plans are under way to purchase adjacent land to alleviate the problem of
space. Despite this initiative, the compound will be too small to accommodate the
flow of traffic through this crossing point. At the moment, construction work for
another bus lane is ongoing. Separate lanes for arrival and departure exist only for
cars; arriving trucks have to cross the lane of cars and buses to arrive at the cargo
checking area. The conditions in the premises of General Security at Masnaa are
apparently satisfactory. The immigration checks for departing and arriving
passengers take place in separate terminals.
70. The customs system is not computerized and the customs processes and
procedures are manually linked to Beirut. Customs entries are regularly sent to
General Customs in Beirut, where the relevant statistics are entered. The Team was
informed that an automated system for customs data will soon be installed at
Masnaa and linked to Beirut. Information on the cars and drivers that depart and
arrive through the border crossing point are logged into a computerized system.
There is no evidence to suggest that the information is being used for risk/trend
analysis.
71. General Security and General Customs at this border crossing point are in
general poorly equipped (e.g. lack of vehicles, radio equipment and hand-held
devices for detecting explosives, weapons or other concealed contraband or
concealed compartments). Equipment donated by Germany for the detection of
forgeries (Docu-Box and document examination toolkits) were present and working.
The fixed scanner donated by the Government of China is not yet in place.
72. All general security staff reportedly have passed further training courses in
detection of forgeries conducted by the German project office in Beirut. The
superficial level of inspection done by customs officials indicates that they are
largely unaware of common concealment methods and trends in weapons
smuggling, precursor chemicals and raw materials for making explosives.
73. Owing to infrastructural circumstances the immigration checks at Masnaa
differ from the workflow as described in paragraphs 42 to 44 above insofar as
customs clearance takes place before the immigration check.

07-39621

23

S/2007/382

74. With regard to the detection of criminal offences, the head of General Security
stated that the misuse and forging of identification cards was commonly detected at
Masnaa. 14
(c)

Partial assessment, analysis and conclusions
75. Arida is the only land border crossing point located close to the borderline; the
other border crossing points have remote premises supplemented by a forward post
close to the border. Despite these advance posts, the authorities do not have strategic
surveillance over the areas between the border crossing point and the borderline,
which are often either inhabited or hilly and bushy terrain. These circumstances
constitute risk factors for border security as they facilitate smuggling and illegal
trafficking.
76. Most of the premises of the border crossing points are confined to small
spaces, preventing the implementation of efficient and effective processes for
immigration checks and customs clearance (separate lanes for cars, buses and
trucks, separate arrival and departure terminals, separation of arriving and departing
passengers, sufficient parking space for trucks/cargo). In general the perimeters of
the border crossing points do not have access gates and are partially fenced if at all.
The zoning and separation of arriving and departing passengers within the premises
are poorly defined and in some instances non-existent. The lack of defined areas for
processing incoming and outgoing passengers and cargo results in the absence of a
controlled sterile customs area, which is an essential component of border security.
77. Immigration checks and customs clearance take place at three positions; the
current workflow slows down the processing of passengers and is liable to present
shortcomings in terms of border security. The procedures used to control arriving
vehicles are inadequate, as there are no clear standards in use to ensure that cargo is
selected for inspection based on adequate risk analysis; nor does the selection of
vehicles and passengers for inspection appear to be based on profiles garnered from
proper risk analysis. The lack of such standards and of analysis/profiling limits the
ability of the customs officials to target potential smugglers and prevent the
smuggling of weapons and explosives or other dangerous items through the official
crossing points. Immigration checks are not fully computerized. Manual data
insertion and registration (to be carried for Lebanese or Syrian identification card
holders) is time-consuming. Subsequent investigations are laborious and timeintensive.
78. Immigration checks and questioning of passengers are not based on risk
analysis and profiling but are done in a standardized process. The techniques used to
inspect passenger vehicles and cargo trucks are not thorough and therefore the
ingenious smuggler may find it quite easy to bring not only explosives, light
weapons and ammunition but also assembled and unassembled heavy weaponry
such as missiles and rockets into the country concealed in compartments and panels
of cargo trucks and passenger vehicles. Experience has proven that strategic
selection and thorough inspection of cargo is essential in border security, because
international trends indicate that contraband is often embedded in normal cargo and
may be transported using falsified information on key documents. The contraband

__________________
14 On 7 June 2007, 12 alleged Iraqi nationals were seized at Masnaa on suspicion of using forged

identification papers.

24

07-39621

S/2007/382

may successfully pass through customs areas with or without knowledge or
assistance from enforcement agents.
79. The smuggling of consumer items such as gasoline and clothing in itself is not
a serious threat to the security of the country’s borders. However, trends in other
countries have shown that “innocent smuggling” at times is an indication of more
dangerous organized crime such as the movement of weapons and drugs. Similarly,
the same methods used to smuggle consumer items could also be used to smuggle
weapons into Lebanon. Organized crime may be facilitated at two levels, the
international level and the local level. External merchants operating internationally
usually employ local entrepreneurs to facilitate the entry of contraband into the
targeted country. Consequently, in the case of Lebanon, it is essential that special
attention be given to so-called innocent smuggling, which may be an indication of a
more serious trend.
80. Guidelines for checking procedures in the form of standard operating
procedures do not exist. The workflow and the procedures keep to well-trodden
paths even if gaps are obvious. Inter-agency cooperation and international
cooperation (local cooperation between officials on the two sides of the border)
exist only in rudimentary form if at all.
81. Premises are in general poorly furnished and staff are insufficiently equipped;
infrastructure circumstances at the border crossing points are badly in need of
improvement. The cramped conditions at most of the border crossing points create
negative effects on immigration checks and customs clearance, e.g. the existence of
only one terminal for arriving and departing cross-border traffic and the inefficient
processing of passengers/vehicles (queuing of following vehicles while one is being
processed). In the event of relocation of border crossing point premises closer to the
borderline the existing deficiencies should be remedied.
(d)

Recommendations
82. The border crossing points with remote premises should be relocated close to
the borderline in order to avoid risk factors for the immigration check and the
customs clearance. For example, at Aboudieh a village is situated between the
borderline and the premises of the border crossing point thus making it possible for
passengers to evade the immigration check or to hide contraband.
83. The current method used to process passengers and vehicles (three stops
within the perimeter of a border crossing point) slows down the process and is not in
line with the concept of integrated border management. The implementation of a
single-stop process with separate checking positions for vehicles apart from the
queue could speed up the process considerably and promote inter-agency
cooperation.
84. Further expansion of computerized immigration checks would simplify and
speed up the work of the General Security staff at border crossing points.
Subsequent investigations could then be carried out technically and would be less
error-prone. In times of continuously increasing passenger traffic the intensity of
passenger questioning should be subject to periodic risk analysis. Dedicated
resources should be concentrated on cross-border traffic, making it the focus of
attention, especially in relation to the infiltration of terrorists into the country. The

07-39621

25

S/2007/382

initiation of standard operating procedures could establish quality standards for
immigration checks and minimize human errors.
85. International donors have been providing various types of equipment for
General Security and General Customs, including Germany which is also
implementing a pilot project at the northern border incorporating capacity-building
elements. The international donor sub-group for border management coordinates
further engagement of the international community in the field of border security.
Further capacity-building (training and funding of equipment) is needed to enhance
the capability of personnel and the technical level of border security.
86. Inter-agency and international cooperation are key elements of integrated
border management and should be either established or expanded where they
already exist at a low level.
2.

Beirut airport

(a)

Overview
87. Beirut airport is the only international and civilian airport in Lebanon. The
premises were inaugurated in 1996 and in 2005 served a volume of 3,285,076
passengers. 15
88. All four border security agencies are involved in airport security. General
Security is responsible for migration control of passengers. General Customs deals
with the clearance of cargo. General law enforcement within the airport premises is
entrusted to General Security and external security responsibilities lies with the
Lebanese Armed Forces. Airport Security is responsible for overall security and acts
as the coordinating body. In all airport security-related issues, the four security
agencies refer to the head of Airport Security.
89. Arriving passengers first report to passport control, where a comparison check
between passport and passenger is performed; the authenticity of passports is
checked manually. A document verifier is present in each passport booth for further
examination of the passport. The verifier is normally switched off and only switched
on if the passport officer becomes suspicious. The only person who can switch on
the equipment is the supervisor, who has to be called to the passport booth. After
examination of the passport, the equipment is switched off again. Before leaving the
passport control area, a second line of control, the checking of an entry stamp in the
passport, ensures that the passenger has gone through passport control procedures.
90. The passenger then proceeds to Customs. At the airport, Customs has adopted
international standards for checking incoming passengers, who pass through a dualchannel system (green or red) in order to facilitate rapid luggage clearance and
traveller flow.
91. Outgoing passengers pass through three lines of control. The first line includes
a passport/passenger check, flight ticket check and luggage security screening. The
passenger then proceeds to check-in, after which the passenger undergoes a passport
pre-check before entering the passport control area itself. At passport control, a
comparison check between passport and passenger is performed; the authenticity of
the passport is checked manually. At both the pre-check and passport control,

__________________
15 2006 figures are not representative owing to the conflict situation at that time.

26

07-39621

S/2007/382

passport verifiers are present. Before the passenger boards the plane, a final
passport/boarding card/passenger comparison check is performed.
92. At the cargo terminal, Customs use two scanners for the clearance of
commercial cargo, complemented by a manual search. There is no physical
separation between incoming and outgoing cargo.
(b)

Facts and findings
93. The security system for airside access appears to be consistent with
international standards. The procedures for passport control and customs clearance
for passengers are well-suited and implemented. The staff at the passport control
points displayed good knowledge of passport control and document examination
equipment. The procedure necessitating a supervisor to switch on the verifiers
before use does not appear to be optimum; it induces reluctance with the passport
control officers, because it is time-consuming and breaks the passenger flow for
unnecessarily long periods of time. The staff performing security screening of
passengers and luggage seem to perform satisfactorily and follow rules.
94. As Customs has not witnessed a single case of weapon smuggling since 1996,
it lacks experience and data for risk assessment and target-setting. The manual
control of commercial cargo performed to supplement the two rather antiquated
scanners was not sufficient owing to a lack of training.
95. There was no physical separation between the areas for incoming and outgoing
cargo, but the corridor linking the two areas was surveyed manually by an officer in
an office adjacent to the corridor. This appears insufficient, as the officer had other
tasks inside the office as well. The cargo area is airside, but vehicles entering and
leaving the area appeared to be manually searched on a random basis only.
96. The interception of incoming cargo before release screening and manual
transfer to a vehicle at the outgoing cargo area appears to be relatively easy, thus
creating an opportunity to avoid security control and taxation. An airside access
system, including progressive security restricted areas, has been introduced with
manual checking between the different areas. In addition, the Internal Security
Force performs random checks and patrols in all areas.
97. There is an adequate presence of female staff in the airport for manual security
checks of female passengers; a few female officers in General Customs and 27 in
General Security provide support to each other. The airport does not possess
advanced passport checking equipment or dedicated document experts. Detection
systems (such as sniffer dogs and scanners) are lacking.

(c)

Conclusion and recommendations
98. There is a need for improvement of certain procedures; for example, the
requirement to call a supervisor in order to perform a basic technical passport check
should be reviewed. An effective and physical separation of ingoing and outgoing
cargo is essential to ensure that taxation and more important security screening
cannot be avoided. More equipment for advanced passport checking and more cargo
security screening equipment, particularly for the detection of weapons and
explosives, are needed.

07-39621

27

S/2007/382

3.

Beirut seaport

(a)

Overview
99. Beirut seaport is the main port in Lebanon, with a volume in 2006 of 20,831
passengers and 1,829 merchant ships. The 2005 figures were of 29,657 and 2,289
respectively. The Beirut port has several security systems, agencies and processes in
place to ensure that contraband does not enter the country through the port facilities.
General Security, General Customs and the Lebanese Armed Forces as border
authorities are present at Beirut seaport. In addition, the Ports Authority, a private
company, is also in charge of security inside the perimeter of the ports. 16

(b)

Facts and findings
100. There is currently no restricted access for visitors to the port, and incoming
and outgoing cargo are not zoned. The parking lot is situated inside the port
premises. During the visit to the ports, the Team observed that construction work
was ongoing to build fences in order to create a physical barrier between the various
areas of the port, thus enhancing security at the seaport. New identity cards with
security features are apparently to be introduced. Moreover, a video surveillance
project was launched on 12 June 2007 to track movements within the seaport, thus
improving security in it as well. Access to the seaport requires the issuance of an
either temporary or permanent access card.
101. The terminals and facilities for immigration checking and customs clearance
are situated at different locations within the perimeter of the port. Immigration
checks of arriving and departing crew members and passengers are conducted in the
same terminal. The premises of General Security appear to be in good condition and
the available furniture satisfactory. The main radar lost in the bombings in July 2006
has still not been replaced.
102. The equipment donated by Germany for the detection of forgeries (Docu-Box
and document examination toolkits) was present and operating. Sniffer dogs for
detecting explosives are available on request. All General Security staff have, it was
claimed, attended further training courses in detection of forgeries held by the
German project office in Beirut. Four General Security officers attended, in China,
another training course in the detection of forgeries.
103. Immigration checks of crew members are performed by General Security,
which collects the passports of crew members on board and then makes immigration
checks in the terminal. General Security keeps the passports for the duration of stay
of the ship in the port. It also makes random checks on ships riding at anchor in the
port to detect stowaways. On the basis of a risk analysis, two General Security
officers are constantly present on board “risk ships” to check the entry and exit of
crew members.
104. Inter-agency cooperation is not sufficiently developed. For example, General
Customs and the Lebanese Armed Forces both perform container checks at different
locations within the perimeter of the port. Manning the General Customs facilities

__________________
16 A wall encloses the perimeter of the seaport; in all, five gates grant access to the port facilities.

General Security and the Lebanese Armed Forces are in charge of access control of those gates.
It seems there is an overlapping responsibility between the two agencies with regard to access
control.

28

07-39621

S/2007/382

(X-ray hall and operation container) with soldiers from the Armed Forces would
permit better synergies.
105. General Customs and the Lebanese Armed Forces are the agents responsible
for cargo inspections at the Beirut seaport. Customs officials informed the Team that
a risk analysis is conducted to earmark cargo for inspection. The Lebanese Armed
Forces inspect all cargo leaving the port, whether or not it has been previously
examined by Customs. The Lebanese Armed Forces manually inspect cargo, without
the use of search aids, such as hand-held devices or dogs. One fixed scanner is in
place and the Customs officer controlling the machine appears capable and
comfortable using it. Customs does not board ships that are docked at the ports. The
Customs authorities informed the Team that there had been no official reports of
seizure of weapons or ammunition at the seaport. With regard to the criminal
offences, the heads of General Security and General Customs both stated that only
smuggling of goods (mainly forgeries, such as clothes, watches and cosmetics) had
been discovered at Beirut seaport.
106. Ports Authority is a private sector company that also plays an essential role in
enhancing the security of the port and cargo. It is responsible for recording,
managing and monitoring the movement of cargo in the ports, including ensuring
the integrity of seals placed on containers at the port of departure and while in the
port. The company is also responsible for upholding the International Ship and Port
Facility Security code, an international standard designed to counter the threat of
terrorism to maritime security. The International Maritime Organization (IMO)
implements the code worldwide.
(c)

Conclusions and recommendations
107. The Beirut seaport has several procedures and practices in place that are
essential for the security of cargo and the prevention of smuggling. General
Customs has implemented risk management systems that assist in the identification
of high-risk cargo. The fixed scanner is also a very good addition and should bolster
the security of the border of Lebanon. The Lebanese Armed Forces perform an
essential check and balance by re-inspecting cargo that has already been inspected.
However, the Team believes that it is not essential for them to re-inspect everything.
The Lebanese Armed Forces should base its inspections on risk analysis and
intelligence. The presence of Ports Authority should be supported and encouraged,
because its staff is the first point of contact with cargo entering the country.
108. In order to exercise full control over all cargo, whether on the port or aboard
ships, it is advisable that General Customs board ships based on intelligence and
risk assessment. This will help to deter any port side or transfer of weapons within
the maritime territory of the country.

B.

Green Border

1.

Description and procedures
109. The Green Border is a strip of land between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, stretching from the coastal border crossing at Arida in the north-west
corner of Lebanon to Mount Hermon in the south-east, where it reaches the area of
responsibility of UNIFIL. It is approximately 320 kilometres long. The terrain is

07-39621

29

S/2007/382

extremely diversified along the Green Border and offers very different possibilities
and difficulties for both border security and controlling illegal cross-border
activities.
110. From the coast to 40 kilometres inland to the east, the border terrain is mainly
a fertile, flat lowland of fields, vegetation and small forests, occupied by private
houses, farms and industries along the river that marks the border. Further to the
east, the terrain changes to flat highland (up to approximately 400 metres) with
ravines leading down to the border river. From the north-eastern corner of Lebanon,
the border turns south-east into a hilly highland terrain alternating with areas of flat
terrain. At the Kaa border crossing, the border turns south climbing into the
mountain ridge of the Anti-Lebanon.
111. The Anti-Lebanon marks the eastern border of Lebanon with the Syrian Arab
Republic all the way down to Mount Hermon and the UNIFIL area of responsibility.
The Anti-Lebanon consists of, in part, very hilly terrain with many valleys and
rugged mountain areas reaching an altitude of more than 2,500 metres. Along the
border, countless tracks cross the border through low or dry riverbeds in the north,
and mountain roads or tracks in the hilly and mountains areas to the east, to a large
extent only passable using four-wheel-drive vehicles.
112. There is a very high level of cross-border activities in one grey zone. Although
technically illegal, a large amount of people have daily “social” reasons to cross the
border. Many people own and cultivate land on the other side of the border; some
cross the border for family or schooling reasons, or to seek medical help. In
addition, a large number of families rely on petty smuggling activities as their only
source of income or as the only way to uphold a livelihood.
Responsibility of Green Border security management
113. Green Border security management between border crossing points is the
overall responsibility of the Lebanese Armed Forces, which deployed approximately
8,600 personnel along the Green Border after the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006). The units deployed at the border have been given the task of both securing
the Green Border and defending the territory of Lebanon. Units of the Internal
Security Force are deployed at the Green Border as reinforcement in general or as
replacement of Lebanese Armed Forces troops redeployed elsewhere in Lebanon.
During the Team’s stay in Lebanon, more than 1,000 Lebanese Armed Forces
personnel were redeployed away from the border owing to fighting in Nahr-el-Bared
north of Tripoli, the bombings in Beirut and for other tasks.
114. The Lebanese Armed Forces are supported by the Customs Brigade, a
uniformed and executive part of General Customs that carries out mobile patrols in
the border areas.
Equipment availability
115. The Lebanese Armed Forces and the Customs Brigade perform their border
security duties with equipment that is inadequate in number or not suited to the task.
In the units of the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed along the Green Border and in
the Customs Brigade, there is a lack of border-specific equipment. Patrols and
“ambushes” by the Lebanese Armed Forces are to a large extent carried out with
trucks and armoured personnel carriers, in part due to the military need to ensure

30

07-39621

S/2007/382

strength in numbers but also in part due to the lack of suitable four-wheel-drive
vehicles. Surveillance equipment such as binoculars is in short supply for both
agencies. The presence of night-vision equipment is scarce, indeed most observation
posts and patrols do not have any at all. Even observation posts in areas around
Palestinian cross-border strongholds make do with simple light-enhancement
equipment without magnification, limiting the range of use to a maximum of 400
metres. Equipment for performing improvised long-duration observation in difficult
terrain and tough weather conditions is non-existent.
Green Border security management
116. Securing the border is in general based on a three-line arrangement. The first
line comprises observation posts and strongholds that survey the border itself. The
second line is made up of patrol activities carried out by either mechanized or foot
patrols, supplemented by ambush activities, which are typically executed by one or
two platoons with light vehicles, trucks and armoured personnel carriers using
traditional military techniques. The third line comprises checkpoints along major
roads, typically in fixed positions and in some instances reinforced by armoured
personnel carriers, that are manned by either the Lebanese Armed Forces, General
Customs or the Internal Security Force, and only on rare occasions as joint
operations.
Coordination and cooperation
117. Very little coordination or cooperation takes place on the Green Border. The
agencies involved, primarily the Lebanese Armed Forces, General Customs and the
Internal Security Force, each work within its own field of responsibility. Only if a
situation makes it necessary, for instance when a person illegally crosses the border
or contraband is found, will the case be handed over to General Security or General
Customs. There is little or no cooperation or joint operations between the agencies,
in particular on the operational level. Hardly any joint activity has been observed or
identified, in particular with regard to forward planning. As an example, the
Customs Brigade performs its own operations, based on its own information, only
informing the Lebanese Armed Forces on ongoing operations through the Central
Operational Unit of the Customs directorate.
118. The sharing of information and intelligence is based on each agency’s
assessment of whether information might fall in to the field of responsibility of the
other; if it is considered relevant, it is handed over. However, there appears to be no
joint assessment of gathered intelligence. Any information to be forwarded from one
agency to another passes through the chain of command to that agency’s
headquarters, from there forwarded to the other agency’s headquarters, and then,
ideally, to the appropriate level. The information and intelligence flow is therefore
almost exclusively vertical, and highly centralized.
Border security management results
119. Some results were documented with regard to apprehending people crossing
the border illegally (returning from the Syrian Arab Republic or Iraqis seeking
asylum), showing the existence or a capability to do so. Some results have been
documented with regard to the seizing of goods crossing the border illegally. To a
large extent, seizures are the result of information received from citizens motivated

07-39621

31

S/2007/382

by a substantial financial reward, which is based on the amount of the fine to be
paid by smugglers.
120. All seizures were of traditional smuggled goods, such as diesel fuel, clothes,
cement or food. No seizures of weapons or explosives were made. Although a few
seizures of illegal weapons have been reported, according to the border security
agencies none were in direct connection with a border-crossing activity and none
has been documented en route from across the Syrian border. In all cases known to
the Team, the claim has been that they were internal weapons transports between
different locations inside Lebanon.
121. The problems faced by the agencies responsible for border security on the
Green Border include lack of resources; inadequate equipment in terms of both
quantity and quality; little long-term experience in border security practices; and
conceptual weaknesses. Even when such problems are taken into account, the
performance of agencies in stopping arms smuggling, which is generally accepted as
a fact, can only be described as not up to what could be expected.
122. Even given the difficult conditions in which the agencies have to perform their
duties, it would have been expected that an occasional seizure of arms, either in the
process of being smuggled over the border or en route after smuggling, would have
been made; if by nothing else, by pure chance. This lack of performance is
worrying. It may be indicative of unsatisfactory performance by the agencies
entrusted with border security. It must also raise questions on the issue of the
integrity of the agencies and its personnel involved in border security. The Team is
not in a position to document the true reason for the lack of performance, but it has
been put to the Team from very different levels in the agencies that illegal decisions
on border management are made, motivated by political sympathies, family or clan
connections or traditional corruption.
2.

Facts and findings on locations visited by the Team
123. The locations visited by the Team are described below.
Borderland adjacent to Nahr el Kabir river from Arida and 4.5 kilometres to the
east (location I) 17
124. The area is primarily agricultural and lies next to the river. Many private
houses, farms and some industrial buildings lie by or very close to the river. A
similar situation can be seen on the Syrian side. The river is between 1 and 2 metres
deep and between 2 and 6 metres wide. There is dense vegetation in some areas
along the banks. The location offers good conditions for floating illegal persons or
goods across the border. Due to its curved run, it is difficult to monitor the river for
any substantial length from any one observation post. Parts of the river were not
under surveillance.
125. A number of very visible observation posts of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
fortified to varying degrees, were observed along the river as a first line of control.
In the hinterland, a few fixed checkpoints of the Lebanese Armed Forces were found
as a third control line on major roads and junctions. The location of observation

__________________
17 Roman numerals refer to location on the map in annex II.

32

07-39621

S/2007/382

posts appear to have been chosen more for the purposes of territorial defence than
for ensuring border security.
Zone between the Aboudieh border crossing point facilities and the physical
border at Nahr el Kabir river (location II)
126. The area is primarily agricultural, with some bushes and trees, and lies on both
sides of a paved road approximately 700 metres long from the village of Abboudiye,
where the border crossing point facilities are located, and the bridge crossing the
river, which marks the physical border. The road cannot be monitored in its entirety
from the forward Customs post at the bridge or from the facilities, none of which
have been appointed the task of performing surveillance.
127. According to the Lebanese Armed Forces, the road is patrolled on a random
basis as a first line of control. The zone is cordoned off by observation posts and
mobile patrols of the Lebanese Armed Forces as a second line of control. At the time
of the Team’s visit, no patrols or observation posts were seen inside the zone, and
none were visible from inside the zone. The Lebanese Armed Forces explained that
there were no border crossings as the Syrian Arab Republic had closed the borders
because of the fighting in the Palestinian camp north of Tripoli.
128. The zone offers advantageous conditions for people to cross the river illegally
into Lebanon and to disappear into the bushland along the road, and for goods to be
unloaded in the village before reaching the border crossing point facilities.
Borderland adjacent to the river from the eastern part of Sahlet el Bqaiaa pocket
and 5 kilometres to the south-east at Wadi Khaled River (location III)
129. The area, in part cultivated, lies next to the river. A few private houses are
located close to the river, but most on a ridge 500 to 1,000 metres from the river.
The river was to a large extent dried out at the time of the Team’s visit, but in winter
and spring it is approximately 1 to 2 metres deep and 2 to 12 meters wide. There are
some areas of dense vegetation along the river bank. In several locations, roads from
both the Lebanese and the Syrian sides lead to the river (riverbed).
130. A number of very visible observation posts of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
fortified to varying degrees, were observed along the river, primarily on the ridge
overlooking some parts of the river and the Syrian bank. Owing to its curved run
and the vegetation, it is difficult to monitor the river for any substantial length from
any one observation post. The location of observation posts would appear to have
been chosen for the purposes of territorial defence than for ensuring border security.
131. The location offers good conditions for the illegal crossing of persons or goods
over the border. Although the riverbed had either natural or man-made riverbanks of
0.5 to 1 metre high, unloading and reloading could be done without great difficulty;
according to the Lebanese Armed Forces, the practice was common before their
deployment. Some onlookers claimed that it continued. A number of children and
teenagers were seen freely crossing the dry border river several times.
Area where road leads to border 1 kilometre east of El Qasr town (location IV)
132. A small village is encircled by a creek marking the border with the Syrian
Arab Republic, forming a pocket inside Syrian territory. In most places the creek is
0.5 to 1 metre wide and between 10 and 40 cm deep. The only legal access to the

07-39621

33

S/2007/382

village from the Lebanese side is through a permanent checkpoint of the Lebanese
Armed Forces at a small bridge. Inside the village, an abnormal amount of goods
was observed, in particular cement. The village appeared to be a stage for smuggling
activities.
133. There were no posts of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the village, thus making
access relatively unhindered to the village from the Syrian side. Some Syrian
military posts were seen very close to the creek at a point where a track crossed
from both sides. The track was obviously used frequently. A few observation posts
of the Lebanese Armed Forces were seen in the hinterland as a second line of
control. The location of observation posts would appear to have been chosen more
for the purposes of territorial defence than for border security.
Area where road leads to border at Haouch Beit Ismail town (location V)
134. A road located in flatlands leads to the border, but is blocked by walls of sand.
A checkpoint of the Lebanese Armed Forces is located there, fortified with
sandbags. A few observation posts were observed and appeared to be adequate for
surveillance of the area. All posts were visible and lightly fortified.
Zone (Ard el Qamar) between the Kaa border crossing facilities and the physical
border (location VI)
135. The zone is bordered by hills to the south-east, the river Assi to the north-west,
the border river to the north-east and the El Kaa/El Hermel road to the south-west. It
is primarily used for sheep herding and agriculture and lies on both sides of a paved
road approximately 11 kilometres long from the border crossing point facilities at El
Kaa to the bridge over the river marking the physical border. Inside the zone, there
are approximately 3,000 permanent residents and an additional 2,000 seasonal farm
workers.
136. The zone is randomly patrolled by units of the Lebanese Armed Forces, either
mechanized or on foot as a first line of control. It is cordoned off by observation
posts and mobile patrols of the Lebanese Armed Forces as a second line of control.
Inside the zone, a 16-man strong foot patrol was observed, very visible and moving
in typical military combat formation. A few observation posts of the Lebanese
Armed Forces were seen in the hinterland as a second line of control. The location
of observation posts would appear to have been chosen more for the purposes of
territorial defence than for ensuring border security. The location of the border
crossing facilities in Kaa 11 kilometres from the physical border makes the zone
suitable for crossing or as a holding area for people who have crossed the border
illegally.
Lebanese area east of Anti-Lebanon mountain range (Jabal Lubnan Al Sharqi)
(location VII)
137. The village of Tfail forms a pocket in Syrian territory, accessible only from the
Lebanese side by four-wheel-drive vehicles, but easily accessible from the Syrian
Arab Republic by normal roads. The gravel road leading to the eastern side of the
mountain range reaching more than 1,500 metres in altitude descends to a relatively
flat highland. The mountainous area of the pocket is used solely for sheep herding,
while the flat land is primarily used for fruit production and agriculture.

34

07-39621

S/2007/382

138. The area is largely uncontrolled by the Lebanese Armed Forces, excluding a
very small number of random patrols. There is no first line of control. All traffic of
vehicles, persons, supplies and trade flows unhindered and uncontrolled by the
Lebanese authorities to and from the Syrian Arab Republic. The area is cordoned off
by observation posts located in the mountains, as a second line of control, and by
checkpoints at major roads leading to the mountains from the Lebanese side, as a
third line.
139. On the Team’s way to the pocket along one road, a checkpoint was observed
on the northern outskirts of the village of Ham. The checkpoint was permanent,
lightly fortified and reinforced by an armoured personnel carrier. While crossing the
ridge, the Team observed two fixed observation posts of the Lebanese Armed Forces
overlooking the road. On the way back along another road, no observation posts
were observed. A combined checkpoint/encampment was the first presence of the
Lebanese Armed Forces observed on that particular road, but it was located in the
village of Ham at the foot of the mountains.
140. The use of the road for illegal border-crossing activities seems to have been
confirmed by the fact that, returning from the pocket, the Team observed a vehicle
loaded with fuel barrels abandoned and stuck by the road, another vehicle leaving
the road into a group of trees when approached and a third vehicle, checked by our
escort from the Internal Security Force, encountered en route to the pocket, loaded
with dozens of empty jerry cans.
141. No mobile patrols were seen during the five hours spent by the Team in the
pocket. The almost completely uncontrolled pocket presents good conditions for
staging illegal border crossings and as a storage area for such activities, in particular
because the Palestinian military cross-border stronghold near Maaraboun neighbours
the pocket. The location of the few observation posts and checkpoints would appear
to have been chosen more for the purposes of territorial defence than for ensuring
border security.
Location of Palestinian cross-border stronghold east of Qoussaya town
(location VIII)
142. The Palestinian stronghold is located around the mountain ridge of Er Rouss
overlooking the Békaa Valley. The Palestinian area extends from Lebanese territory
into the Syrian Arab Republic, with the official borderline running through the area.
There is no presence of Lebanese authorities in the Palestinian-controlled area,
leaving the border itself uncontrolled and to some extent outside the vision of the
Lebanese Armed Forces. The Team did not have access to the Palestinian-controlled
area. The completely uncontrolled area creates very good conditions for illegal and
unhindered cross-border activities, as recently documented by information received
by the Team from the Lebanese Government. The information is identical to that
reported to the Security Council by the Special Envoy for the Implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004).
143. The Palestinian area itself is cordoned off by checkpoints and observation
posts of the Lebanese Armed Forces. Their location would appear to have been
chosen more for the purposes of territorial defence than for ensuring border security,
given that they are conspicuous and heavily fortified by armoured personnel
carriers.

07-39621

35

S/2007/382

Location of disputed territory around Deir el Aachayer town (location IX)
144. The disputed territory consists of an enclave claimed by the Syrian Arab
Republic that reaches approximately 10 kilometres into Lebanon and 2 to
4 kilometres wide; it includes the highgrounds south-east of the Damascus highway.
The enclave is currently under complete Syrian control and is de facto attached to
the Syrian Arab Republic.
145. The Lebanese Armed Forces have adapted to the present situation by creating
an encircling control line by heavily fortifying positions, including with the aid of
armoured personnel carriers and tanks. The location of observation posts which are
conspicuous and deterrent in nature, appears to have been chosen more for the
purposes of territorial defence than for ensuring border security.
Location of Palestinian cross-border stronghold at Haloua (location X)
146. The Palestinian stronghold adjacent to the disputed area under location IX is
located in the valley leading from Haloua to the Damascus highway and the
surrounding high ground. It extends from Lebanese territory north-east in to the
Syrian Arab Republic proper; the official border runs through the area and touches
the disputed area (IX) to the south-east.
147. There is no presence of Lebanese authority in the Palestinian-controlled area;
the border itself is uncontrolled and to some extent outside the vision of the
Lebanese Armed Forces. The area is cordoned off by checkpoints and observation
posts of the Lebanese Armed Forces. The location of checkpoints and observation
posts, which are conspicuous and heavily fortified by armoured personnel carriers
and tanks, appears to have been chosen more for the purposes of territorial defence
than for ensuring border security. The Team was unable to enter the Palestiniancontrolled area.
148. The completely uncontrolled area creates highly favourable conditions for
illegal and unhindered cross-border activities.
Assessment from the air of the border and surrounding area from the Arida
border crossing point to Rayak (location XI)
149. In order to comprehend fully the diverse nature of the terrain, an assessment
from the air was conducted with the aid of a helicopter provided by the Lebanese
Air Force. The flight followed the northern border from Arida eastwards to the
border crossing point at Bokayaa, turning south-east along the border to Kaa. From
there, the Team flew south-west along the western slopes of the Anti-Lebanon
mountains to Baalbek. South of Baalbek, the flight kept some distance from the
border, avoiding the Palestinian military strongholds at Maaraboun and Qussaya.
150. In general, the assessment from the air confirmed the Team’s observations on
the ground, particularly those concerning the difficulties for border control. It also
clearly confirmed that the very diverse terrain offers many possible routes of access
for illegal cross-border activities. A large number of cross-border trails that could be
used by four-wheel-drive vehicles were seen. The numerous valleys, dry riverbeds
and mountain trails provide many opportunities for illegal activity that cannot be
countered by static observation posts along or near the border.

36

07-39621

S/2007/382

151. At the same time, the assessment also revealed the strength of border
surveillance from the air, as both the helicopter crew and the Team frequently
identified either suitable locations or options for illegal activities that would be very
difficult on the ground. A number of suspicious vehicles and activities sighted
would have called for interception had the assessment been conducted by a border
security patrol. The Team even observed permanent pipes for the smuggling of fuel
over the border downhill to Lebanese lowland.
3.

Partial assessment, analysis and conclusions
152. The lack of operational cooperation and coordination is evident. Combining
the capabilities of several agencies does not appear to be a desired option. All
agencies appear self-contained and do not actively seek joint operations or planning;
the possibility of any synergy is therefore lost. In particular, the lack of joint
operations based on joint planning presents a multitude of missed opportunities. A
system that ensures the use of the collective capabilities of the agencies for
operational purposes is needed.
153. There is a lack of joint intelligence gathering and analysis in order to, inter
alia, identify profitable targets for operations based on the total sum of intelligence
and information from all involved agencies. Military intelligence seems to have
established itself as the leading intelligence source, occasionally sharing
information with the other agencies. It is still reliant on its own intelligence plus
what other intelligence services choose to convey to it. There is a definite need to
establish a common intelligence and analysis unit to ensure that information and
intelligence are not lost or incorrectly stored.
154. It is evident that the Lebanese Armed Forces lack personnel resources, which
forces them to prioritize border defence over border security. It is in particular clear
that the majority of personnel are used for static defence positions rather than for
fast and flexible mobile patrols focusing on illegal border activities. With the
multitude of tasks given to them, the Lebanese Armed Forces are clearly
overstretched, in particular during active fighting or when countering enhanced
security threats.
155. The Customs Brigade is understaffed. Its desired operating strength is 2,635,
but it only has 1,320. This shortfall obviously limits its ability to perform
operations.
156. The task of securing the Green Border is new to the Lebanese Armed Forces
and does not fall inside what is normally considered a military task. They have
problems adapting known military doctrines to their new responsibility for the
prevention of illegal cross-border activities on the Green Border. Although the
Lebanese Armed Forces appear to do their best under the given conditions and the
personnel seem both vigilant and observant, the personnel deployed are best suited
to traditional combat situations. The lack of resources probably also plays its role.
157. The result is that the Lebanese Armed Forces are actually addressing a civilian
problem with military doctrines, sending a signal to both the population and their
own personnel that the main priority is defence of the territory rather than the
prevention of arms smuggling. Although that priority might be understandable, it
also prevents both the Lebanese Armed Forces and other border security agencies

07-39621

37

S/2007/382

from focusing on smuggling. A change of emphasis, from military doctrine to
civilian border control, is needed in order to ensure high efficiency in the latter.
158. The many legal and semi-legal near- and cross-border activities in combination
with “accepted” smuggling blurs the picture of the border, making it difficult to
distinguish the serious illegal cross-border activities, such as commercial smuggling
and arms smuggling, from the others. There is a need to separate legal, semi-legal
and accepted smuggling from more serious border crimes, making the latter a more
visible and recognizable target.
159. The dilemma of petty smugglers losing their income and families their
livelihood if border security is tightened must be solved through socio-economic
projects. Without such projects, the elimination or reduction of that particular traffic
will continue to blur the picture of cross-border activities, in particular because the
tendency of the border security agencies present to ignore those particular activities
will most likely continue. Consequently, failure to solve or reduce this socioeconomical dilemma will preserve an obstacle to effective border security.
160. All agencies involved in Green Border security are insufficiently equipped.
Lack of suitable equipment reduces their ability to perform border surveillance
adequately in terms of both quantity and quality. There is a need to ensure that these
agencies become better equipped, but also to ensure that the equipment is suited to
the purposes of border security. There is urgent need in particular for surveillance
equipment suitable for night observations and operations, and four-wheel-drive
vehicles to ensure a higher level of mobility and less visible patrolling. Reliable
communications systems will allow small and light unit patrols to be conducted
without having to rely on strength in numbers.
161. The lack of cross-border cooperation is evident. There is no cooperation
between the Lebanese agencies on the operational level and their Syrian
counterparts. As optimum border security management can only be reached by
cooperation of the border agencies on both sides of the border, its absence clearly
represents an obstacle to the improvement of border security.
162. The lack of results shown in the field of arms smuggling, even taking into
consideration the difficult conditions in which the agencies have to perform, is
troubling. It raises the question of whether the current and planned capacitybuilding efforts will deliver the desired effect. Whatever the reasons might be, it
shows that there is a need for a solution that will dramatically increase the risk of
detection through ensuring the integrity of enforcing agencies.
163. The inevitable conclusion at the moment is that there is no real alternative to
the existing arrangement of four agencies responsible for border security along the
Green Border. Ongoing efforts should therefore build on that model and be
continued in both the capacity-building and technical reinforcement of those
agencies.
164. On the other hand, the existing arrangement will be hard to modify; if more
rapid improvement is sought, alternative solutions should be looked into. One
solution might be to establish a multi-agency mobile task force working in parallel
to the existing arrangement but more focused on arms smuggling. Its task would be,
within a relative short period of time, to commence targeted operations based on
target-identifying analysis provided by an embedded joint intelligence and analysis

38

07-39621

S/2007/382

cell. It would combine the best capabilities of the four existing agencies, reinforced
by a small team of international border security advisers.
165. The personnel in the unit would be required to have knowledge of all aspects
of border security, including documents control, customs procedures and tactical
techniques. The unit should be highly skilled and suitably equipped for special
operations. It should have a high level of mobility, including an airlift capacity and
four-wheel-drive vehicles. A high degree of independence and integrity should be
ensured through appropriate command and control mechanisms. The joint
intelligence and analysis cell should provide information to all of the four existing
agencies. A small, highly efficient unit would increase the likelihood of detection of
arms smugglers and thus create a deterrent effect on them in general. Furthermore,
if in future a political decision were made to create a dedicated border guard agency,
the multi-agency unit could provide a solid foundation for it.
166. A number of measures must be taken to separate legal and illegal border or
near-border activities. The current mixing of all sorts of traffic near and on the
border makes the task of identifying illegal activities very difficult. In order to
reduce the personnel-consuming border surveillance task for the Lebanese Armed
Forces and at the same time increase its efficiency, dedicated hi-tech equipment for
border security and the air surveillance capability (by means of helicopters and
unmanned aerial vehicles) should be boosted.

C.

Conclusions
167. In the recent history of Lebanon, border security at the Syrian border is a new
exercise for all the security agencies. Lebanese security agencies have taken
substantial measures to secure this section of the country’s border against arms
smuggling, mostly through the deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the
area. Security agencies demonstrate a good level of understanding of the nature of
their duties in relation to the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006). Despite those
measures, the current border control strategy, the nature of the terrain, the current
state of equipment available and training, as well as the processes and
infrastructures at official border crossing points make it still possible for arms to be
smuggled undetected across the border. The Team would, however, like to point out
that, even in an unfavourable environment, the assets and equipment currently
available would make it reasonable to expect more success in the detection of crossborder weapons smuggling. Beirut airport and, in particular, Beirut seaport benefit
from a more efficient degree of control in the processing of passengers and cargo.
168. The presence of armed Palestinian camps in the border zone constitutes a
major obstacle to both the concept of border security and the implementation of an
efficient, integrated border security system. In addition, the incomplete delineation
of the border with the Syrian Arab Republic further hampers border control and
demotivates border security agencies when having to intervene in areas that are not
clearly demarked. In that regard, a political agreement is urgently needed. The
presence of such obstacles to border security on the Green Border should, however,
not distract from the current ease of concealing weaponry and related materiel in the
legitimate loads of trucks that pass unhindered through the main land border
crossing points.

07-39621

39

S/2007/382

169. While border security agencies have started to cooperate in the control of the
border, their understanding of cooperation is currently limited to a mostly indirect
exchange of information and a separation of the areas of responsibility and
operation, still far from the implementation of basic aspects of integrated border
management. The bulk of the recommendations presented by the Team in section V
below relate to means of ensuring, in the short term, higher levels of integration and
efficiency among the existing forces, and aimed, in the long term, at the creation of
a specialized border control agency. Greater control over all aspects of border
security will have to be accompanied by socio-economic programmes aimed at
providing an alternative income for the families dependent on the revenue from
petty smuggling activities.

D.

Assessment of the implementation of the recommendations
of the expert mission dispatched by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations
170. During its visit, the Team analysed the findings of the border police experts
sent to Lebanon in September 2006 and March 2007 (see para. 5 above), which have
been incorporated into the present report, where appropriate. On the whole, the
Team judged that the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the expert
mission were in part or in their entirety still valid.
Concepts and procedures
171. The concept of integrated border management has not made much progress.
The four agencies responsible for border security still work side by side on their
own mandated tasks, with little coordination and barely any cooperation. No
concept of operations for integrated border management has received ministerial
approval, although it is partly in the works, prompted and linked exclusively to the
German lead pilot project on the northern border. There is no synchronization of
operations and procedures in the border crossing point facilities.
172. The idea of coordination and cooperation between border security agencies has
seen some progress on the management level, in that the joint Border Security
Committee has regular meetings and is promoting the concept. At the local
commander level, however, and in particular at the operational level, there is still no
significant sign of coordination or cooperation. There is no or very little cooperation
or joint operations between the agencies, in particular in the area of forward
planning.
173. The sharing of information and intelligence is based on each agency’s
assessment of whether information falls into the field of responsibility of another.
The information and intelligence flow is still almost exclusively vertical, and
therefore highly centralized.
174. Progress in locating border crossing point facilities closer to the physical
border is slowly being made. Although plans for relocations at Aboudieh, Kaa and
Masna do exist, all are pending final planning and funding. Even the border crossing
point in Bokayaa, scheduled for opening at the beginning of July 2007, is located
some distance from the physical border; plans to move it forward have yet to be
decided.

40

07-39621

S/2007/382

175. The development of standard operating procedures for the border crossing
point and its reconstruction to separate incoming and outgoing passengers has not
progressed.
Equipment
176. The main radar in Beirut seaport has still not been replaced after it was lost in
the conflict in 2006. Passport control at the seaport is better manned and has been
improved by the installation of basic document examination equipment.
177. Passport control at Beirut International Airport has received basic document
examination equipment. However, a procedure requirement that only a supervisor
may switch on the equipment limits its effectiveness. An improvement has been
seen in the number of female officers, which is now considered adequate. The cargo
terminal is now equipped with one — rather antiquated — X-ray machine to
supplement manual searches.
178. All border crossing points are now in possession of passport verifiers. At
Masnaa, the planned container scanner is still not in place. The scanner is
temporarily used at Beirut seaport, pending construction of the foundations at
Masnaa. General Customs stated that the funds for the engineering work have not
yet been released.
Training
179. General training on border-related issues is still not being conducted. Most
representatives of the agencies appeared to be waiting for international support in
this regard. Some on-the-job training has apparently been held for the use of
passport checking equipment, as the officers on the ground seemed to have an
adequate knowledge of the equipment.
General remarks
180. Overall, progress seems to be moving forward at a slow pace. On the
management level of the agencies, there is a declared will to improve border
security and consensus on the advantages of the principles of coordination and
cooperation and of the concept of integrated border management. Very little
information or implementation of measures have been seen at the lower command
levels or on the ground.
181. The delaying factor appears to be a reluctance to introduce any new measures
in border security until after the evaluation of the pilot project on the northern
border. It is worth noting, however, that a number of the recommendations in both
the reports of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the present report
could easily be implemented without external support, significant funding or
structural changes and without awaiting the outcome of the pilot project.

V. Recommendations
182. On the basis of the above assessment, the Lebanon Independent Border
Assessment Team makes the recommendations set out below.

07-39621

41

S/2007/382

Recommendation 1
A multi-agency mobile force focusing on arms smuggling should be
established with the purpose of ensuring efficient arms seizures through its
intelligence and rapid interception capabilities. An additional purpose would be to
serve as a role model for the other border security agencies and as a platform for a
possible future dedicated border guard agency.
Recommendation 2
An intelligence and analysis component embedded within the abovementioned multi-agency force should be established, with access to all border
security relevant intelligence from the four agencies, analysing and providing the
four agencies and the multi-agency force with targets that have a high probability of
apprehension.
Recommendation 3
International border security experts should be deployed to:
(a)

The multi-agency force and its embedded intelligence and analysis cell;

(b) All four agencies on all levels, in particular on the operational level, in
order to advise on non-military border security aspects and follow up on the training
provided;
(c) An advisory secretariat, consisting of both international advisers and
representatives from the Lebanese border security agencies, who will collect,
analyse and disseminate information and lessons learned.
Recommendation 4
A dedicated border guard agency should be established as part of a long-term
strategy to streamline border security procedures, gather all expertise, information
and intelligence in one agency, thereby freeing resources of, in particular, the
Lebanese Armed Forces and General Security for their traditional tasks.
Recommendation 5
Full and absolute control should be established over border crossing points,
by:
(a) Creating standard operating procedures for border crossing points,
including regulations for any movement inside the control area of persons, vehicles
and goods; standardized compulsory measures for checking compliance; anticorruption mechanisms; and so on;
(b) Implementing a one-stop-control philosophy, whereby all components of
person and cargo control are jointly performed in one place by the agencies
concerned;

42

(c)

Fencing the perimeter of the control area;

(d)

Redesigning building locations and layout where appropriate.

07-39621

S/2007/382

Recommendation 6
Measures to separate legal and illegal near-border or border-crossing activities
should be implemented with the purpose of creating a transparent and unambiguous
environment, including:
(a) Blocking the maximum number of border crossing roads and trails and
non-vital roads in near-border areas;
(b) Establishing mechanisms for cross-border social movement with
dedicated crossing points;
(c) Increasing the number of legal border crossing points by establishing a
number of small crossings for light traffic and social movement, where appropriate;
(d)

Clearly marking the agreed parts of the line;

(e)

Moving border crossing point facilities to a physical border;

(f) Combating smuggling traditions through socio-economic programmes
offering an alternative income for petty smugglers in order to decrease their
numbers.
Recommendation 7
Training programmes for the four agencies and all levels within them should
be established in order to transform border security concepts and doctrines into a
highly professional and skilled civilian approach, where possible building on or
drawing from the training experience of the northern border pilot project, including,
among other aspects:
(a)

Cross-agency competencies;

(b) Search
components;

techniques

and

knowledge

of

explosives

manufacturing

(c)

Profiling techniques, intelligence gathering and risk analysis;

(d)

Approach to coordination and integrated border management;

(e)

Non-military border security tactical skills;

(f) Integrated border management concept training including studies outside
Lebanon.
Recommendation 8
Border-specific equipment support for all agencies should be continued and
enhanced, with the purpose of increasing efficiency and serving as force multipliers,
including:
(a)

Surveillance equipment suitable for night observations and operations;

(b) Surveillance equipment suitable for surveillance from the air (for
example, helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles);
(c) Four-wheel-drive vehicles to ensure a higher level of mobility and less
conspicuous patrolling;

07-39621

43

S/2007/382

(d) Reliable communications systems permitting small and light unit patrols
to be performed without having to rely on strength in numbers;
(e) Cargo scanners at certain border crossing points, hand-held metal
detectors, density and explosives detectors;
(f)

Additional basic and advanced document checking equipment;

(g)

Explosive-sniffing dogs and canine patrols.

Recommendation 9
Information technology capacity and capabilities should be improved by:
(a)

Upgrading existing data-storage capacities;

(b) Improving
exchange;

or

establishing

inter-agency

computerized

information

(c) Implementing a system of central registration of fingerprints for
identification card and passport holders.
Recommendation 10
A reward system for outstanding professional performances should be
established.
Recommendation 11
Cooperation with Syrian counterparts should be established, in particular at the
operational level, making border security management a joint effort to secure the
border and prevent illegal cross-border activities.

44

07-39621

S/2007/382

Annex I
Visits and meetings of the Lebanon Independent Border
Assessment Team
Sunday, 27 May 2007
Arrival in Beirut
Monday, 28 May 2007
Meetings with:
• Major General Ashraf Riffi, Chief of Internal Security Forces and Head of the
Border Security Committee
• Milos Strugar, Director of Civilian/Political Affairs of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon
• Geir O. Pedersen, Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for
Lebanon
Tuesday, 29 May 2007
Meetings with:
• General Wafic Jezzini, General Security, Director General
• General Assad Ghanem, General Customs, Director General
• General Siham Harakeh, General Security
• Border Security Committee
Wednesday, 30 May 2007
Meetings with:
• General Michel Sleimann, Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces
• German Pilot Project Team, General Detlef Karioth
• Informal Donor Coordination Group
Thursday, 31 May 2007
Meetings with:
• Beirut seaport, Director General Hassan Kraytem
• Beirut airport
Friday, 1 June 2007
Visits to:
• Kaa border crossing point
• Green Border location near El Qasr (location IV)

07-39621

45

S/2007/382

• Green Border location at Haouch Beit Ismail (location V)
• Green Border location between Kaa and Beit Hira (location VI)
Saturday, 2 June 2007
Visits to:
• Green Border location near Qoussaya (location VIII)
• Masnaa border crossing point
• Green Border area near Deir el Aachayer (location IX)
Monday, 4 June 2007
Visits to:
• Masnaa border crossing point
• Governor of Bekaa and Chtaura Provinces, Antoine Suleiman in Zahle
• General Customs Regional Director of Bekaa Region, Fouard Harb in Chtaura
Tuesday, 5 June 2007
Visits to:
• Arida border crossing point
• Green Border area between Arida and Tell Bin (location I)
• Aboudieh border crossing point
• Green Border location near Aboudieh (location II)
• Bokayaa border crossing point
• Green Border area east of Sahlet el Bqaiaa pocket (location III)
Wednesday, 6 June 2007
Meetings with:
• Senior Adviser to the Prime Minister, Mohammad Shattar
• Geir O. Pedersen, Personal Representative of the Secretary General for
Lebanon
Thursday, 7 June 2007
Meetings with:
• General Customs Director General, Assad Ghanem, in Beirut
• General Customs, Audit and Anti-smuggling Division Chief, Ahmad Naser, in
Beirut

46

07-39621

S/2007/382

Friday, 8 June 2007
Visit to:
• Implementation Unit for Northern Border Pilot Project, Col. Hamid Iskandar,
in Ministry of Defence, Beirut
Monday, 11 June 2007
Meetings with:
• Senior Protection Officer of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Ayaki Ito
• German Pilot Project Team, General Detlef Karioth
Tuesday, 12 June 2007
Visits to:
• Green Border location at Jabal Lubnan Al Sharqi pocket (location VII)
• Green Border location near Haloua (location X)
Wednesday, 13 June 2007
Meetings with:
• Civil Aviation Authority, General Director Hamdi Shawk
• Major General Ashraf Riffi, Chief of Internal Security Forces and Head of the
Border Security Committee
Thursday, 14 June 2007
Meetings with:
• Informal Donor Coordination Group
• Border Security Committee
• Prime Minister Fouad Siniora
Friday, 15 June 2007
• Assessment from the air of Green Border from Arida to Rayak (location XI)
Saturday, 16 June 2007
• Departure Beirut to New York

07-39621

47

S/2007/382

Annex II
Map of border crossing points and field visits
BOKAYAA

II

ARIDA

ABOUDIEH

I

III

IV

V
VI
KAA

XI
SEAPORT
AIRPORT

VII
VIII
MASNAA

X

IX

BORDER
CROSSING
Border
crossing
point POINT
GREEN BORDER LOCATION FIELD VISIT
Number reference see report page 29

Green Border location field visit

XI Route
of border
assessment
from the
air
ROUTE
OF AIRBORNE
BORDER
ASSESSMENT
48

07-39621

S/2007/382

Annex III
Terms of reference of the Lebanon Independent Border
Assessment Team
Introduction
1.
In paragraph 14 of its resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council calls upon
the Government of Lebanon to secure its borders and other entry points to prevent
the entry in Lebanon without its consent of arms or related materiel. In paragraph 15
of the same resolution, the Council outlines measures that States should take to
prevent the supply of arms or other military assistance to any entity or individual
other than those authorized by the Government of Lebanon or the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
2.
In its presidential statement of 12 December 2006 (S/PRST/2006/52), the
Council, responding to the letter of the Secretary-General dated 1 December 2006
(S/2006/933) to its President, noted the conclusions of a United Nations team of
border police experts, dispatched in September 2006 by the Secretary-General at the
request of the Government of Lebanon, and invited the Secretary-General to pursue
further technical and independent assessment of the situation along the border and to
report back to the Council on further findings and recommendations.
3.
In his report of 14 March 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) (S/2007/147), the Secretary-General notes the second visit of the team of
border police experts during the reporting period and its observations that a lack of
critical equipment and training provided to the relevant Lebanese authorities
continued to hamper serious efforts to properly secure the Lebanese land border
with the Syrian Arab Republic. The Secretary-General called for further urgent
assistance to be provided to the Lebanese authorities, in particular to enhance their
border security capacities, and welcomed the ongoing bilateral assistance that was
being provided by the Government of Germany in that regard.
4.
The Secretary-General also suggested that the Security Council consider
supporting further steps, such as an independent assessment mission, to ensure the
full implementation of paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006), including the arms
embargo. In its presidential statement of 17 April 2007 (S/PRST/2007/12), the
Council welcomed the Secretary-General’s intention to evaluate the situation along
the entire Lebanese-Syrian border, and invited him to dispatch at the earliest, in
close liaison with the Lebanese Government, an independent assessment mission to
fully assess the monitoring of the border and to report back to the Council on its
findings and recommendations in that regard.
Mandate
5.
In close liaison with all relevant Lebanese authorities, including the recently
appointed Border Security Committee and its member agencies, including the
Lebanese Armed Forces, the Internal Security Force, General Security and General
Customs, as well as other interested parties that the Team may need to talk to, the
Team shall fully assess current border security and the monitoring of the Green
Border, including its official crossing points.

07-39621

49

S/2007/382

6.
The Team shall provide specific recommendations to the Secretary-General on
measures and assistance strategies leading to the enhancement of border security
along the entire length of the 320 km border, shared by Lebanon with the Syrian
Arab Republic.
7.
The Team shall review the roles of all the above-mentioned agencies, with
particular attention to current national customs and border monitoring capacities, as
well as progress made by security and customs agencies in strengthening their
control over the border, in compliance with resolution 1701 (2006), and identify
major obstacles hindering the effective strengthening of that control.
8.
The Team shall analyse the findings of the two previous visits by the border
police expert team to Lebanon (September 2006 and February 2007) and build on its
recommendations, with a focus on the designing of an integrated border
management project and possible training and development opportunities, working
in close consultation with the above-mentioned agencies and with German experts
currently conducting a bilateral assistance pilot project on border security
enhancement in the north of the country.
9.
The Team shall also liaise closely with the aforementioned German team and
with above-mentioned agencies and develop a set of standards for border entry
points, including recommendations on the reconstruction and refurbishment of
critical infrastructure along the border.
Main activities
10.

The main activities recommended for the Team shall include:

(a) To meet with relevant Lebanese security agencies, United Nations,
bilateral partners and other relevant parties to discuss and enquire into all aspects of
efforts to ensure the security of the Lebanese-Syrian border;
(b) To visit and inspect multiple points along the Green Border and the
official crossing points between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic;
(c) To review existing security arrangements, types of equipment in use by
the relevant Lebanese authorities and other official procedures in use at official
crossings;
(d) To consult closely with the previous team of border police experts,
relevant German experts and others providing border security assessments or
technical assistance, in making any further recommendations on assistance, training
and equipment to be provided to enhance border security.
11. Specifically, it is recommended that in Lebanon, the Team shall liaise closely
with the Government of Lebanon and shall for that purpose endeavour to meet and
liaise with the following interlocutors, among others:
(a) Prime Minister, ministers for the Defence and the Interior and other
relevant Government officials;
(b)

Lebanese Armed Forces Commander;

(c) Heads of the Internal Security Force, General Security, military
intelligence;

50

07-39621

S/2007/382

(d) Lebanese Chiefs of Police and other border services (Customs and
Immigrations).
Qualifications and appointment
12. Appointed by the Secretary-General, the Team should be small and comprise
senior border security, police and customs officials, and possibly military experts,
who will be employed by the United Nations on a full-time basis for a period of up
to two months. The experts could be seconded for the purpose of this task from
Member States that have personnel with the relevant experience and expertise.
Assistance could also be provided by United Nations personnel (current or former)
as deemed appropriate.
13. All members of the Team shall have the status of experts on mission for the
United Nations. They shall benefit from the privileges and immunities provided for
in articles VI and VII of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations during their mission. They shall be subject to the Regulations
Governing the Status, Basic Rights and Duties of Officials other than Secretariat
Officials and Experts on Mission, as adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 56/280 of 27 March 2002.
Logistics and support
14. The Department of Political Affairs will be the lead Department in support of
the Team and will continue to work in close consultation with relevant United
Nations departments and agencies, particularly the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
15. Lebanese authorities, relevant United Nations agencies and missions in
Lebanon or elsewhere in the region will support the Team in Lebanon with all
required logistical and security-related assistance and facilitate all transportation
and travel as necessary.
Cooperation with the Government of Lebanon
16. The Government of Lebanon shall ensure the freedom of movement of the
members of the Team and of its secretariat throughout Lebanon.
17. The Government of Lebanon shall ensure the security of the members of the
Team and their secretariat while deployed in Lebanon.
18. The Team shall enjoy the full cooperation of the Government of Lebanon and,
in particular, of the Government agencies mentioned in the terms of reference. The
Team should be accompanied by the competent Lebanese authorities during field
visits.
19. The Government of Lebanon shall accord (a) the members of the Team the
privileges and immunities, facilities and exemptions enjoyed by experts on mission
for the United Nations, as provided for in articles VI and VII of the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, to which Lebanon is party, and
(b) the secretariat of the Team the privileges and immunities, facilities and
exemptions enjoyed by officials of the United Nations, as provided for in articles V
and VII of that Convention.

07-39621

51

S/2007/382

Reporting
20. A detailed report on the Team’s findings, containing options, recommendations
and follow-up steps, shall be submitted for the attention of the Secretary-General
not later than two weeks after the completion of field visits.
Funding
21. Subject to the approval of the Secretary-General, the Team shall be funded
from the Secretary-General’s unforeseen and extraordinary budget account.

52

07-39621
