Resolutiom adopted on the reporlll of the Speeial Political Committee

7. Once again draws the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that the situation in South Africa
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
that action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations is essential in order to solve the problem of apartheid and that universally applied rnandatory
econornic sanctions are the only rneans of achieving a
pcaceful solution ;
8. Invites the Special Cornrnittee on the Policies of
Apartheid of the Governrnent of the Republic of South
Africa to continue to take all steps to discharge its
mandate more effectively and, to that end, authorizes it :
(a) To hold sessions away from Headquarters or
to send a sub-committee on a rnission to consult
specialized agencies, regional organizations, States and
non-governmental organizations on ways and means to
promote the international carnpaign against apartheid
and to investigate various aspects of the problem of
apartheid;
( b) To continue and to increase co-operation with
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Irnplementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
with a view to the consideration of the activities of
foreign economic interests in southern Africa which
impede the efforts to elirninate apartheid, racial disc_timination and colonialism in the region ;

9. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to consider appropriate assistance for the
employment in their secretariats and programmes of
qualified South Africans who are victims of apartheid ;
10. Invites the specialized agencies, regional organizations, States and non-governmental organizations to
co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Special
Committee on the Policie:; of Apartheid of the Govcrnment of the Republic of South Africa in the accomplishment of their tasks under the present resolution.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2054 B (XX) of 15 Decembcr 1965 establishing the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,'
to which is annexed the report of the Committee of
Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
l. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa for their efforts to promote the Fund ;

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Fund;
3. Renews its appeal to Governments, organizations
and individuals to contribute generously to the Fund.

1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
"Official R.tcords of th, General Assembly, Twenty-first
Stssion, Anntxts, agenda item 34, document A/6494.

21

2213 (XXI). Effect8 of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 Decembcr
1955, which established the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and
its subsequent resolutions reaffirming the desirability
of the Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects to
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling information about atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
1. N ates wi,th appreciation the report adopted by
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation at its sixteenth session ;11
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for thc
valuable contributions it has made since its inception
to the wider knowledge and understanding of the effects
and levels of atomic radiation;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
programme, including its co-ordinating activities, to
increase the know ledge of the levels and effects of
atomic radiation frorn all sources ;
4. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committce
to hold its next session in 1967 and to report further
to the General Assembly;
5. Commends the World Meteorological Organization for its work in carrying forward the scheme for
monitoring and reporting levels of atmospheric radioactivity;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistancc
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the specialized
agencies of the United Nations, the International
Atornic Energy Agency and the non-governmental organizations concerned ;
7. Recommends that ali the parties concerned should
continue their co-operation with the Scientific Committee;
8. Requests thc Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the disseminatfon of its findings to the public.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2220 (XXI). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in ali
their upect8

The General Assembly
l. Decides to refer the report of the Special Political
Committee on the comprehensive review of the wholc
question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects•
to the General Assembly at its fifth special session, to
be held not later than 30 April 1967;
2. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to continue the review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations and to report to the General
Assembly at its fifth special session.
1499th plenMy meeting,
19 December 1966.
11 lbid., Twenty-first Stssion, Supplem,nt No. 14 (A/6314
and Corr.1).
6 [bid., Twenty-first Sesswn, Annexts, agenda item 33, document A/6603.
