United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9064

th meeting
Wednesday, 15 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Ms. Fériaud
Mr. Nanga
Ms. Namtee Osabutey
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Broderick
Ms. Mohammed
Mrs. Vásquez Muñoz
Ms. Tranoey
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Tantawy
Ms. Camara
Ms. Kroeker-Maus

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Keeping the promises: the role of regional organizations in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda in the face of political turmoil and
seizures of power by force
Letter dated 4 June 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/457)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38459 (E)
*2238459*

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President: Before we begin, I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than three minutes in order to enable the Security
Council to carry out its work as expeditiously as possible.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphone will
prompt all speakers to bring their remarks to a close
after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Inanç Örnekol (Türkiye): We would like to
express our appreciation to the Albanian presidency
for convening us today to discuss this critical issue.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his opening
remarks, as well as the Executive Director of
UN-Women, Ms. Bahous, and the other briefers for
their insightful remarks.
The Security Council’s landmark resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions under the women
and peace and security agenda not only acknowledge
the adverse impact of armed conflict on women and
girls but also recognize the contributions of women
to peace and reconciliation processes and the need to
promote and protect the rights of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
Although we have that solid, comprehensive
framework in place, it is unfortunate that we are seeing
its implementation either fall short or be completely
cast aside during turbulent times marked by wars,
military coups or the seizure of power by force. Recent
events in countries such as Ukraine, Afghanistan and
Myanmar have shown us vividly how the fragile gains
of the women and peace and security agenda can easily
be rolled back, as well as how the rights and well-being
of women and girls can be violated with impunity.
While the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda rests with States, several Council resolutions
acknowledge regional organizations and United
Nations entities as key actors that play an important
complementary role. That should also be seen in the
context of broader cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in the prevention of conflicts and the maintenance of
peace and security.
In that vein, we commend efforts to strengthen
cooperation on the women and peace and security
2/28

15/06/2022

agenda between the Security Council and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, through
annual consultative meetings and regular briefings. We
also welcome the contributions of regional organizations
to the agenda, including their adoption of dedicated
women and peace and security plans and strategies.
We are pleased to say that NATO is also actively
engaged in women’s empowerment and increased
participation in conflict resolution, decision-making
and peace processes. Türkiye has contributed to the
development of a number of recently adopted NATO
policies in the context of the women and peace and
security agenda and continues to include a gender
perspective in training for security personnel at the
national level, as well as for international personnel
in preparation for their deployment to NATO, United
Nations and European Union missions and operations.
We all acknowledge that further efforts are required
to fully implement the women and peace and security
agenda. Those efforts should be persistent and collective,
with a view to seeing more women gain positions of
leadership and seats at the negotiating table, thereby
enhancing their engagement in decision-making at all
stages of peace processes.
How can we strengthen the role and the capacity
of regional organizations to that end? Building on the
experience of the African Union and NATO, Member
States can appoint high-level women and peace and
security representatives to drive implementation
at the regional level. States can establish regional
advisory bodies of women peace leaders so that they
can systematically contribute to the conflict-prevention
and peacebuilding work of regional organizations.
Member States can also assist in building regional
capacity for monitoring and reporting on progress
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Last but not least, States can increase their
engagement and interaction with international and
regional human rights mechanisms to ensure full
consideration of women’s human rights — a central
component of the women and peace and security agenda.
As we enter the third decade since the women
and peace and security agenda was adopted, we
need to refocus our efforts with a more inclusive and
holistic approach to untap the agenda’s full potential
for building and sustaining peace. Let me assure the
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

Council that Türkiye remains committed to supporting
all international and regional efforts to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Albania for holding this
open debate, and the briefers for providing a snapshot of
the progress and successes, as well as the challenges, in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda,
and for making concrete suggestions in that regard.
Twenty-two years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda still faces numerous challenges
across all four of its pillars, particularly concerning
protection and participation. Malta welcomes the focus
of today’s debate, as regional organizations play a pivotal
role in supporting the work of women peacebuilders
and civil society organizations more broadly in a bid to
develop more direct and effective strategies.
The latest annual report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2022/272) reiterates
that sexual violence and violent extremism continue
to disproportionately affect women and girls. Malta
continues to fully support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and recognizes the important work that her Office
is doing, in particular its reporting on the Russian
aggression against Ukraine.
Malta is concerned about the surge of violence in
the Sahel and Lake Chad basin, where Boko Haram
factions are responsible for brutal attacks on women
and girls. In Afghanistan, the Sudan and Myanmar,
unconstitutional takeovers have exacerbated underlying
issues, including sexual violence. The need for regional
cooperation, including in the areas of cross-border
monitoring and response capabilities, is an urgent one.
Women and peace and security will be one of Malta’s
priorities when serving on the Security Council in the
period 2023 to 2024. We will strive to further strengthen
our women and peace and security commitments and
find common ground in addressing existing gaps. States
have the primary role in implementing the women and
peace and security agenda.
Nevertheless, resolutions 2467 (2019) and 2493
(2019) also underline the important complementary role
of regional organizations. We therefore urge regional
and subregional bodies to continue implementing
policies for women and girls affected by conflict-

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

related sexual violence, while actively promoting their
full, equal and meaningful participation, in all of their
diversity, in peace negotiations.
We encourage further cooperation with all
related bodies, including the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the League of Arab States. Regional organizations
can further advance the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in a number of ways,
including by supporting States in drafting national
action plans and providing expertise, as necessary,
for their implementation, adopting their own regional
action plans and assuming mediation roles in peace
processes in order to ensure that women are at the
negotiating table.
Malta calls for the adoption of a gender perspective
by all stakeholders when discussing the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. We
cannot overlook the importance of gender equality in
the achievement of sustainable peace and security. The
Security Council should continue to show political will
and sustained commitment to the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. Women have a
crucial role to play in shaping the future of the societies
they live in and must be at the negotiating table. By
ensuring that, we will be giving long-term peace a
significantly better chance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): At the outset, I would like
to thank Albania for organizing today’s debate and all
the briefers for their informative contributions.
Prioritizing women’s empowerment in peace
and security settings must remain a continued effort.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in peace and security processes is essential
to achieving long-lasting peace. It is conducive to
building resilient societies and to more effective
decision-making processes.
Regional organizations have an important role
to play in complementing United Nations efforts to
advance the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. In order to achieve the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), that agenda
must become an integral part of our everyday work
within both civilian and military structures.

22-384593/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Slovenia pays particular attention to education and
training on women and peace and security. All involved
in peace and security processes must be informed of
women’s role in peace-related activities. Our national
experience has shown that increasing the number of
female members of the Slovenian armed forces in crisis
management processes and peacekeeping missions
improves negotiation and mediation efforts. That is
because women are better at building trust with local
populations, marginalized groups, women, children
and older persons in crisis areas.
We also welcome the Brussels Declaration on
Actions towards Empowering Women in Conflicts,
jointly issued by European Council President Charles
Michel, UN-Women, Nadia’s Initiative and the Dr.
Denis Mukwege Foundation. In many conflicts, local
and grass-roots women’s organizations are most often
the first responders on the ground. By working closely
with such organizations, regional organizations can
play an important role in supporting the efforts of
women working on the front lines of the world’s most
intractable conflicts.
In conclusion, women must play a leading role in
political processes, conflict resolution and the transition
from conflict to peace, and the Security Council and
its members must ensure that the voices of women are
always included and amplified. Ensuring that we have
a diversity of voices and that those voices are listened
to and heard should be our priority. That is essential to
the greater credibility, effectiveness and legitimacy of
our work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union. The pile of lies spouted by the
Russian representative this morning will be used in
future trials in which Russian war criminals and their
accomplices will be prosecuted.
We thank Albania for convening this open
debate and all the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations. We align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
The women and peace and security agenda has
always been of vital significance for Ukraine. In the
circumstances of the Russian aggression, which has
been ongoing since 2014, Ukraine adopted a national
4/28

15/06/2022

action plan on women and peace and security and was
the first United Nations Member State to do so during a
situation of conflict. Russia’s war on Ukraine has made
it clear that our second national action plan, covering
the period from 2020 to 2025, requires serious updates
and adjustments to address the new security threats.
Our commitment to implementing resolution 1325
(2000) remains the same, but our capacities have been
undermined by Russia’s invasion.
We are updating our national action plan against a
backdrop of the Russian forces’ destruction of civilian
infrastructure and war crimes committed by Russian
soldiers against women, particularly through the use
of sexual violence as a weapon. An updated draft is
expected in August, and we appreciate the assistance
of the United Nations in the process. In a memorandum
signed by Ukraine and the United Nations on 3 May,
we identified key areas of cooperation to be included in
the updated action plan. I would like to commend the
efforts of Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and her team in that regard. The practical steps to
be taken include opening centres to assist survivors
of wartime terror. The first will be opened soon in
cooperation with the United Nations Population Fund
in one of the cities near the front lines.
As the Secretary-General pointed out today, the
Russian invasion of Ukraine has forced millions of
women and children to flee their country overnight. In
general, they remain among the most vulnerable groups
in any conflict situation, and Russia’s war on my country
is not an exception. It is important to maintain the
focus on women and girls in all programmes involving
humanitarian and economic assistance, protection from
crime and political empowerment.
It is also alarming that Russia has continued its
attempts to undermine the work of the Office of the
Project Coordinator of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has been
instrumental in implementing women and peace
and security projects. If Russia decides to break the
consensus on the Office, it could close as soon as July.
In that regard, we welcome the continued efforts of the
European Union, the OSCE and NATO, as partners in the
region, to strengthen support for women peacebuilders,
human rights defenders, activists and gender-equality
advocates. Ukraine also confirms its full commitment
to furthering awareness and the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, and I would like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
I would like to thank Albania for organizing this
open debate on a topic as relevant as the role of regional
organizations in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda in the face of political turmoil
and seizures of power by force. I also want to express
my appreciation to the briefers for their presentations
and for advocating and promoting the accelerated
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. As the briefers highlighted, women and girls
are often the people worst affected by conflict, natural
disasters or political turmoil. We are holding this debate
against a backdrop of the Russian Federation’s ongoing
illegal, unprovoked and unjustified aggression against
Ukraine, which has created millions of refugees,
mostly women and children. In conflict situations,
women and girls are the main victims of sexual
violence. Their underrepresentation and even exclusion
from the decision-making process represent a failure
to use readily available potential that has shown itself
able to contribute constructively to advancing peace
and security.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women and girls in all aspects of life is crucial if we are
to have peaceful, functional and prosperous societies.
Ensuring such participation should be a priority for
all of us at all levels, and regional organizations
are instrumental in that regard. We commend all
organizations that have adopted dedicated action plans
on women, peace and security, which can be essential
to providing disaggregated data and best practices,
while ensuring the meaningful inclusion of women and
a human rights-based approach.
Only through collective efforts can we really
guarantee safe and enabling environments for women
peacebuilders, human rights defenders and activists.
Furthermore, regional organizations can and do
play a role in capacity-building. Women negotiators,
mediators and peacebuilders remain rare sightings.
It is very important to ensure that women become
an integral part of the decision-making processes on
matters of security, and for that they need the necessary

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

skills. In that regard, we commend the work of all
the briefers. Bulgaria attaches great importance to
regional organizations and recognizes their critical
role in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. This year we will prepare the mid-term
progress report on the implementation of our national
action plan on women and peace and security for the
period 2020 to 2025. It includes a focus on cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations on the
women and peace and security agenda, including in
South-East Europe and the Black Sea region.
As we confront the largest number of conflicts
since 1945 and what the Secretary-General called
an epidemic of coup d’états, it is clear that political
turmoil and seizures of power by force are reversing
the progress made on implementing the women and
peace and security agenda. We ought to use the lessons
learned to push even further. Meanwhile, we should
continue to work together with regional organizations
and civil society to better shape the way we address
current global challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
Albania for convening this debate, and the speakers for
their briefings.
There is no lasting peace without women. Our
Secretary of State stressed that at the recent meeting
of the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points
Network organized by Switzerland and South Africa in
Geneva. Yet political turmoil and seizures of power by
force — in Afghanistan, the Sudan and Mali, to name
but a few — as well as the Russian military aggression
against Ukraine, have widened the gap between the
normative framework of the women and peace and
security agenda and the reality on the ground. We need
to reverse that trend. I would like to share three thoughts
on the role of regional organizations in that regard.
First, when power is seized by force women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders see their
hard-won achievements called into question and
exposed to increased risks. They often show resilience
and form tightly knit networks, as the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General on Myanmar noted this week in
the General Assembly. Alongside the United Nations
and Member States, regional organizations play a key
role in protecting and supporting civil society, including
through rapid, flexible and predictable funding.

22-384595/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Switzerland supports, among other things, the
Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, which brings
together some 100 organizations.
Secondly, regional organizations have contextspecific instruments to prevent the escalation of
tensions and mitigate their root causes, as well as earlywarning mechanisms. The full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in those mechanisms and at all
decision-making levels of peace processes is paramount.
For example, with the support of Switzerland, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
published a tool kit for the integration of women in
formal peace processes.
We also welcome the initiatives of other regional
organizations in that field, such as the strengthening
of the African Union’s Network of African Women
in Conflict Prevention and Mediation. Cooperation
between regional organizations and the United Nations
should be deepened by strengthening gender expertise
on both sides. Switzerland is committed to that.
Thirdly, we need to work more in networks and
across geographical and institutional boundaries.
At the Focal Point Network meeting held recently
in Geneva, six regional organizations participated
alongside representatives of Member States, the United
Nations and civil society. Such meetings allow for the
dissemination of good practices, capacity-building and
the upscaling of initiatives developed at regional level.
The provisions of all resolutions related to the
women and peace and security agenda must be fully
implemented. The Security Council should reiterate
that with one voice. As a future member of the Security
Council, Switzerland will continue to promote synergies
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in order to make those objectives a reality.

15/06/2022

of rape and sexual violence in Ukraine following
Russia’s aggression.
Member States have the primary responsibility
for the prevention of, and response to, conflict-related
sexual violence, but the roles of regional organizations,
together with international mechanisms, are also
crucial in upholding the principles of the women and
peace and security agenda. In that regard, we commend
the 12 regional organizations that have adopted or are
developing regional action plans on women and peace
and security.
While further encouraging their efforts, I
would like to make three points on the role of
regional organizations.
First, regional organizations should be closely
engaged in the work of the Security Council on early
warning of conflict-related sexual violence. The
Council needs to give due consideration to regional
organizations’ monitoring and analysis on the signs of
sexual violence in such contexts as political instability,
unconstitutional changes of power and rising militarism
in regions.
Secondly, regional organizations should strengthen
cooperation with national and local authorities to
improve and reform legal and institutional frameworks
in the area of women and peace and security. To ensure
the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence,
national and local efforts should focus more on the root
causes of sexual violence, including harmful social
norms and structural gender inequality. Regional
organizations themselves should lead and encourage
those efforts.

Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): My delegation would
like to commend Albania for convening today’s meeting
on this significant issue.

Thirdly, survivor-centred approaches should
be adopted by regional organizations in preventing
and responding to conflict-related sexual violence.
Survivors should be heard, and their different needs
should be respected in the reparation processes. Regional
organizations should play a key role in upholding an
inherently survivor-centred approach, which must start
with listening to the voices of survivors.

Hard-won gains in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda are being
increasingly reversed in many parts of the world,
including Afghanistan and Myanmar, in the face of
political turmoil and seizures of power by force. We
are particularly appalled by the recent allegations

Last year, the Republic of Korea established the
third national action plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000). We committed to enhancing cooperation
in the Asian region to promote the women and peace
and security agenda. Korea has also contributed to
the advancement of that agenda in Africa through its

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.

6/28

22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

contribution to the African Union Political Affairs,
Peace and Security Department.
As a staunch advocate of the women and peace and
security agenda and a candidate for non-permanent
membership of the Security Council for the term 2024
to 2025, we will continue to redouble our efforts to
advance the women and peace and security agenda
around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I would first like to thank
Albania for organizing this timely high-level open debate
on the role of regional organizations in implementing
the women and peace and security agenda.
In the turbulent times we live in, the increasing
number of armed conflicts and seizures of power by
force have brought tectonic crackdowns on peace,
security and democratic values, such as gender equality
and the equal enjoyment of human rights by everyone.
Unfortunately, women and girls are disproportionately
affected by such security threats.
Against that backdrop, the role of regional
organizations is critical in maintaining sustainable
peace and security, while promoting gender-equal
human rights protections and participation in
peace processes.
Many regional organizations, such as the European
Union, the African Union, the League of Arab States,
NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and others, have already adopted or are currently
developing action plans or strategies on women and
peace and security. Those regional policy documents
should be implemented not only by the respective
organizations but also by their member States in
alignment with their national action plans on women
and peace and security, thereby enhancing policy
coherence at the national and regional levels.
At the same time, coordination among the
various regional partners within the United Nations
architecture can prove beneficial for achieving systemwide coherence and bridging national and international
efforts to implement the women and peace and
security agenda.
It goes without saying that almost all organizations
consider maintaining peace and security at the regional

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

level a high priority. As a result, they have developed the
know-how and the appropriate tools and mechanisms
for mediation, conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. Regional organizations promote
context-specific, tailor-made solutions to regional
challenges threatening security and can also serve as
safe environments for inclusive dialogue and meaningful
cooperation between all relevant stakeholders, such as
States, civil-society organizations and human rights
defenders. The only way, therefore, to promote genderequal participation in decision-making processes,
as well as to generate effective gender-responsive
policies, is through systematic gender mainstreaming
across the organizational structure. Moreover, crossregional collaboration, based on sharing best practices
and the division of labour under the coordination of the
Security Council, is likely to have a positive impact
on the promotion of a culture of peace that places
women and girls at the centre of international efforts,
as well as on closing the gap between commitments
and implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić (Croatia): Croatia aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, and I would like to add some
remarks in my national capacity.
I would like to thank the Albanian presidency,
as well as Her Excellency Minister Olta Xhaçka
and the briefers. Croatia joins the calls for the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent Security Council resolutions on women and
peace and security.
In the context of military coups d’état, political
turmoil and the seizure of power by force, women
are often prime targets, with new patterns of violence
creating increasing insecurity and inequality affecting
them directly. Sexual and gender-based violence,
already widespread, gains momentum in such situations
and becomes an instrument of repression and political
intimidation. Increased insecurity contributes to an
atmosphere of fear, while women are often denied work
and education. Even in such dangerous situations,
women are bravely fighting for their rights. In
Afghanistan, women have been protesting for months
on end. In the Sudan, women were among the first to
protest the coup d’état and are still playing a prominent

22-384597/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

role in the street movement. Similarly, they were on
the forefront of the revolution in the Sudan but have
largely been sidelined in the formal political process in
the aftermath.
Regional organizations can contribute through
mediation and the prevention of conflict escalation,
and can help bring women to the forefront. Various
regional organizations have also developed frameworks
to promote the protection of women and girls from
human rights violations. Women are agents of change,
as well as peacebuilders. We are all familiar with
indisputable data showing that the inclusion of women
in negotiations and peace processes produces a much
more sustainable peace. Conversely, the exclusion of
women from politics negatively affects the political
dialogue and social balance in a country, potentially
leading to turmoil.
Mere steps from us, on the United Nations lawn,
there stands a monument, the Peace Monument. The
statue of a woman on a horse is symbolically leading
the nations of the world towards peace. That monument
embodies the women and peace and security agenda.
We should take inspiration from that powerful work of
art and bring its message to life.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Benelux
countries — Belgium, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and, my own country, Luxembourg.
The Benelux countries fully align themselves with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union
and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
We thank Albania for organizing today’s debate on
the role of regional organizations in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda, and for its efforts
to integrate that agenda into the Council’s work. We
welcome today’s briefings and the Security Council’s
regular exchanges with regional organizations, which
play an important complementary role in implementing
the women and peace and security agenda on the
ground. We must continue working together to
implement the normative framework on women and
peace and security. While we welcome the adoption of
women and peace and security action plans by many
regional organizations and several Member States,
including the European Union, we believe that regional
8/28

15/06/2022

organizations should further develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for all women and girls
affected by conflict. We believe it is essential to draw
lessons from previous and current crises, and we would
therefore like to make the following four observations.
First, we must work together to promote gender
equality and the economic, political and social
empowerment and participation of women, which
are prerequisites for sustainable development, peace,
security and justice. We call for the adoption of a
rights-based approach, because protecting women’s
rights, including their sexual and reproductive health
and rights, means protecting the rights of all members
of society as a whole.
Secondly, according to Preventing Conflict,
Transforming Justice, Securing the Peace, the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
the participation of women creates a 35 per cent
increase in the probability of reaching a sustainable
peace agreement that will last 15 years. In line with
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), we urge all
relevant actors, including all regional organizations,
to take effective measures to ensure and increase the
participation of women, in all their diversity, at all
stages of peace processes, in particular through the
active involvement of civil-society organizations.
Particular attention should be paid to women human
rights defenders and women peacebuilders to ensure
they can operate in a safe environment and are involved
at all levels of political decision-making processes.
Thirdly, we would like to highlight the importance
of women mediators, while recognizing the valuable
networks supported by regional organizations such
as the African Union’s FemWise-Africa network. Too
often, women mediators are not included in formal
peace processes. We believe they can play a key role in
breaking the patriarchal silos of negotiations, and that
regional organizations can promote the deployment
of qualified senior experts. Regional organizations,
working in concert with national Governments, could
enhance the sharing of knowledge on where and how
women can receive formal training to become mediators
and share toolkits on how training can be developed at a
national or regional level.
As the Secretary-General’s annual report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2022/272)
emphasizes, recent unconstitutional power grabs have
been followed by widespread insecurity, economic
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

shocks and human rights violations, including the
use of sexual violence. Those violations have a
disproportionate effect on women and girls, whether
in Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan or Mali. We
are also witnessing such violations in Russia’s war of
aggression on Ukraine. Considering their convening
role, regional organizations have a responsibility to
ensure that concerns about human rights violations
and abuses are reflected in specific provisions of peace
agreements. Violations of international law should
not go unpunished, and amnesties for sexual violence
crimes are never acceptable. Today it is more crucial
than ever to redouble our efforts to advance the women
and peace and security agenda in cooperation with
regional organizations. The Council can count on the
Benelux countries’ firm commitment and support in
that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank Albania
for organizing this important open debate today. We
take this opportunity to welcome the briefing by the
Secretary-General delivered this morning, and we
thank all the briefers for their insightful briefings.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Germany as co-Chair of
the Group of Friends of the African Women Leaders
Network to the United Nations, and that made by the
representative of Canada, on behalf of the Friends
of 1325.
Allow me to highlight the following points in the
context and purpose of today’s debate.
First, South Africa reiterates its commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda, as envisioned
in resolution 1325 (2000) and all its subsequent
resolutions. We remain guided by our own national
action plan and the Regional Strategy on Women, Peace
and Security of the Southern African Development
Community, as well as the African Union Strategy
for Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment.
Those mechanisms aim to address the limitations to
women’s empowerment and their full and meaningful
participation in socioeconomic and political processes.
They also crucially advocate for women’s rights and
gender equality in peace and security matters. We must
actively and decisively safeguard all the gains made on
the women and peace and security agenda.

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

South Africa remains of the view that the women
and peace and security agenda has one of the most
comprehensive normative and institutional bases.
However, the full and effective implementation of
commitments is still lacking in specific areas, such as
the underrepresentation, marginalization and exclusion
of women in decision-making processes, negotiations
and mediation efforts in peace processes and elections.
We are concerned by the lack of access to sexual and
reproductive health services, the rise in intimidation,
reprisals and sexual violence and abuse against women
and girls, including human rights abuses, in conflict
and transition settings. Those elements were starkly
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2022/272) in March.
National Governments bear the main responsibility
for implementing, and addressing gaps in the
implementation of, the women and peace and security
agenda. In addition, the role of regional and subregional
organizations,
including
financial
institutions,
remains invaluable.
In that context, mainstreaming the women
and peace and security agenda in the discussions
of the United Nations and regional organizations
pertaining to conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding is necessary in ensuring that
challenges to the implementation of the agenda are
addressed comprehensively.
In recognition of the existing challenges and
potential threats that threaten to roll back women and
peace and security commitments, South Africa wishes
to make the following recommendations.
First, in safeguarding the women and peace and
security agenda, it is important that Member States
adopt institutional, policy and legislative measures
that address discriminatory barriers against women so
that they can have an equal opportunity to be part of
planning and decision-making processes.
Secondly, there is a need to strengthen electoral
bodies and judicial institutions so that they can hold
perpetrators of human rights abuses and violators
of international law accountable. Accountability
and addressing impunity for violations can serve as
a deterrent for further abuses and deliver justice to
victims and survivors of abuses
Regular exchanges with other regional and
subregional organizations and the sharing of best

22-384599/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

practices are crucial in addressing conflicts and
preventing the escalation or emergence of new
conflicts, including addressing the root causes that lead
to those conflicts.
I conclude by urging collaboration with, and taking
advantage of, the advisory and convening role of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council.
We commend the efforts of the Council in inviting
women peacebuilders to brief it, and we hope that their
recommendations on women and peace and security
find a place in the mandates of peacekeeping missions
when they are discussed by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy welcomes the initiative of
Albania to convene this high-level open debate, which
allows us to reiterate our strong support for resolution
1325 (2000) and the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and would like
to make a few remarks in a national capacity.
Promoting the full, effective and meaningful
inclusion of women in all spheres of public life and in
the main decision-making processes is key to bringing
about change and fostering peaceful coexistence. It
is a task that starts in times of peace, involving local
communities and grass-roots civil society organizations,
and that helps to enhance the resilience of our societies
and prevent conflicts. The women and peace and
security agenda is not only a women’s rights issue; it
is primarily a security issue that concerns the whole of
society. In the light of that, we uphold the importance of
streamlining women and peace and security in all the
relevant discussions of the Council.
Since the adoption of the historic resolution 1325
(2000), a great deal has been accomplished. We have
strengthened awareness and developed a more robust
policy framework, and new monitoring and reporting
mechanisms are in place. However, 20 years later, women
and girls continue to disproportionately bear the burden
of conflict and turmoil and remain underrepresented
or unrepresented in peace process efforts despite their
constructive contribution to conflict resolution at the
grass-roots level.
10/28

15/06/2022

Allow me to pay tribute to all the women who live
in fear for their own safety and that of their families in
contexts of war and violence, particularly in Ukraine
and elsewhere. They are mothers, daughters and wives,
but they are also peacebuilders, human rights defenders,
activists and community leaders, ready to contribute to
shaping and directing the path to lasting peace. Their
voices must be heard.
We must put women at the centre of all our
efforts, working in a coherent way at the different
and complementary levels — national, international
and regional.
At the national level, Italy is currently implementing
its fourth action plan on women and peace and security.
In parallel, we continue to engage, together with our
European Union (EU) partners, in the implementation
of the relevant EU action plan for the 2019 to 2024 term.
We have strengthened our partnership with
the United Nations system in favour of women and
girls through increased core funding and policy
commitments. We also firmly believe in the benefits
provided by the presence of well-integrated female
personnel in peacekeeping operations.
At the regional level, Italy launched the
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, which has
increased in scope through the years and contributed to
the creation of the Global Alliance of Regional Women
Mediators Networks, gathering voices from different
regions of the world demanding to accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, we believe that the United Nations
should be able to count on the fundamental contribution
of regional organizations in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, seizing the
opportunities offered by their proximity to the specific
realities on the ground. There is plenty of evidence that,
when women are meaningfully involved, peace talks
are more likely to address root causes and yield more
sustainable results. Rest assured that Italy will remain
actively engaged in pursuing this goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I am pleased to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network (AWLN) to the United
Nations, co-chaired by South Africa and Germany.
We thank the Albanian presidency of the Security
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

Council for convening this open debate on women
and peace and security, with a focus on the role of
regional organizations. The theme of the open debate
is timely given the focus by all of us on implementing
the women and peace and security agenda following
its 10 resolutions, which represent a robust normative
framework on which we can base our actions.
We also thank the briefers for their insightful
remarks. In the context of this morning’s discussion,
the Group wishes to highlight the following five points.
First, we strongly urge that the Council, in its work,
deepen its efforts towards the full implementation of all
global commitments on women and peace and security,
including the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all aspects, at all levels and from the outset
of peace and security processes.
Secondly, to ensure strong implementation,
the women and peace and security agenda requires
strong partnerships among the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission, through its advisory
and convening role, and regional and subregional
organizations, including their regional financial
institutions, in order to support women’s organizations
and peacebuilding initiatives. We urge all those actors
and partners of the United Nations system to continue
to support local ownership of peacebuilding efforts, as
well as national and regional action plans, frameworks
and mechanisms already in place.
Thirdly, the Group is pleased to inform the Council
that, so far, the AWLN has established 29 national
chapters across all five regions in Africa. While
there is much work to be done, we are pleased that,
through the African Union’s regional and subregional
organizations — such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the Mano River Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of Central African States, which have
their own regional mechanisms and regional action
plans — have been able to support the acceleration of
women and peace and security commitments in Africa.
The second Africa Forum on Women, Peace
and Security, which took place in December 2021,
underscored the need to enhance the monitoring and
evaluation of continental frameworks and mechanisms.
We take this opportunity to echo calls made by the
Peacebuilding Commission that Member States should

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

ensure adequate, predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding for peacebuilding, which often supports the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda by regional organizations.
Fourthly, the Group reaffirms its full support to
the United Nations and the African Union. The AWLN
has innovatively operationalized resolution 1325 (2000)
and its follow-up resolutions by working locally and
regionally, focusing on local-level initiatives through
the AWLN national chapters and conducting highlevel fact-finding missions and amplifying the voices
of women and girls silenced by the consequences of
war. For example, in 2020 and 2021, the Network held
virtual solidarity missions to Mali and Mozambique,
highlighting and responding to challenges presented to
women and girls in political transitions and by violent
extremism, respectively.
Finally, the Group commends all regional and
subregional organizations around the world for working
to close the remaining gaps posing a challenge to the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and all
its subsequent resolutions. We also urge enhanced
coordination among them, including deepened
cooperation with the United Nations.
In this endeavour, it would be remiss of the Group not
to underscore the importance of continuously shining a
light — not only on the plight of women, including civil
society and peacebuilders around the world, but also on
their constructive and essential contributions to gender
equality in political governance, decision-making
and security sector reform, as well as in their private
life. We have also learned from their experiences and
share best practices on the most pressing challenges
disproportionally affecting women, including responses
to the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Albania on its presidency of the
Security Council. I would also like to express our deep
appreciation for the organization of this open debate. Let
me also thank the briefers for their invaluable remarks.
Egypt stresses the importance of implementing
the full mandate of the women and peace and security
agenda, as stipulated in the relevant resolutions,
including achieving a balance between its four
components — prevention, protection, participation and

22-3845911/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

relief and recovery — while taking into consideration
the cultural and social specificities of each country
in order to ensure greater participation by women in
situations of armed conflict and countries emerging
from conflict.
Egypt reiterates the importance of women’s
participation in negotiations and of building their
capacity to be able to participate effectively in peace
negotiations and peacebuilding. Egypt played a crucial
role in the establishment of the Global Alliance of
Regional Women Mediator Networks and has actively
participated in the work of the Network of African
Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation and the
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, as well as
in the establishment of the Arab Women Mediators
Network, which recently joined the Global Alliance.
Egypt also joined the Women, Peace and Security Focal
Points Network, established by Spain, and participates
actively in its meetings.
It is always worth mentioning that Africa was
the first to place the women and peace and security
agenda on the Council’s agenda when Namibia took
the initiative to do so, resulting in the drafting of
resolution 1325 (2000). We believe that Africa has
taken significant steps forward in order to ensure the
effective implementation of the agenda in Africa by
launching a continental framework to report on the
agenda’s implementation.
Regional organizations, such as the African Union
and the League of Arab States, have a pivotal role to
play, with the aim of enhancing the commitment of
States to implement the women and peace and security
agenda and providing them the necessary support
through the international community, especially
international financial institutions. It is of the utmost
importance to create mechanisms for coordination
among donors, partners and the executive bodies in
order to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of the
agenda, with a special emphasis on national ownership
and engagement with national entities during the
implementation process.
Egypt is currently developing its first national
action plan on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. However, we believe that
it is not enough to merely adopt plans on the women
and peace and security agenda. We must also mobilize
the necessary resources to implement those plans and
pledges, especially to African countries, upon their
12/28

15/06/2022

request, in order to build their capacities in that regard
and implement those ambitious plans, with special
attention to be given to countries suffering from armed
conflict or in post-conflict situations.
Moreover, His Excellency President Abdel Fattah
Al Sisi, President of Egypt, was one of the first leaders
to join the circle of leadership initiative to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
operations. Egypt takes pride in championing the
General Assembly resolutions on United Nations action
on sexual exploitation and abuse since the Assembly’s
seventy-first session, the latest of which is resolution
75/321, adopted in September.
Let me conclude by stressing that women are the
fundamental agents of change during the transitional
period from conflict to development. The empowerment
of women is a must for a healthy and coherent society
aiming to reach sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mrs. Kuzee (Namibia): Namibia thanks you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the issue of women and peace and security. We are
encouraged, as always, by the overwhelming support
for this debate.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was borne out of the need to
promote women’s participation in efforts and processes
aimed at pursuing peace and security, the prevention
of all forms of violence against women and girls and
the protection of women in conflict and non-conflict
situations, including in the context of unauthorized
seizures of power.
Documented evidence demonstrates that, although
peace is more long-lasting with women’s meaningful
participation in peace, security and humanitarian
processes, that value does not consistently translate
into women’s inclusion or participation in peace
negotiations and implementation mechanisms.
Regional organizations play a critical role in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda as a whole and, in that regard, I commend
the important leadership of the African Union in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
and embedding its impact.
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Allow me to share some key points that my
delegation considers critical to the successful
engagement of regional organizations.

that individual Member States may not have in the
field of conflict resolution — that power must be
positively exploited.

High-level political commitment is essential — not
only for countries to effectively implement the women
and peace and security agenda, including through their
own national action plans, but also in the effective
implementation of regional or subregional action plans.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.

We must maintain a common understanding of
global women and peace and security norms, while at
the same time focusing our approaches on regional and
local contexts that extrapolate women and peace and
security commitments and promote women’s leadership.
Regional organizations must share best practices
with subregional organizations, as their efforts have the
potential to be mutually reinforcing. There is also value in
national institutions supporting regional organizations.
A case in point is the Women’s International Peace
Centre, launched in Namibia in 2020, which is set up
to strengthen regional and international innovation to
advance the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda and enhance the capacity of national,
regional and international actors in multidimensional
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Working with civil society remains essential to
effective regional, national and local implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. It is therefore
important to have mechanisms in place to link civil
society with regional and subregional organizations.
Regional organizations should focus their targets
and indicators on areas in which they have direct
influence — for example, by setting targets for
women’s meaningful participation in peace processes
under the auspices of those organizations. Regional
organizations must also improve information-sharing
among themselves and integrate early-warning systems
for conflict prevention into their regional frameworks in
order to enhance effective preparedness and responses
to conflict.
Finally, the protection of women’s rights and the
importance of their participation and leadership in
conflict prevention, resolution, peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction cannot be overstated. Regional
action plans have a catalytic effect, by encouraging the
development of national action plans and dovetailing
the work of individual Member States. Regional and
subregional organizations have a convening power

Mr. Marschik (Austria): Austria welcomes
the briefing delivered by the European Union (EU)
Ambassador for Gender and Diversity, Ms. Stella
Ronner-Grubačić. We also align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
This
morning,
we
heard
from
our
briefers — five highly impressive women leaders from
regional organizations — that gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls are deprioritized
far too often when a State is confronted with armed
conflict, political turmoil or the seizure of power by
force. Apparently, the normative power of the women
and peace and security agenda, which is enshrined
in 10 resolutions of the Security Council, fades when
Governments switch from normal to emergency mode.
As was made very clear earlier today, that is irresponsible
and counterproductive, and it has to change.
At the Security Council’s annual open debate
on women and peace and security held in October
every year, the report of the Secretary-General sheds
light on the significant gaps in the implementation of
the four pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda. The participation of women in truce and peace
negotiations is marginalized. The protection of women
and girls from gender-based and sexual violence is
inefficient. And the heinous crime of conflict-related
sexual violence, including mass rapes, persists. The
prevention of those forms of violence is insufficient due
to a lack of accountability.
Relief and recovery efforts and the nexus between
humanitarian aid, development assistance and
peacebuilding lack a dedicated gender lens. Too often,
local women’s rights and grass-roots organizations
do not receive the necessary funding, despite the fact
that they move quickly from community programming
to the provision of crucial humanitarian services
when conflicts begin. In short, the challenges in
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda globally are numerous and need the continuous
focus of the international community, in particular the
Security Council.

22-3845913/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Austria commends Albania for its efforts to keep the
spotlight on the women and peace and security agenda
in the Council by convening today’s debate, which
focuses on regional and subregional organizations.
After having listened to the briefers and other speakers,
it seems that the main conclusion we can draw from
today’s debate will be that the international community
needs regional organizations to bolster the women and
peace and security agenda.
Regional organizations and the Council should
collaborate in localizing the women and peace and
security agenda and extending it from the Council
via regional intergovernmental bodies to the level of
local policies. In those efforts, the role of civil society,
especially women’s rights organizations, must be
fully taken into account in terms of both planning and
implementation. Regional organizations can strengthen
the accountability of their members with respect to
the women and peace and security agenda by keeping
track of national implementation. When a member is
faced with political turmoil, a regional organization
can step in to offer mediation, protection and relief and
recovery efforts.
Let me conclude with two examples of efforts of
regional organizations that we support.
In Eastern Africa, Austria has been a longstanding partner of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) to strengthen IGAD’s peace
and security programme. Austria also supports the
efforts of the African Union to contribute to peaceful
resolutions of conflicts in Africa.
In the context of the Russian Federation’s aggression
against Ukraine, Austria supports all efforts by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to bring the war to a rapid end, including
through parliamentary diplomacy supported by the
OSCE Parliamentary Assembly’s newly appointed
Special Representative for Parliamentary Dialogue on
Ukraine, Mr. Reinhold Lopatka of Austria.
Those are just two examples of many other
excellent regional and subregional efforts that can
serve as a model for best practices in terms of how we
can contribute, through regional organizations, to the
women and peace and security agenda. We look forward
to further strengthening our efforts in that regard at the
local, regional and global levels.
14/28

15/06/2022

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to congratulate Albania for the
transparent manner in which it has presided over
the Security Council in the first half of the month of
June. I commend the variety of topics included on the
Council’s agenda, including the situations in Libya,
Mali and Yemen, as well as briefings on the work of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (see
S/PV.9058) and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals (see S/PV.9062), to name only a
few. I also note the open debate on accountability held
on 2 June (see S/PV.9052), which is also pertinent to
today’s debate.
I thank the briefers for their presentations
this morning.
I also wish to highlight the leadership of the
non-permanent members of the Council in promoting
the women and peace and security agenda. That
agenda is no longer confined to the commemoration of
resolution 1325 (2000) every year on 31 October and the
commemoration of International Women’s Day every
year on 8 March — instead, it is now mainstreamed
within the Council’s monthly agenda.
My delegation admires the role played by the
Council’s elected members in that regard, and we
hope that those efforts will be increasingly reflected
in the agenda’s implementation on the ground, with
the support of regional and subregional organizations.
During its term on the Council for the period 2023 to
2024, the women and peace and security agenda will
also be one of Ecuador’s priorities.
Cooperation with regional organizations, as
provided for in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, is a concrete tool that promotes the effectiveness
of the Security Council’s efforts. In the case of conflict
zones, regional organizations can foster greater
effectiveness of efforts to reach peaceful settlements of
disputes through confidence- and capacity-building, as
well as verification and monitoring, all of which remain
relevant to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and are mutually reinforcing.
By guaranteeing a stable environment, in particular
a zero-tolerance approach to gender-based violence
and sexual abuse against women, States can facilitate
the participation of women in crisis response efforts
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

and can strengthen social cohesion, development and
prevention at the local, international and regional levels.
On the other hand, not only does the seizure of
power by force impact the rights of women, but all
attempts to break the rule of law also undermine the
situation of the civilian population, especially women
and children. That is why we firmly condemn all acts
of violence.
I would like to highlight the fact that special
political missions have been cooperating with regional
organizations to achieve greater inclusion and enhance
the implementation of commitments undertaken in
relation to women and peace and security. We must
promote and strengthen regional action plans in that area,
which also benefit from the contribution of civil society
organizations, particularly women’s organizations.
During the Fourth Committee’s interactive dialogue
on special political missions held on 3 June, my delegation
addressed Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
specifically in preparation for today’s debate. We asked
her to elaborate on the additional specific support that
the Security Council and the General Assembly require
in order to improve regional cooperation for efforts to
further the women and peace and security agenda. The
response we received was direct and concrete. There
are a number of undertakings and mechanisms that can
be advanced, but greater investment and resources are
needed, and for that, political will is essential. We share
that opinion, and therefore today we would add that
strengthening cooperation to reinforce accountability
systems is imperative if we are to deter bad actors and
prevent any loss of ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): We thank the Permanent
Mission of Albania for organizing this meeting.
Slovakia acknowledges and welcomes the progress that
has been made since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) towards achieving the meaningful participation
of women in peace and security processes. In taking
account of the fact that we are currently dealing with the
greatest number of conflicts since the end of the Second
World War, it is crucial that all stakeholders affirm
their strong support for the equal and full participation
of women in all efforts to establish and maintain
international peace and security, while adopting and
supporting concrete and targeted measures to that end.

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

We believe it is essential for the Security Council
to continue to systematically and consistently advance,
advocate and promote the women and peace and
security agenda in all its work. Women contribute to
ending conflicts, restoring shattered communities
and sustaining peace. It is therefore necessary to
equip them with essential skills, including relevant
training, connect decision-makers with women leaders
and ensure women’s full participation in all relevant
decision-making processes. This must be grounded in
the hand-in-hand principle, and fostering cooperation
between the United Nations and other organizations is
therefore a vitally important issue.
We fully agree with the conclusion of the SecretaryGeneral’s September 2021 report (S/2021/827) on
women and peace and security that national action
plans have the potential to be important tools for
guiding implementation efforts. We were pleased to see
that besides the 98 countries and territories that have
adopted dedicated action plans on women and peace and
security, 12 regional organizations already had regional
strategies or plans in place. We would like to take this
opportunity to call on other relevant stakeholders to
follow that approach in order to strengthen and advance
the efforts to address the meaningful participation
of women.
We want to stress that women not only contribute
substantially to conflict prevention and resolution but
are also still particularly affected by conflict situations.
In that respect, we are horrified by the allegations of
conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by Russian
forces, including gang rape and rapes committed in
front of children, which we find particularly deplorable.
Slovakia calls for an immediate cessation of Russian
military activities in Ukraine and the unconditional
withdrawal of all Russian troops from the entire
territory of Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): First of all, let me
thank the Albanian presidency of the Security Council
for convening this timely and important meeting. With
the number of conflicts in the world increasing, it is
all the more important to discuss effective ways to
implement the women and peace and security agenda.
After all, the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and girls at all stages of peace processes and
security efforts, as well as the protection of women and

22-3845915/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

girls’ rights, is among the most effective tools we have
for ensuring the sustainability of peace.
It is abundantly clear that in following through on
our promises, we must make consistent and concerted
efforts at the national, regional and international levels
to fully implement resolution 1325 (2000) and all
subsequent related resolutions. The Czech Republic is in
the process of implementing its second national action
plan for the period from 2021 to 2025. We would like to
commend all Member States and regional organizations
that have developed their respective action plans on
women, peace and security. Let me encourage others
that have not yet done so to join us. In general, from our
perspective, there are three areas where urgent action
is needed.
First, we have to strengthen our efforts to prevent,
respond to and prosecute cases of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict situations. In that context,
regional organizations have a special role to play in
early-warning protection, monitoring and the collection
of evidence. The survivors of such heinous crimes
throughout the world, including of the Russian atrocities
in places such as Bucha and Borodyanka, among
others, deserve closure and justice. In that regard, we
welcome all efforts undertaken by international entities
such as the International Criminal Court, civil-society
organizations and State actors to collect evidence of
the sexual and gender-based violence that is reportedly
being systematically perpetrated by Russian armed
forces in Ukraine. Even one case of rape is one too
many. We believe that accountability is the best means
of prevention.
Secondly, we have to ensure a safe and enabling
environment for the full, equal and meaningful
participation of all women and girls, including
representatives of women’s civil-society organizations
and human rights defenders. Women-led organizations
are often at the forefront of crisis response. Yet they are
being sidelined and lack sufficient funding. Moreover,
they often face reprisals and harassment both online
and offline, which is unacceptable. In that context,
regional organizations should ensure that women have
a seat at the table at all stages of conflict resolution,
peace processes and peacebuilding. We applaud
the Secretary-General on achieving gender parity
among his senior leadership, and we call on all other
organizations to follow suit.
16/28

15/06/2022

Thirdly, we need relevant data and expertise to
identify areas where we have to redouble our efforts
and make them more context-specific. Gender advisers
and gender-responsive conflict analysis are essential to
integrating a gender perspective into our interventions
and deliberations.
I want to conclude by reminding us all that we the
Member States have committed time and again to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. The mandate exists. Let us work together so
that women and girls in all their diversity can contribute
to and enjoy sustainable and lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain is very grateful for the convening of this open
debate on women and peace and security, which is an
integral part of Spain’s feminist foreign policy. At the
same time, it is a cross-cutting and crucial dimension
of the work of the Security Council, with which we
share the goal of promoting women’s participation in
peace processes.
The seizure of power by force through coups
d’état, wherever it happens in the world, is generally
compounded by a deterioration in respect for human
rights, which affects women and children in particular.
The protracted use of force exponentially increases the
risk of sexual violence, as we have unfortunately seen
many times; respect for that nexus is therefore more
necessary than ever.
We must empower women in times of peace so
that their vulnerability is less in times of violence.
We must empower women peacebuilders, women
mediators, women journalists, women politicians,
women human rights defenders and women working on
humanitarian projects to contribute to the establishment
of fundamental political frameworks for peace and
prosperity in their countries.
The implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda requires, in addition to the development
of a gender dimension in peace operations, the important
commitment of civil society as a key actor to ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
mediation and peace negotiation processes. There will
be no lasting solution to any conflict if women are not
involved in the peace negotiations. There will be no
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

lasting peace if the rights of women and girls are not
included into the political framework for peace.
Those principles are clearly reflected in resolution
1325 (2000) and the important Commitment 2025,
launched by Finland and Spain at Headquarters in 2019.
We all know that peace processes that are inclusive and
ensure women’s participation and leadership always
yield results that are more stable and sustainable.
Spain understands that international regional
organizations are key agents for a better dialogue with
civil society in their member countries, as they have the
knowledge, experience and human capital necessary to
ensure greater effectiveness of the programmes and
public policies related to the women and peace and
security agenda.
For Spain, cooperation at the multilateral level serves
as a catalyst to effectively support the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, in
particular at the local level. It seems more important
and necessary today than ever before to translate the
agenda into concrete and effective programmes.
I would like to highlight today, by way of example,
the cooperation and excellent relations between Spain
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), an organization that brings together, among
other countries, the countries of the Western Sahel, in
which the women and peace and security agenda is of
paramount importance.
In December 2021, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Spain signed a memorandum of understanding
with ECOWAS on cooperation in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. It was
then proposed that the funds be managed through
the ECOWAS Centre for Gender Development. The
programmes to which they will be allocated are already
being identified.
Part of the funding will go to the projects of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Women’s
Platform, which aims to facilitate the mainstreaming
of a gender-based approach and the priorities of
women and girls into the initiatives and activities of
the G-5 Sahel, thereby contributing to the development
and stability of the region. ECOWAS’s support in
programme development and implementation will
undoubtedly help ensure that the work of those women
has a real and significant impact on the ground.

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Spain wishes to express its continued support and
firm commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda. You, Madam President, can always count on us
to ensure that every day the enormous gap is reduced
between what has been achieved on paper in the
resolutions and its real and effective implementation on
the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I would like to thank
Albania for convening this debate. I also thank all the
briefers for their informative briefings.
The role of regional organizations and mechanisms
is vital in supporting the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. Three months ago
in this Chamber, Indonesia highlighted the need for
the Security Council to enhance its engagement and
collaboration with regional initiatives on the women
and peace and security agenda (see S/PV.8989). I am
happy that today we are able to do that.
Allow me to highlight the following points.
First, it is important to promote and accentuate the
significant achievements and progress of the women
and peace and security agenda at the regional level.
Over the past several years, we have witnessed many
success stories in the implementation of women and
peace and security initiatives at regional and national
levels. Regional initiatives can often take the lead on
global work on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
For example, in our region in 2020 Indonesia
established the Southeast Asian Network of Women
Peace Negotiators and Mediators. Today we are
working under that umbrella with the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Myanmar to help
empower women and youth in Myanmar’s peace and
development process. We believe the Council can play
an important role in promoting good practices of the
Secretary-General’s women and peace and security
initiative. Indonesia believes that positive approach
will be impactful to motivate and encourage the
wider implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Secondly, regional initiatives are important building
blocks of the global initiative. Regional organizations
are best placed to understand the culture, needs and
challenges related to implementing the women and peace

22-3845917/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

and security agenda in the region. In South-East Asia,
for example, women and girls constitute almost half of
the total population, while among the total population
of women more than 280 million are young women.
Therefore, the women and peace and security effort
must take into account and encourage the meaningful
participation of both girls and young women.
Indonesia is one example of the Peace Village
initiative. That initiative focuses on the participation
of girls and young people in sustaining peace and
related challenges in the region. Such initiatives can
be important complementarity and building blocks to
global initiatives on women and peace and security.
Thirdly, the Council should continue to support
close interregional initiatives on women and peace
and security. Based on our experience, cross-regional
cooperation on women’s involvement in peace has
great potential to accomplish the women and peace and
security agenda.
Since 2019, Indonesia has been consistent in
strengthening dialogue with Afghanistan on the
women and peace and security agenda, including with
the participation of Afghan women. That has enabled
Indonesia to continue to stress to the current political
authority the need to ensure the protection of women’s
and girls’ rights, even during the current difficult
times. That includes our continuous interaction with the
authority on the need to ensure girls’ right to education.
Our experience has shown that women and girls
hold promising capacities and can be a tremendous
asset for international peace and security. Against
that backdrop, Indonesia calls on the United Nations
to intensify its partnership with such women’s regional
peace networks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like thank Albania
for organizing today’s open debate. My appreciation
goes also to the briefers for their insightful remarks
and their work to translate the women and peace and
security agenda into reality.
We welcome the focus of this debate. We share the
view that the enormous challenges currently witnessed
in global politics have resulted in the increased
relevance and role of regional organizations. They are
often best positioned and equipped to understand and
18/28

15/06/2022

react adequately to the root causes of armed conflicts
in their respective regions.
Europe has the longest and most significant record
of building collective security institutions at the
regional level. In that regard, NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
European Union and the Council of Europe continue
to play prominent and influential roles in conflict and
post-conflict environments. We are glad that all those
organizations have duly recognized the significance of
the women and peace and security agenda for conflict
prevention and resolution and have taken active steps to
promote it and make it a reality.
Poland, as this year’s OSCE Chairman-in-Office,
is a strong advocate of the practical approach to the
women and peace and security agenda, both in the
workings of the organization and in the implementation
of its activities. In that spirit, Poland has decided to give
financial support to a number of projects implemented
by the OSCE that aim to increase the number of
women employed in sectors traditionally reserved
for men, such as the energy sector and State security
services, thereby strengthening women’s participation
in policymaking and in bodies dealing with water
management and conflict resolution that focus on
Central Asia and Afghanistan. We also commend the
initiative of the OSCE Networking Platform for Women
Leaders, launched in December by OSCE SecretaryGeneral Helga Maria Schmid. The informal platform
brings together mediators and experts involved in
peace processes in the OSCE region in order to
exchange experiences and best practices. In addition,
we would like to highlight that the OSCE takes its
commitments seriously, ensuring that supervisory
positions related to security issues, such as positions
of special representatives and heads of field missions,
are entrusted to women. One such example is Olga
Skripovscaia, who leads the largest team of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine in Donetsk.
The sustainability of the progress achieved so far in
the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda remains a priority. Furthermore, in view of
the tragic events affecting Ukraine and Afghanistan,
where the Taliban is effectively excluding half of the
population from public life, as well as other conflictaffected societies all over the world, our determination
to take more decisive action and go beyond the standard
commitments under the women and peace and security
agenda should be stronger. Poland believes firmly in the
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

value of regional security cooperation. We support the
cooperation of all Europe-based regional organizations
with the United Nations, as contact between them
contributes to global and regional stability.
I would like to once again reiterate that close
ties between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations are essential to ensuring the
availability of a variety of tactics and solutions to global
challenges. Just as the war in Ukraine has changed our
approach to global security, it is similarly important
to change our commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda. We need more credibility, more
practical engagement and more visibility. Poland stands
ready to further support such cooperation so that it can
fulfil its unquestionably untapped potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Ms. Sudhidhanee (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand would like to express its appreciation to
Albania for convening today’s open debate to advance
the women and peace and security agenda. We also
want to thank all the briefers.
Thailand is fully committed to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda and
welcomes the focus of our discussion today on the
role of regional organizations. In this interconnected
world, peace and security challenges cannot be
overcome through national or even global efforts alone.
Cooperation at the regional level is also important. As
the birthplace of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and one of its founding members,
Thailand attaches great importance to the role of
ASEAN in particular and regional organizations in
general in promoting peace and stability, and by
extension to effective and mutually reinforcing
regional multilateral partnerships. Recognizing women
as agents of change and contributors to a peaceful and
prosperous community, ASEAN has placed the women
and peace and security agenda high on its agenda. In
2017, ASEAN’s leaders adopted a joint statement on
promoting women and peace and security in ASEAN
that emphasizes the importance of women’s full,
equal and effective participation at all stages of peace
processes. It also recognizes their indispensable roles
in peacebuilding, conflict prevention and resolution
and post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation.
Like other ASEAN member States, Thailand
deploys women peacekeepers to United Nations peace

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

operations, while the ASEAN Defence Ministers’
Meeting is working on an initiative to enhance a
support mechanism through capacity-building and the
sharing of knowledge and experience. The ASEANUnited Nations Plan of Action 2021-2025 also aims
to promote the women and peace and security agenda
as a multilateral approach to sustaining regional and
international peace and security. Areas of cooperation
include conflict prevention and mediation, women’s
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and strengthening
women’s leadership and meaningful participation, as
well as preventing violent extremism and trafficking
in persons, ending conflict-related sexual violence
and strengthening legal protection for women human
rights defenders. On the basis of those regional policy
frameworks, I would like to share some of Thailand’s
contributions in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda at the regional level.
First, during Thailand’s chairmanship of ASEAN,
at the ASEAN Regional Forum in 2019 the ASEAN
Regional Forum Ministers adopted a joint statement on
promoting the women and peace and security agenda,
of which Thailand was a sponsor. In a follow-up to
the statement, Thailand, together with Indonesia and
Canada, chaired an ASEAN Regional Forum workshop
on women and peace and security in 2021 that
provided a platform for discussing ways to advance the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in the Asia-Pacific region, as well as future
trends, including the implications of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and other emerging challenges.
Secondly, Thailand has also supported the ASEAN
Women for Peace Registry, which was established in
2018 as a pool of women experts in peace processes in
the region. Thailand’s representatives at the Registry
are actively engaged in developing a programme on
women in peace processes under the ASEAN Institute
for Peace and Reconciliation. One of the programme’s
key components is capacity-building for women peace
actors in the region.
Thirdly, Thailand also played a leading role in
developing regional guidelines and procedures to
address the needs of victims of trafficking in persons,
in support of the implementation of the ASEAN
Convention against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.
In conclusion, translating the women and peace
and security agenda into concrete action on the ground

22-3845919/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

requires political will at all levels — national, regional
and global — and close coordination between them.
Thailand and ASEAN stand ready to work in concert
with the international community generally and
the United Nations in particular to promote gender
equality, the empowerment of women and girls and
their engagement for sustainable peace and stability
with the region and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I am very pleased that my first statement in this main
organ of the United Nations as Chile’s Permanent
Representative relates to the topic of women and peace
and security. It has long been a primary focus of Chile’s
multilateral foreign policy and will be a priority in
President Gabriel Boric’s Government’s development
of its feminist foreign policy. I thank the Albanian
presidency for convening today’s open debate. I also
want to highlight the initiative of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group in putting this topic
on the Council’s agenda, and I thank the briefers for
their important contribution to today’s discussion.
Chile aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and reiterates
its commitment to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the nine subsequent resolutions on
the matter.
It is worrying that in 2020 women accounted
for only 23 per cent of the representatives in peace
processes led or co-led by the United Nations. Moreover,
the percentage of peace agreements with genderbased provisions stands at only 28.6 per cent. In that
regard, Chile promotes the strengthening of regional
and international cooperation to bring about structural
changes to ensure the full and meaningful participation
of all women at all levels of decision-making, the
empowerment of all women, the prevention of sexual
and gender-based violence and access to justice for
victims and survivors, as well as accountability for
the perpetrators.
At the regional level, Chile is a founding member of
the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network.
Similarly, we are a co-founder of the Regional Network
of Mediators of the Southern Cone, a forum for
cooperation established to ensure an increase in the
number of women receiving gender-sensitive mediation
20/28

15/06/2022

training to enable them to participate in peace talks
and mediation amid humanitarian crises or in conflict
and post-conflict situations. Our country was also a
pioneer in Latin America in drafting an action plan in
2009 for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Subsequently, a second action plan was drawn up,
and a third one is currently being developed to ensure
women’s participation in the contexts of negotiation,
mediation, peacebuilding and peace consolidation.
The current political circumstances, particularly the
invasion of Ukraine, and the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war are equally a reminder that the theme of
today’s open debate must remain at the forefront of our
efforts for a fairer world without violence. The safety
of women, girls and boys and the setting up of, and
strict respect for, humanitarian corridors in situations
of war must be the focus of our collective efforts. We
count on the support and cooperation of international
organizations to meet the commitments of the women
and peace and security agenda and to expedite the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women, in all
their diversity, in all decisions that involve them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks Albania, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council, for convening this open debate.
It is undeniable that the issue of women and peace
and security is becoming increasingly important to
address in the Council. We also thank the briefers for
their briefings.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted by this
organ more than 20 years ago, and progress in its
implementation continues to be limited. While
States have adopted national measures for the full
implementation of that resolution and its 10 related
resolutions, such as the national action plans or the
various networks of focal points to address the issue,
there are still challenges that we must overcome.
The Secretary-General’s most recent annual report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2022/272) of
29 March indicates that several recent unconstitutional
takeovers were followed by widespread insecurity,
economic crises and human rights violations, including
the use of sexual violence before, during and after such
events to subjugate and humiliate opposition groups and
rival communities. The report also notes that some of
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

the actors who took power had been involved in patterns
of conflict-related sexual violence for several years.
In the light of that, Guatemala believes that
regional organizations are among the key actors in
charge of implementing the women and peace and
security agenda. Specifically, as stated in resolution
2242 (2015), while the main implementation role lies
with States, regional organizations and United Nations
entities play an important complementary role.
The role of regional organizations is also mentioned
in the body of resolutions focusing on conflict-related
sexual violence. For example, through resolution 1820
(2008), the Council urged regional and subregional
bodies to consider the development and implementation
of policies, activities and advocacy for women and girls
affected by conflict-related sexual violence.
Also in 2013, resolution 2106 (2013) requested that,
where appropriate, regional organizations, as well as
the Secretary-General and Member States, ensure that
mediators and envoys engage on issues of combating
sexual violence, including civil society and groups of
women and survivors of sexual violence, ensuring that
such concerns are duly reflected in specific provisions
of peace agreements.
Guatemala wishes to highlight the important role
that women can, and should, play in peacebuilding. There
is an important link between the full and meaningful
participation of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, reconciliation and reconstruction activities
to ensure the effectiveness and long-term sustainability
of such activities.
In conclusion, the international community must
remove barriers that impede the strengthening of
women’s role in decision-making processes in conflict
prevention and resolution and peacebuilding. There
remains a need to increase women’s representation at
all levels of decision-making in national, regional and
international institutions and mechanisms for conflict
prevention and resolution.

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

some of the best practices and lessons learned and
make recommendations regarding the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, with an
emphasis on the regional aspect.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security,
and wishes to make some reflections and share
progress in its national capacity on the issue that brings
us together.
In that regard, this is also an opportunity to convey
to the members of the Council our concern about the
most recent report of the Secretary General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2022/272) in March of this
year, which underscores that, more than 20 years after
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), there are still
challenges that must be addressed in order to fully
improve the situation of women and girls in those
difficult situations. The report also highlights practical
ways to promote progress in improving gender equality
in peace operations.
For Uruguay, regional organizations are a
fundamental component that can not only contribute
to concrete improvements on the ground, which can
translate into women’s greater participation in conflict
and post-conflict negotiation processes, but also, in
particular, identify the most serious problems affecting
women and girls in in situations of conflict and
systematic violence.
In line with resolution 2242 (2015), we agree that
regional organizations can complement the efforts of
States and, given their experience in their respective
regions, provide tailor-made recommendations and
promote exchanges among the various actors at both
Government and civil society levels. Similarly, under
resolution 1820 (2008), regional organizations can
make efforts to include certain issues in policymaking
by States — important elements that can be overlooked
in setting other priorities.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.

Similarly, in the case of the Americas in particular,
regional organizations may be useful in identifying
regional approaches.

Mrs. González Hernández (Uruguay) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, my delegation would like to
thank your Permanent Mission and Security Council
presidency, Madam President, for having convened
this open debate and for giving Member States the
opportunity to exchange information, as well as discuss

Strengthening regional positions, with the guidance
and support of organizations that are familiar with the
field and the particularities of the regions, therefore
provides an opportunity to promote exchanges and,
above all, to encourage the learning of good practices
taking place in the regions.

22-3845921/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The African Union stands an example of success,
which has led not only to greater collaboration among
countries, but also to women’s more active participation
in all stages of the process. We understand that, together
with regional organizations, the Americas could also
benefit from such an experience.
In that regard, in relation to the region, as was
mentioned earlier by the representative of Chile, we
also highlight the launching, in March 2021, of the
Regional Network of Women Mediators of the Southern
Cone, comprising Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay
and Uruguay. It is a pioneering project that seeks to
give visibility to the important work done by women to
prevent conflicts in their communities and strengthen
the social fabric through the exchange of experiences,
good practices, lessons learned and the promotion of
joint actions with other regional networks of women
mediators and international organizations.
My country is currently awaiting administrative
approval to launch its first national action plan on
women and peace and security. Given the experience
of other countries in the region in implementing such
commitments, their experiences are very useful.
In addition, in the context of the Elsie Initiative,
Uruguay is one of the first countries in the world
to have completed its studies on barriers to the
deployment of women in peacekeeping operations,
known as Measuring Opportunities for Women in
Peace Operations reports, at the level of both its armed
forces and its national police. In that regard, Uruguay
is willing to share the results of those exercises, as well
as its good practices resulting from policies aimed at
overcoming that situation.

15/06/2022

I also thank all of the briefers for their pertinent and
informative presentations.
Aware of women’s contributions as critical
mechanisms to sound an early warning on social
tensions, of their sensitivity to threats to personal,
family and community security and of their fight against
extremism in local discourse, as well as of their role in
mediation, Morocco participates actively in a number
of initiatives, such as the promotion of mediation in the
Mediterranean, launched by Morocco and Spain, the
training of murshidats and women preachers and the
holding, in Morocco, of an international conference on
women and peace and security.
In addition, Morocco recently adopted a national
action plan on women and peace and security. The
plan is part and parcel of the royal initiative for the
promotion of gender equality as a foundation of a just,
democratic and egalitarian society. In that connection,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI has stressed that
“[t]he issue undoubtedly requires an overall renewal
through a profound transformation of archaic
mindsets and collective conscience. It requires
that women be given the opportunity to become
involved in all aspects of the life of the nation.”
The submission of Morocco’s national action
plan on women and peace and security is not a mere
formality. On the contrary, it is a concrete manifestation
of Morocco’s determination and commitment to gender
equality and its conviction that the women and peace
and security agenda is an essential component of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

The women and peace and security agenda
makes women agents of change and equal partners in
decision-making processes. It has the potential to be
transformative because it recognizes that development
cannot be sustainable unless it is inclusive, that peace
cannot be achieved if women do not participate and
that security cannot be complete if it does not take into
account the needs of women and girls, particularly the
most vulnerable.

Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is a
real pleasure, Madam President, to see your friendly
country, Albania, preside over the work of the Security
Council for the month of June. At the outset, my
delegation would like to thank the Albanian presidency
for organizing this open debate on an issue of the
highest importance — women and peace and security.

Unfortunately, we still live in a world where women
are affected, now more than ever, by humanitarian
crises, armed conflicts and natural disasters. The
gap between words and deeds is therefore widening.
Conflicts have devastating consequences all over the
world, particularly for women and girls, as they are
most often the targets of sexual and gender-based

Finally, I would like to say that, while there is
still a long way to go, we understand that, through the
various bodies of the United Nations system, SouthSouth cooperation can be fostered for the sharing of
best practices and training at the regional level.

22/28

22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

violence and exclusion from political processes to
establish peace and bolster security. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has amplified their vulnerability and
the risks they face.
The efforts of Morocco to achieve the objectives of
the women and peace and security agenda are part of
its action to promote a multilateralism that is based on
action, that goes beyond mere declarations of intention,
that is translated into concrete initiatives to respond
to the needs of the most vulnerable and that is guided
by the evolving current threats to international peace
and security. The road map for the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda must be
guided by those evolving threats. It is therefore critical
to strengthen international and regional cooperation
in capacity-building and the training of women in
preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping and the
prevention of violent extremism, as well as to create
synergies between the women and peace and security
agenda, the human rights normative framework and the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Morocco actively participated in the launching of
the African Women Leaders Network in New York
in June 2017. Morocco welcomes that the Network
has since been able to create a continental force of
women leaders that contribute to the transformation of
Africa, in line with the African Union’s Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In
December 2019, the Network launched its Morocco
chapter in Casablanca. The chapter seeks to strengthen
women’s leadership at all levels of decision-making in
the political, economic and public spheres. Its work is
focused on several areas — the empowerment of rural
women, political participation, peace and security,
young women’s leadership, financial inclusion and
social mobilization.
In conclusion, Morocco remains committed to
working together with the United Nations, regional
organizations and partners in order to advance the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda as part of its national action plan. Women are the
most vulnerable and targeted members of the population
in conflict situations. Their participation in peace
processes improves the likelihood of conflict resolution,
promotes lasting peace agreements and boost national
reconciliation and socioeconomic reintegration.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Khandamishvili (Georgia): At the outset,
I would like to express my appreciation to the
Albanian presidency for convening this important
and timely meeting. I also thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
Regional organizations play a crucial role in
conflict prevention and resolution and in post-conflict
recovery, as well as in the implementation of the
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, as
they offer a valuable platform for sharing best practices
and proposing solutions to the existing challenges.
In that regard, I would like to reaffirm Georgia’s
commitment to integrating gender perspectives in
decision-making, protecting the rights of women and
promoting their meaningful participation in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Today, as we gather to discuss the women and peace
and security agenda, Russia’s unjustified, unprovoked
and premeditated full-scale military aggression against
Ukraine continues, bringing with it devastating
humanitarian consequences and immense suffering for
the civilian population, especially women and girls.
Particularly outrageous are reports about Russian
forces perpetrating sexual violence as a weapon of war
against women and girls. In that regard, it is imperative
that accountability be ensured and justice be served for
those gross violations through all available international
legal instruments.
The ongoing military aggression against Ukraine,
as well as the continued occupation and creeping
annexation of the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali, blatantly violate the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and undermine the rulesbased international order, thereby jeopardizing regional
and global security.
Despite persisting challenges, Georgia is sparing
no effort to increase women’s participation in areas
pertaining to international peace and security,
including through engagement with relevant regional
organizations. Since 2021, with the aim of promoting
gender-equality in institutions and increasing women’s
participation in politics and electoral processes,
Georgia has been participating in a project through
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe entitled “Capitalizing on the Human
Dimension Mandate to Advance Gender Equality”.
The project includes up to 40 different programmes for

22-3845923/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

representatives of the Parliament, local municipalities
and the Government Administration.
Georgia actively cooperates with the relevant
mechanisms of the Council of Europe related to
various aspects of gender equality. We contribute to
the work of the Council of Europe’s Gender Equality
Commission, as well the independent Group of Experts
on Action against Violence against Women and
Domestic Violence.
At the national level, based on key findings,
recommendations and consultations with regional
organizations and civil society, the Government of
Georgia is finalizing its fourth national action plan on
women and peace and security for the period 2022 to
2024. The plan constitutes the Government’s approach
to integrating gender perspectives in the security sector
and in decision-making processes by using a gender lens
in peace negotiations and by promoting the meaningful
participation of women and girls in conflict prevention
and resolution.
At the Geneva International Discussions and the
Incident Prevention and Response Mechanisms, the
delegation of Georgia regularly raises issues related to
the needs and priorities of women internally displaced
persons and conflict-affected women.
I take this opportunity to highlight that, on 17 June,
the President of Georgia will host the Tbilisi Women’s
International Conference — Leaders on Conflicts,
Peace and Security, which will gather women leaders
from all over the world to discuss their role in fostering
peace and security.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Georgia’s
commitment to advancing the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
level and to promoting its implementation within
regional and international forums in order to contribute
to strengthening the role of regional organizations,
especially in the current challenging environment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
Albania on its presidency of the Security Council during
this month and to wish it every success in discharging
its mandate. I would also like to commend the efforts of
the United States during its presidency of the Council
last month.
24/28

15/06/2022

The topic we are discussing today is of paramount
importance. The implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda is a key component of international
and regional efforts to achieve lasting peace, given
the crucial role of women in that regard. However,
unconstitutional changes of government undermine the
capacity of States to guarantee women’s security and
stability. The effective and meaningful participation of
women in political activity and all other aspects of life
is a cornerstone of any policy that seeks to strengthen
stability and achieve sustainable development, or to
address the effects of unconstitutional changes of
government and the resulting disruption of political
discourse and dissolution of constitutional institutions,
which threaten to reverse previous gains, especially
those related to women’s empowerment.
The delegation of Algeria stresses the need to
develop comprehensive strategies on gender equality
and women’s empowerment in order to ensure women’s
participation in peace and security operations, as well
as in political processes. The protection of women
during conflict and post-conflict situations must also
be ensured, including by supporting the substantive
presence of women at all levels and in all aspects of life.
My delegation would like to touch upon several
points contained in the important concept note
circulated by the presidency (S/2022/457, annex).
Resolution 1325 (2000) serves as a benchmark
for Member States and regional organizations in
developing programmes for the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, as well as for the
elaboration of action plans and strategies at the regional
and national levels that effectively address its four
pillars. Such strategies should take into consideration
regional and national specificities and demands so as
to guarantee the harmonization of policies and ensure
transparency and accountability with respect to the
safety and security of women.
In view of the negative impact of unconstitutional
changes of government on States’ security and stability,
the then Organization of African Unity (OAU) adopted
the 2000 Lomé Declaration on the framework for
an OAU response to unconstitutional changes of
Government, which requires that the membership of
any country subject to such unconstitutional changes
be suspended. The Lomé Declaration also stresses, in
principle IV, the promotion of political plurality and
all forms of participatory democracy, including by
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

enhancing the role of civil society and ensuring gender
balance in political processes.
That approach, which was later reaffirmed by the
African Union, was enshrined a few days ago in the
Malabo declaration on terrorism and unconstitutional
changes of Government in Africa, which calls for “a
strong response and deepening democracy and collective
security”, including synergized efforts to create an
environment conducive to effective participation of
women in political processes.
The League of Arab States has made considerable
strides in enhancing the role of women in conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including by providing women with the necessary tools
to participate in mediation processes by effectively
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda in the Arab world.
Algeria believes in the importance of women’s
participation in the context of the African Union and
supports their effective participation in negotiations
on conflict prevention and mediation at all levels.
Consequently, Algeria was a pioneer in the creation of
FemWise-Africa, the Network of African Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation in the framework of
peace and security in Africa, and hosted the Network’s
first general assembly in 2017.
We commend all actions taken by regional and
international organizations to implement the women
and peace and security agenda. We stress the need for
cooperation and coordination among them, especially
between the Security Council and the African Union,
including the latter’s Peace and Security Council.

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

be achieved only by addressing the internal and external
factors that cause political crises and by intensifying
efforts to ensure that no one is left behind or deprived
of sustainable development.
The implementation of the goals of resolution
1325 (2000) requires synergized efforts at all levels
in a spirit of international solidarity. Unfortunately,
on many occasions such solidarity has been limited
when it comes to addressing the socioeconomic aspects
of conflict prevention and the achievement of lasting
security for the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
recognized for the first time the central role that women
must play in conflict prevention and resolution. Since
then, the world has become more aware of the positive
contribution of women in conflict situations and why
their meaningful participation in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes is essential.
However, significant gaps in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) persist. More than 20 years have
elapsed since its adoption, and yet very little progress
has been made. Despite the advances made at the
level of the normative framework, those achievements
are not reflected on the ground. The role of national
Governments and regional organizations is crucial in
closing those gaps.

Algeria is honoured to organize an annual highlevel seminar on peace and security in Africa in the
city of Wahran. Its aim is to support Africa’s voice
in the Security Council. Within the context of the
League of Arab States, Algeria also made a significant
contribution to establishing an emergency committee
on the protection of women in armed conflict, which led
to the creation of the Arab Women Mediators Network
in February 2020.

The exclusion of women has become particularly
prominent in the context of military coups and the
seizure of power by force. We have witnessed the
abrupt interruption of national commitments to
women and peace and security, including through the
dismantling of gender-based policies. In the context of
military coups or the seizure of power by force, regional
organizations, with their experience in mediation and
conflict prevention and resolution, can have a positive
impact on the protection, promotion and implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

In conclusion, given the importance of the topic
we are discussing today, it is clear that the women and
peace and security agenda cannot be discussed from
only one perspective but is part of a comprehensive
vision that aims to empower women in all aspects of
life, while ensuring their safety and stability. That can

Regional organizations are often the first to react
to a crisis, engage the parties concerned and guarantee
the protection of civilians. They are in a unique position
to build confidence and promote dialogue among the
parties, as well as to offer support through mediation
and reconciliation.

22-3845925/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Regional organizations play a fundamental role in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
That is why, in the regional context, the Argentine
Republic has promoted the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in various forums. Specifically,
we promoted the inclusion of the topic of women and
peace and security on the agenda of the Southern
Common Market, as well as at the Regional Conference
on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Against that backdrop, we would like to highlight
the Santiago Commitment, adopted in 2020, whereby
the parties agreed to promote measures to ensure the
full and effective participation of women at all levels
and at all stages of peace processes and mediation,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution initiatives.
Argentina also advocated the establishment of
the Regional Network of Women Mediators of the
Southern Cone, launched in Buenos Aires in March
2021 by the Ministers of the member countries of the
Southern Common Market. The Regional Network
is a pioneering project in Latin America and the
Caribbean that highlights the important work done by
women in preventing conflict in their communities
and strengthening the social fabric and ways of
preventing conflicts through dialogue and mediation.
The initiative also represents a contribution by the
countries of the Southern Cone to achieving the aim
of creating more just, inclusive and peaceful societies
that is Sustainable Development Goal 16. The women
and peace and security agenda must be a priority not
only for the Security Council but the entire United
Nations. Women are agents of change and pillars of
their communities. Argentina remains committed to
realizing that vision and views the women and peace
and security agenda as an integral part of efforts for
peacebuilding and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela welcomes the convening of this
important open debate to address the role of regional
organizations in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, and in particular
their approach in the context of political unrest and
the seizure of power by force. That is an especially
relevant issue today, given the many cases of foreign
intervention and destabilization, as well as political
26/28

15/06/2022

exploitation — of human rights issues and of the natural
social and economic challenges that every nation has
to deal with — in order to overthrow Governments
and alter the constitutional order of sovereign and
independent countries that refuse to yield to foreign
blackmail, pressure and coercion.
Our country is a faithful defender of the Charter
of the United Nations and has historically advocated
total respect for and adherence to the principles and
purposes it enshrines, including the promotion of
friendly and cooperative relations among States, based
on mutual respect and the recognition of their sovereign
equality and the inalienable right of their peoples
to self-determination. It is therefore an increasingly
urgent ethical and moral duty to make those values
more visible every day as ideals and as commitments
to be translated into concrete political action. In that
regard, after thousands of years of exclusion, women’s
progress on rights issues and the increase in their
active and sustained participation in political activity
at all levels — in addition to their contributions to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts at different stages
and the maintenance and consolidation of peace — must
be a priority on the agenda of multilateral and regional
organizations in the same way it is in terms of the
cross-cutting realization of national public policies in
Venezuela and in itself represents a definitive means
for the effective realization of the three pillars of
the Organization.
The effort to build Latin American unity that our
region has made in recent years, despite its differences,
is based on a firm commitment to women’s advancement
and political, economic and social participation in an
environment that — although it is not involved in bitter
armed conflicts — has fallen prey to other systemic
forms of aggression as the consequence of poverty,
destabilization and other forms of interference that
not only claim women, girls and other vulnerable
populations as their main victims but also jeopardize
public policies promoting their continued inclusion and
guaranteeing their rights.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
repeatedly condemned in numerous international forums
the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures,
which constitute one weapon of multipronged warfare
that exploits human rights issues, financial systems,
humanitarian assistance, supply chains, information
and communications technologies, access to universal
health care, education and countless other infrastructure
22-38459

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

systems necessary to a State’s sustainability and
development, with the goal of imposing a single
thought system through a hegemonic political bloc. One
of the main and most harmful results of such cruel and
inhuman policies of aggression, among many others, is
its effect on States’ political stability and the setbacks
it brings in rights previously gained, including women’s
rights. That is something we have seen so many times,
in particular with regard to attempted coups d’état,
failed and successful assassinations, funding, logistical
support and safe havens for mercenary and terrorist
groups and worse forms of intervention, including from
the Latin American and Caribbean region. We demand
a full and definitive end to those criminal aggressions.
My country supports the efforts of the United
Nations, all regional and subregional organizations
and the States leading in the area to strengthen the
women and peace and security agenda, as we are aware
of the complexity of the challenges that remain on the
horizon. Meanwhile, we want to take this opportunity
to reaffirm firmly and categorically our condemnation
of sexual exploitation and abuse in all cases, including
within international organizations, while reaffirming
zero tolerance for such crimes and the vital importance
of bringing all those responsible to justice.
In conclusion, Venezuela reiterates that it will
continue to work to promote and strengthen the agenda
for women’s advancement and empowerment at all levels
and in all arenas — including in regional organizations
and other political cooperation forums to which we
belong, such as the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples
of Our America and the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States — while reaffirming and actively
defending women’s full participation, ensuring their
human rights, equal opportunities and equity and
combating the feminization of poverty, all of which are
crucial to building true peace and represent urgently
needed measures in the struggle for the emancipation
and definitive transformation of our peoples and the
realization of the ideals enshrined in the Charter. It
is a commitment to which Venezuela will continue to
dedicate all the resources it commands, despite the
constant attacks and obstacles imposed by foreign
Powers, while remaining faithful to its historical
vocation to promote the possibility of a better world,
with greater prosperity and inclusion for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal
aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
In my national capacity, I want to focus on the
commitment to respect for all women and girls’
human rights and their protection and fulfilment, and
to underline the importance of women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peace negotiations,
peacebuilding and peacemaking. In that regard, I
would like to stress the importance of including and
mainstreaming the women and peace and security
agenda within military doctrines, formative frameworks
and practices of State and non-State actors. That is
equally important at both the national and regional
levels. We must do more and be mindful of all women
and girls whose fundamental human rights are under
attack. We must support them in their plight and take
stock of some of the direst situations, such as in Yemen,
Afghanistan and Myanmar, and in Ukraine following
the Russian invasion.
Sexual violence as a weapon of war and a method
of intimidating civilian populations must be brought
to an end. It is paramount to fight impunity, reprisals,
promote prevention and ensure accountability, bringing
women into decision-making processes, diplomacy
and political dialogue. Regional organizations must
integrate those aspects into their work. That is also
our commitment in the scope of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, which in 2021 adopted
an action plan for the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, which is aligned with
its strategic plan on gender equality and women’s
empowerment.
For its part, Portugal is implementing the third
edition of its national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000), based on three main objectives: prevention,
protection and participation. As a result of its longstanding commitment and action over the years, Portugal
has included the women and peace and security agenda
and a gender-equality perspective into its operational
and strategic documents, namely, in its development
cooperation, defence, security and justice sectors.
As an outcome, I would like to highlight that
our development cooperation devotes more than
one third of its bilateral assistance — about 35 per
cent — to initiatives promoting gender equality and

22-3845927/28

S/PV.9064 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

women’s empowerment. We believe that approach
contributes to implementing the women and peace and
security agenda with a focus on prevention, namely,
in contexts where political and social stability might
face challenges, by building resilience and helping to
further strengthen the role of women in society.
That is also a priority for Portugal as a current
member of the Peacebuilding Commission, in which we
have been highlighting the need to support the action
of women peacebuilders at the grass-roots level in a
way that is aligned with and feeds into the respective
national priorities. In achieving that objective, the

28/28

15/06/2022

support of regional organizations can also play a
considerable catalytic role.
As this debate comes to an end, I want to thank
you, Madam President, for bringing this matter into
the Security Council. Let me assure you that Portugal
stands ready to continue to push for the women
and peace and security agenda — both nationally
and internationally — not only by advocating it
but also by implementing it from an integrated and
horizontal perspective.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

22-38459
