S/2015/391

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 May 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 28 May 2015 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the twentieth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution
2118 (2013) (see annex). The present letter covers the period from 23 April to
21 May 2015.
On the destruction of the remaining 12 chemical weapons production facilities
in the Syrian Arab Republic, I am pleased to note that the export licence for the
explosives required to destroy the five hangars has now been issued and that the
delivery of these explosives is expected to take place by mid -June. I also note that
the installation of monitoring equipment at the first of the four accessible
underground structures will take place at the end of this month. I regret, however,
that the prevailing security situation continues to render one underground structure
and two hangars inaccessible.
There is continuing dialogue between OPCW technical experts and the Syrian
authorities with regard to the initial declaration by the Syrian Arab Republic and
subsequent amendments, and the Declaration Assessment Team of OPCW is
currently undertaking its ninth visit to the Syrian Arab Republic to continue its
clarification of outstanding issues. I welcome the continued consultations between
OPCW and the Syrian authorities, and reiterate my previous calls for ongoing
cooperation in this regard.
The work of the fact-finding mission that is looking into allegations of the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic is also continuing and
OPCW experts are closely examining all available information. I note that the
fact-finding mission that is looking into allegations brought to the attention of the
Director-General of OPCW by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic is
preparing to deploy imminently to Damascus. Such a deployment follows agreement
to that end that has now been reached between OPCW and the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
In spite of such progress, however, I must express my continuing and deepest
regret that allegations of the use of these weapons have not ceased, even since the
time of my last letter on this subject. This is utterly deplorable. There can be no
excuse or justification whatsoever for the use of such weapons.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex urgently
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-08446 (E)

290515

*1508446*

S/2015/391

Annex
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of Executive Council decision EC -M-33/DEC.1 of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to the
Council. My report covers the period from 23 April to 21 May 2015 and also
covers the reporting requirements contained in Executive Council decision
EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/5

15-08446

S/2015/391

Enclosure
Note by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted t o the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, also adopted a decision entitled
“Reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated
4 February 2015).
4.
This, the twentieth monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance with
the aforementioned Council decisions, and includes information relevant to the
period from 23 April to 21 May 2015.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
5.

Progress within the reporting period by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

(a) With respect to the 12 chemical weapons production facilities (CWPFs)
(seven aircraft hangars and five underground structures) in the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Secretariat has verified the destruction of four underground structures,
as previously reported. Five hangars are now ready to accommodate the explosives,
for which the supplier has received the export licence and anticipates delivery in
mid-June. While the security situation continues to preclude safe access to one
underground structure and two hangars, the contractors have made measurable but
sporadic progress, during brief periods of stability, in preparing the underground
structure and one of the hangars for destruction.
(b) On 15 May 2015, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
eighteenth monthly report (EC-79/P/NAT.2, dated 15 May 2015) regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and CWPFs, as
required by paragraph 19 of EC-M-34/DEC.1.
(c) The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the necessary
cooperation in accordance with the implementation of subparagraph 1 (e) of EC-M-

15-08446

3/5

S/2015/391

33/DEC.1 and paragraph 7 of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118
(2013).
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
6.
As reported previously, all declared chemicals have been removed from the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, and all declared stocks of the Category 1
chemicals have been destroyed. A total of 93.6% of the Category 2 chemicals has
now been destroyed, representing a combined total of 98.7% of all chemical
weapons declared by the Syrian Arab Republic, including the isopropanol
previously destroyed in the Syrian Arab Republic. The status of the destruction of
the remaining Category 2 chemical (hydrogen fluoride (HF)) and effluents is as
follows:
(a) A total of 47.7% of the HF has been destroyed. Mexichem UK Limited in
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has completed
destruction of its allocated quantity of HF. With a viable option now identified, the
destruction activities at Veolia ES Technical Solutions, LLC in the United States of
America will resume soon after the arrangements to safely process the c orroded HF
cylinders have been finalised. Veolia has implemented interim measures to safely
store the HF cylinders until such time as they can be processed.
(b) Of the DF and HD effluent produced by the neutralisation process on
board the United States vessel MV Cape Ray, Ekokem in Finland has destroyed a
total of 82.2% of the DF effluent and is expected to have completed the destruction
by the end of June 2015. The GEKA facility in Germany has now completed the
destruction of the HD effluent.
7.
The Secretariat will continue to brief States Parties in The Hague on the
aforementioned destruction activities. Timelines for the completion of the
destruction of Syrian chemical weapons were provided in the overall report on the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme (paragraph 25 of EC76/DG.16, dated 4 July 2014), which was noted by the Council at its Seventy -Sixth
Session.
Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
8.
In the context of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, cooperation
with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) has continued and
eleven OPCW staff members were deployed as part of that Mission as at the cut-off
date of this report. Ambassador José Artur Denot Medeiros of Brazil, as the Special
Adviser to the Director-General on Syria, continued his meetings with senior Syrian
officials, UNOPS staff, and the United Nations Designated Official in Syria during
his visit from 10 to 12 May 2015.
9.
The Director-General has continued to communicate with senior
representatives of the States Parties hosting a destruction facility or providing
assistance with the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, and with senior
officials of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As requested by the
Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2, dated 7 March
2014), the Secretariat, on behalf of the Director-General, has continued to brief
States Parties in The Hague on its activities.

4/5

15-08446

S/2015/391

10. The Secretariat and the Syrian authorities have continued to cooperate on
outstanding issues regarding the Syrian initial declaration, as encouraged by the
Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session (paragraph 6.17 of EC-76/6, dated 11 July
2014). The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT), having completed its eighth visit
to the Syrian Arab Republic as previously reported, issued a Note entitled “Fourth
Status Report of the Activities of the Declaration Assessment Team,” (EC -M49/P/S/1, dated 1 May 2015), which was noted by the Council at is Forty-Ninth
Meeting. The Secretariat also gave a presentation in this regard. On 17 May 2015,
the DAT began its ninth visit and will continue interviews and technical discussions
on issues still requiring clarification. Further site visits and the takin g of samples
are also planned, depending on the security situation. The visit is expected to end on
29 May 2015.
11. Regarding the implementation of additional special monitoring measures in
accordance with Notes EC-M-43/DG.1/Rev.1 (dated 21 July 2014) and EC-M40/DG.2/Add.1 (dated 20 July 2014), the preparatory work necessary to install the
monitoring equipment, such as constructing the base stations at the four
underground structures, installing cables, training the operators, establishing the
administrative and technical requirements, and so on, is now complete. Installation
of the equipment at the first site is expected to begin at the end of May 2015, with
the aim to begin testing the system at all four structures by the end of June 2015.
Supplementary resources
12. The total contributions of EUR 50.3 million in the Syria Trust Fund for the
Destruction of Chemical Weapons and the contributors thereto remained unchanged
from the previous report.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
13. The Director-General provided an update regarding the work of the Fact
Finding Mission (FFM) at the Forty-Ninth Meeting of the Council, held on 7 May
2015. On 21 May, the Secretariat received a letter from the Syrian Arab Re public
advising that they were willing to receive the FFM in Damascus. The team is
preparing for deployment to the Syrian Arab Republic.
14. With regard to the recent allegations of use of toxic chemicals in Idlib
province, the Director-General informed the Council that the FFM continues to
examine all available information and will be guided in its work by Council
decision EC-M-48/DEC.1 and Security Council resolution 2209 (2015).
Conclusion
15. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic will continue to be on the destruction of the eight remaining CWPFs
and on installing and operationalising the special remote monitoring system in the
four underground structures. The DAT and the FFM will also continue their work in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-08446

5/5
