S/2020/1301

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 December 2020
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General
Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2545
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in which it requested the
Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the mandate of the Mission
every 90 days. The report covers the period from 26 September to 28 December 2020.
2.
On 24 November, Colombians marked the fourth anniversary of the signing of
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), which put an end to a conflict of more
than 50 years and ushered in a new era of peacebuilding in which unquestionable
achievements have been attained even as concerns and risks remain. As a result of the
Agreement, the country has seen a significant nationwide decrease in violence
compared to previous decades, such as notable reductions in homicides, kidnappings
and other conflict-related indicators; Colombian democracy has expanded to include
more political participation; conflict-affected communities are beginning to see the
fruits of long-overdue investments in their regions; and a transitional justice system
is working to provide truth, justice and reparations to victims. The parties to the
Agreement remain committed to implementing the various components of the
Agreement, with the support of Colombian society and the international community,
amid formidable challenges, particularly the persistence and concentration of
violence in some regions.
Major developments
3.
In the light of the dire security conditions facing them, hundreds of former
combatants marched in late October from various regions of the country to Bogotá in
a “Pilgrimage for life and peace” to demand effective actions from the Governm ent
and from State entities, including to enhance security guarantees and strengthen the
reintegration process. The mobilization was triggered by the killing on 16 October of
a well-known regional leader of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(FARC), Juan de Jesús Monroy, who was actively leading reintegration activities, and
one of his bodyguards, Luis Alexander Largo, who was also a former FARC -EP
member. The mobilization was peaceful and orderly, and measures were taken to
prevent coronavirus disease (COVID-19) contagion. No security incidents were
reported.

20-17496 (E)

060121

*2017496*

S/2020/1301

4.
On 6 November, the President of Colombia, Iván Duque, hosted a meeting with
representatives of the Pilgrimage at the Presidential Palace, following several
meetings with senior government officials in Meta department and in Bogotá. The
President reiterated his commitment to the reintegration process and to strengthening
security measures for former combatants and announced that in 2021 he would visit
all the former territorial areas for training and reintegration that he has not yet visited.
Both the Government and representatives of the Pilgrimage highlighted the positive
results of the meeting; the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation,
Emilio Archila, recognized the constructive nature of the exchange and the
representative of FARC, Pastor Alape, highlighted the importance of the dialogue
with President Duque as a positive step in fighting stigmatization against former
combatants. On 17 December, six weeks after the meeting, President Duque visited
the former territorial area for training and reintegration in Dabeiba, Antioquia, where
he announced a land purchase for productive and housing projects for former
combatants.
5.
In October, thousands of indigenous people from south-western Colombia,
organized in a form of social mobilization known as a minga, marched to Bogotá
demanding increased security in their territories and the implementation of the Final
Agreement. In Bogotá, representatives of the minga attended a session of the House
of Representatives and mobilized peacefully in the city to express their demands. The
Government has emphasized its efforts to meet commitments adopted in previous
discussions with the communities, and several meetings have taken place in Cauca
department after the mobilization.
6.
In October, Congress approved the general national budget for 2021. The
Government informed that peace-related investments increased by 9 per cent.
Opposition parties, including FARC, have argued that funding remains insufficient,
especially for the comprehensive rural reform envisioned in section 1 of the Final
Agreement, and for the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops established in section 4. Congress also approved a 10-year extension of
the Victims and Land Restitution Act, which was due to expire in 2021.
7.
In November, the media reported the existence of audio recordings from
mid-2019 from the drug trafficking case against former FARC-EP commander and
now member of a FARC-EP dissident group Seuxis Hernández, alias “Jesús Santrich”.
These reports have stirred controversy over an alleged lack of cooperation from the
Office of the Attorney-General at the time with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Civil society and political actors have called for a thorough investigation on the
matter.
Implementation priorities for 2021
8.
In his report of 26 March 2020 (S/2020/239), the Secretary-General proposed
three priorities to guide the implementation of sections 3.2 (reintegration) and 3.4
(security guarantees) of the Final Agreement in 2020. Progress was accomplished in
some areas, despite complications arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. This section
analyses the progress made and the remaining challenges over the reporting period,
while also proposing five priorities for 2021 focused on the Mission’s verification of
sections 3.2 and 3.4 of the Final Agreement, as well as elements which are essential
for progress in the implementation of these sections, and the Final Agreement more
broadly: consolidating State presence, strengthening constructive dialogue between
the parties, and promoting reconciliation.

2/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

Ensure protection and security for former combatants, conflict-affected
communities, and social leaders and human rights defenders
9.
The greatest threat to the implementation of the Final Agreement continues to
be the persistent violence against the thousands of men and women who voluntarily
laid down their arms in good faith and remain committed to peace, against the
communities that have endured violence for decades, and against the social leaders
and human rights defenders who work on their behalf.
Attacks against former combatants
10. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, the Mission has verified 248 killings
of former combatants (six women), including 21 during the reporting period (two
women, three of indigenous origin and two Afro-Colombians) and a total of 73 during
2020. Additionally, the Mission has verified 55 attempted homicides (three women)
and 20 disappearances (all men) since the signing of the Agreement.
11. Threats from illegal armed groups are driving former combatants away from
former territorial areas for training and reintegration and new collective reintegration
areas in several regions. With support from the Government, 191 former combatants
have relocated. However, there are cases where former combatants do not report their
decision to leave, fearing this may heighten their security risks. In many cases, their
families, including children and partners, are left behind with little institutional support.
12. The security situation for former combatants in the border area between Meta,
Caquetá and Guaviare departments has deteriorated sharply in recent months. Taking
advantage of limited State presence, FARC-EP dissident groups have expanded their
reach and are jeopardizing the reintegration process by threatening and attacking
former combatants, co-opting their economic projects and sabotaging their political
and social initiatives. Several local FARC leaders have left due to security issues and
have expressed reluctance to return.
Precautionary measures ordered by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
13. In November, senior Government and State officials were called before the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace to update on actions taken to comply with its orders,
issued in July, to bolster the measures provided for in the Final Agreement for the
security and protection of former combatants. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace had
also previously ordered precautionary measures for the protection of ethnic
communities accredited as victims in the three macro-cases focused on specific
regions of the country.
14. During the hearing, the Government reiterated its commitment to the protection
of former combatants and highlighted measures such as the deployment of public
security forces around the former territorial areas for training and reintegration and
its support for the National Protection Unit. The Government reported that it allocated
approximately $3.8 million to the Unit in September, in compliance with the order by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace for a plan to fill over 680 vacancies of bodyguards
and over 50 vacancies of security risk analysts within the Specialized Subdirectorate
for Security and Protection of the National Protection Unit, tasked by the Final
Agreement with the protection of former combatants. To date, none of these additional
bodyguards and only 27 analysts have been recruited.
15. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, 25 former combatants (all men) have
been killed while awaiting a response to their protection requests by the National
Protection Unit. Concerns remain about the more than 1,000 prot ection requests
pending evaluation and implementation. Equal access to security and protection
schemes by women former combatants remains a challenge, despite internal guidance
20-17496

3/19

S/2020/1301

issued in April by the Specialized Subdirectorate calling on its staff to ensur e equal
access to protection schemes by both men and women former combatants.
16. The orders of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to submit the guidelines and
action plan for the public policy to dismantle criminal organizations and their support
networks, and to advance in the formulation of the Strategic Plan for Security and
Protection have invigorated discussions within the National Commission on Security
Guarantees and the Technical Committee on Security and Protection, respectively.
However, the finalization of these instruments, which are provided for in the Final
Agreement, is still pending.
17. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace had also ordered the Office of the High
Commissioner for Peace to convene the High-level Unit of the Comprehensive
Security System for the Exercise of Politics, to operationalize the comprehensive
protection programme for members of the FARC party, as per the Final Agreement.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace has reported several meetings of the
Unit between September and October, including with the participation of FARC, to
discuss a draft document to establish the protection programme.
Special Investigations Unit
18. The work of the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the AttorneyGeneral, created by the Final Agreement, is critical to fight impunity by bringing to
justice those responsible for attacks against former combatants and social leaders,
including intellectual authors.
19. The Special Investigations Unit has reported 289 cases of attacks against former
combatants under its purview. During the reporting period, the Unit reported three
new convictions, for a total of 34, as well as 20 cases in trial phase, 3 8 under
investigation, and an additional 49 with arrest warrants issued. The Unit also reported
the arrest of 27 individuals allegedly involved in killings of former combatants,
including 2 individuals who belong to a FARC-EP dissident group operating in the
tri-border region between Meta, Caquetá and Guaviare and who are linked to the
killing of Juan de Jesús Monroy and his bodyguard.
20. The lack of security measures and remoteness of some rural areas where these
crimes take place affect the ability of the Special Investigations Unit to carry out its
mandate. Strengthened support from public security forces is necessary to enable
prompt access to these areas and to execute arrest warrants.
21. Strengthening local judicial capacity, particularly in the regions most affected
by violence, is also key to combat impunity. At the Special Investigations Unit hearing
in November, the Deputy Attorney General highlighted the role that regional
specialized judges can play in bringing perpetrators to justice and in dismantling local
criminal organizations.
Deployment of public security forces
22. Army and police units continue providing protection around former territorial
areas for training and reintegration. These deployments have helped protect former
combatants in former territorial areas for training and reintegrat ion, with only two
killings registered therein since the signing of the Final Agreement. Approximately
35 per cent of killings in 2020 have occurred in new reintegration areas or in their
vicinity, around which there are no dedicated security deployments. During the
reporting period, the presence of public security forces has been reinforced in former
territorial areas for training and reintegration located in municipalities where there
are ongoing confrontations between the armed forces and illegal armed g roups.

4/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

Attacks against social leaders, human rights defenders and
conflict-affected communities
23. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received information about 42 killings
of human rights defenders and social leaders (1 documented and 41 under
verification), for a total of 53 verified this year (including 11 indigenous leaders and
2 Afro-Colombian leaders), 5 of whom were women and another 74 cases are under
verification. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, OHCHR has reported 378
killings (including 44 women, 6 lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
persons, 69 indigenous leaders and 15 Afro-Colombian leaders). OHCHR has also
reported 13 killings of large numbers of civilians during the reporting period, while
an additional 10 incidents are under verification. In 2020, 269 civilians have been
killed, including 24 children and 19 women, in 69 such incidents.
24. Attacks against women social leaders and women human right s defenders
continue hindering their participation in the implementation of the Final Agreement
and peacebuilding more broadly. For example, in December, the organization Mujeres
Andinoamazónicas temporarily withdrew their participation in the Special Foru m on
Gender due to ongoing attacks against its representative and limited security
guarantees for her participation. In November, in accordance with the Comprehensive
Programme for Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, the
National Protection Unit presented a new protocol for gender-sensitive risk analysis;
civil society and women’s groups have requested to provide inputs. More progress is
still necessary to implement the rest of the action plan of the Comprehensive
Programme.
25. Political parties from across the spectrum reported violence against their
members, including three members of the Colombia Humana political movement who
were killed in Antioquia, Cauca and Huila; a female member of the Puerto Guzmán
municipal council, Putumayo department, from the Partido Conservador who was
killed alongside her husband, a former FARC-EP combatant; and threats against
Senator José Obdulio Gaviria, reported by the Centro Democrático party. These
events highlight the importance of strengthened prevention and protection measures
for all political parties, including through the Comprehensive Security System for the
Exercise of Politics. In December, the System activated its gender working group,
which will focus on measures to protect women members of political parties.
National Commission on Security Guarantees
26. The National Commission on Security Guarantees met once and several
technical-level meetings were held during the reporting period ; however, it has yet to
finalize its public policy to dismantle criminal organizations and illegal armed groups
and their support networks. In November, arguing that the Government has not given
due consideration to their proposals, civil society representatives to the Commission
presented their own draft guidelines for the public policy.
Regional dynamics of violence
27. Attacks against former combatants, social leaders, human rights defenders and
communities continue to be concentrated in rural areas where there is limited State
presence, illegal armed actors, illicit economies and high levels of poverty. Of the
killings of former combatants in 2020, 75 per cent occurred in rural areas, 75 per cent
in municipalities with illicit crops and 72 per cent in municipalities where the
development programmes with a territorial focus are being implemented. 78 per cent
of killings of social leaders and human rights defenders occurred in rural areas, 98 per
cent in municipalities with illicit economies, especially drug production and illegal
20-17496

5/19

S/2020/1301

mining, and 45 per cent in municipalities with development programmes with a
territorial focus. In municipalities with similar characteristics, humanitarian actors
reported that the violence from illegal armed groups was impacting communities in
terms of rising indicators of displacement, confinement, forced recruitment and
sexual violence.
28. The violence is concentrated in specific departments. Those with the most
killings of former combatants this year have been Meta (11), Valle del Cauca (8),
Cauca (8), Chocó (7), Putumayo (7) and Nariño (6), while those with the most
homicides of social leaders and human rights defenders were Cauca (12), Norte de
Santander (9), Putumayo (8), Valle del Cauca (5) and Chocó (4). During 2020, the
Office of the Ombudsman issued the highest number of early warnings for
municipalities in Chocó, Antioquia and Cauca. The concentration of violence in these
departments demonstrates the importance of tailored strategies to mitigate the risks
and address the specific needs of these areas.
Ensure sustainability of the reintegration process
29. Four years after they laid down their arms, more than 13,000 former combatants
(23 per cent of whom are women) remain actively engaged in the reintegration
process, and the Government and FARC continue working together to overcome
challenges to the process, including within the National Reintegration Council.
Access to land and housing
30. Chief among these challenges is access to land for former combatants, which is
essential for the sustainability of the reintegration process. Following his meeting
with former combatants in November, President Duque committed to accelerate the
purchase of land for former combatants’ housing and productive projects, starting
with the recently announced purchase of land for the former territorial area for
training and reintegration in Dabeiba. During his visit, President Duque also
announced that the technical studies required for housing projects in five former
territorial areas for training and reintegration were finalize d, allowing for the design
and building process to begin, and that the first 35 homes are expected to be handed
to former combatants in Dabeiba in May 2021.
31. As part of its efforts to give permanence to the 24 former territorial areas for
training and reintegration, which host approximately 2,500 former combatants, the
Government has so far purchased land for three of these territorial areas and is in the
process of purchasing land for an additional three out of the nine it had committed to
by the end of year. The allocation of these plots is now required.
32. In October, the Ministry of Housing issued a decree to include former
combatants as beneficiaries of subsidies for rural housing. In November, the
Government issued a decree allowing the allocation of rural land for former
combatants’ productive projects from the Fund for Rehabilitation, Social Investment
and Fight Against Organized Crime, and Congress approved legislation on housing
for victims and former combatants which creates a path for them to access housing
opportunities.
33. FARC has made proposals to expedite existing avenues to access land and
explore new ones, including the allocation of additional resources for the special
programme for granting land for reintegration. The Agency for Reint egration and
Normalization has committed to analysing these proposals and has suggested
including former combatants in the registry of land beneficiaries of the National Land
Agency, to make it possible for them to access subsidies and mechanisms to obtain
land and formalize ownership.

6/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

Former combatants residing outside former territorial areas for training and
reintegration, including in new reintegration areas
34. Over 9,500 former combatants reside outside former territorial areas for training
and reintegration. Their continued challenges, including insecurity, lack of productive
opportunities and uneven institutional support, were at the core of former combatants’
demands during the Pilgrimage, and remain one of the key issues requiring
prioritization within the reintegration process.
35. Former combatants who are pursuing their collective reintegration process in
new reintegration areas require increased institutional attention. While 44 per cent of
collective productive projects approved by the National Reintegration Council are
outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration, these projects involve
only about 11 per cent of former combatants living outside former territorial areas for
training and reintegration. In its second report on the implementation of the Final
Agreement, the Office of the Inspector-General called for scaling up the institutional
response in new reintegration areas.
36. Deteriorating security conditions continue affecting collective reintegration
outside of former territorial areas for training and reintegration. In areas like
El Diamante, La Pista and Nueva Esperanza in Meta, Algeciras and Neiva in Huila,
and La Blanquita in Antioquia, former combatants facing threats have relocated to
protect themselves and their families.
Relocation of former territorial areas for training and reintegration due to
security challenges
37. With support from local authorities, the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization is on track to purchase a plot of land in Caquetá for the transfer of the
former territorial area for training and reintegration in La Macarena, Meta. Despite
efforts by the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and FARC, no suitable
plot of land has been identified to relocate the former territorial are a for training and
reintegration in Buenos Aires, Cauca. In October, in a visit to Mutatá, Antioquia, the
Government and former combatants who relocated from the former territorial areas
for training and reintegration in Ituango in August agreed on tempora ry housing
solutions, whose implementation is pending. Although food provisions were
delivered and health brigades visited in a timely manner, water and sanitary
conditions remain deficient and increased efforts are needed to find permanent
solutions. Lessons learned from the difficulties encountered in the relocation of that
former territorial area for training and reintegration should inform other future
relocations, especially the need to ensure housing and basic services.
Productive projects
38. Approximately 41 per cent of accredited former combatants have received
financial support for productive projects through mechanisms stipulated in the Final
Agreement. These include 86 collective productive projects approved by the National
Reintegration Council (20 during this period) benefiting 3,353 former combatants
(935 women), 61 of which have received funding, and 1,865 individual projects (398
approved this period) benefiting 2,269 former combatants (517 women). FARC has
requested more information on the approval, monitoring and support provided to
individual projects.
39. While the pace of approval of projects should continue, many projects face
challenges in terms of market access and technical assistance, which have been
compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic.

20-17496

7/19

S/2020/1301

40. A total of 46 per cent of accredited women former combatants (1,433 women)
have benefited from productive projects. However, their participation in decision making instances remains limited, including due to their caregiving tasks, which have
intensified during the pandemic.
Health, including COVID-19
41. The Working Group on Health has continued monitoring and responding to
COVID-19 cases among former combatants. According to the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization, 154 former combatants (55 women) have tested
positive for the virus, 3 of whom died (all men).
42. Visits by health professionals to former territorial areas for training and
reintegration have continued without disruptions. According to the Ministry of
Health, around 80 per cent of beneficiaries of these health visits in 2020 were
community members and 64 per cent were women.
43. In December, the National Reintegration Council approved the continuity of
health services in former territorial areas for training and reinte gration in 2021. The
Technical Working Group on Health is analysing options to prioritize health
interventions in rural areas hosting new reintegration areas by engaging local and
regional authorities.
44. According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, 1,222 former
combatants (161 women) identify themselves as persons with disabilities. In
November, the Agency launched a pilot initiative to determine the needs of 220 of
these former combatants. Support to provide functional rehabilitation is i ncluded in
the programme CaPAZcidades, financed by the European Union, which has yet to be
presented to the National Reintegration Council.
Reintegration policies and institutions
45. During the meeting between President Duque and former combatants, they
agreed to hold seven sessions of the National Reintegration Council outside Bogotá,
with the objective of defining local action plans.
46. Progress was made in fine-tuning the methodology for the reintegration road
map, which establishes the long-term framework for the socioeconomic reintegration
process. Three exercises were undertaken as pilots to design collective and individual
road maps. The implementation of the road map has not begun, as FARC has stated
that the establishment of the national reintegration system is a precondition. Such a
system is envisioned in the national reintegration policy (CONPES 3931) as a
coordination mechanism among all entities involved in reintegration. FARC argues
that a national reintegration system is necessary to ensure a whole-of-Government
approach to the reintegration process. Submission to the National Reintegration
Council of a proposal on the system will allow formal discussions between the parties
in this regard.
47. The Working Group on Gender of the National Reintegration Council reports
some progress on inter-institutional coordination to implement the gender provisions
of the national reintegration policy, but funding remains limited, especially for local
entities.
Political reintegration
48. In December, the National Council of the FARC party met to have preparatory
discussions regarding the upcoming Assembly of the party, which will address four
issues: the party’s political platform; guidelines for the 2022 elections; the possibility
of changing the party’s name; and the election of a new legal representative.
8/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

49. In November, FARC Senator Griselda Lobo chaired a plenary session of the
Senate, becoming the first FARC party member to do so.
50. Some former combatants involved in local politics have reported stigmatization
and security concerns related to their political activity in Caquetá, Huila, Meta and
Valle del Cauca. Ensuring security for former combatants during the 2022 elections
was among the commitments made by FARC and the Governm ent during the
Pilgrimage.
Consolidate the integrated presence of the State in conflict-affected areas
51. One of the greatest challenges facing Colombia is closing the long -standing gap
between urban and rural areas regarding the integrated presence of the State,
especially in areas affected by the conflict. The Final Agreement established
objectives and programmes aimed at closing this gap, including, among others, the
development programmes with a territorial focus to bring infrastructure a nd services
to rural areas; the comprehensive security and protection programme for communities
and organizations in the territories to improve security for communities who continue
to be wracked by violence; and the National Comprehensive Programme for th e
Substitution of Illicit Crops to provide families with viable alternatives to move away
from illicit economies. Although the Government has reiterated its commitment to all
three programmes, maintaining momentum and ensuring adequate resources is
important to bring to fruition the full promise of these instruments.
Comprehensive rural reform
52. Steady progress has been achieved over the last four years in implementation of
the development programmes with a territorial focus for 170 conflict -affected
municipalities: norms were issued, participatory planning was carried out locally,
small infrastructure works have been completed, additional funding sources were
identified and are being utilized, and coordination improved between national and
regional authorities. FARC and other opposition parties, as well as various civil
society actors, have reiterated that the development programmes with a territorial
focus must preserve the spirit of the Final Agreement and be articulated with other
elements of the comprehensive rural reform envisioned in section 1 of the Final
Agreement, such as the 16 national sectorial plans (of which only 8 have been
approved). State oversight entities and civil society organizations have called for the
continued participation of local communities in the implementation of the
development programmes with a territorial focus.
53. In addition to the 1,110 completed works under the development programmes
with a territorial focus, 102 are currently being implemented. Additionally, out of 173
projects approved with royalties from hydrocarbon and mineral exploitation, 3 have
been concluded and 79 are under way. Of the 100 projects approved in the “works for
taxes” programme with the private sector, 57 are focused on municipalities covered
by the development programmes.
54. The Government committed to finalizing, before the end of the year, the 15
remaining stabilization road maps for regions with development programmes with a
territorial focus, the main instrument for inter-institutional coordination to implement
the development programmes; however, all 15 are still pending.
55. In October, the Government issued a decree regulating the integral subsidy for
access to land, in compliance with the Final Agreement. The Government also
presented a bill to Congress, currently under discussion, to create a dedicated judicial
mechanism for the resolution of land-related disputes, also provided for in the Final
Agreement, to guarantee timely access to justice for the rural population.

20-17496

9/19

S/2020/1301

56. The Government has reported that 1,033,468 hectares have been added to the
Land Fund to grant land for peasants, out of the goal of 3 million in the Final
Agreement. However, the Office of the Inspector General has indicated that a large
majority of these plots are currently occupied, so they still require formalization and
regularization rather than being counted as plots for allocation.
Comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories
57. The technical committees of the comprehensive security and protection
programme for communities and organizations, created by section 3.4 of the Final
Agreement, continue to meet. There has been progress in training 135 leaders (87
women and 48 men) as community peace promoters in seven prioritized departments,
who are expected to begin working in early 2021.
Illicit crop substitution
58. The National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops,
established in section 4 of the Final Agreement, continues to be implemented in 56
municipalities in 14 departments concentrating 65 per cent of the country’s coca
crops. There are 99,097 families participating in the Programme (36.5 per cent of
which are headed by women). According to the United Nations Office on Drug s and
Crime (UNODC), compliance by participating families stands at 97 per cent and
reseeding is only 0.2 per cent. This demonstrates the effectiveness of voluntary
eradication and its potential to allow families to transition out of their dependence on
illicit crops, provided that sustainable development opportunities reach these
communities more quickly.
59. The Government, communities and local authorities recently signed agreements
within the framework of the Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Cr ops in
municipalities in Vichada, Guainía, Cauca, Valle del Cauca and Nariño, for the
participatory development of essential infrastructure works. In regions affected by
poverty and violence, where illicit crops persist, peasant communities and leaders
continue to call upon the Government to prioritize voluntary substitution over other
eradication strategies.
Reinforce constructive dialogue between the parties
60. Progress in the implementation of the Final Agreement depends on constructive
dialogue between the Government and FARC to discuss and jointly resolve the
various challenges facing the process, especially through the mechanisms established
by the Agreement.
61. Under the Final Agreement, the Commission for the Follow -up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement is the main forum for
dialogue between the parties regarding its implementation. While the Commission
has been meeting more regularly this year, it is not being used to its full potential and
not all key senior Government officials attend the meetings regularly, affecting the
Commission’s ability to have substantive discussions. In October, the Commission
dedicated a session of the Special Forum on Gender to present its report on the
implementation of the gender provisions of the Final Agreement, which noted limited
progress in this regard.
62. In addition to bilateral forums such as the Commission for the Follow -up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement and the
National Reintegration Council, the parties have used tripartite mechanisms with the
support of the United Nations to engage in constructive dialogue over various
implementation issues. The tripartite working group on transit to legality, composed
10/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

of the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the Mission, has made
substantial progress over the past year in addressing pending accreditations of former
combatants, which are necessary for them to access reintegration benefits. As of
November 2020, the total number of accredited former combatants is 13,589 (10,453
men and 3,136 women). There are still 139 individuals (6 women) whose
accreditation is pending definition, most of whom are in prison.
63. The tripartite working group on mines, composed of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the United Nations, has approved the project
proposal to gather information on the location of landmines. The project proposal is
undergoing final legal review by the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace.
64. The Tripartite Protection and Security Mechanism, composed of the National
Protection Unit, the national police and the army, and the Mission, has continued to
monitor the security of former combatants, including during the Pilgrimage.
65. The deadline set by the Government for the handover of the former FARC -EP
assets is 31 December 2020. While the Government, the Special Assets
Administration and FARC have continued to make efforts to meet this deadline, there
are security, legal and financial challenges affecting the process. A more effective use
of the tripartite working group regarding former FARC-EP assets, is important in
order to help the parties jointly find suitable solutions.
Strengthen conditions for reconciliation
66. With the aim of placing victims’ rights at the centre of the Final Agreement, the
parties established the Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition, which is helping to lay the groundwork for reconciliation. Since its
three components started functioning in 2018, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has
made progress in its seven macro-cases dealing with specific crimes and regions; the
Truth Commission continues gathering and analysing thousands of testimonies for its
final report; and the Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing
continues to bring relief to the families of forcibly disappeared persons.
67. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace informed that by mid-2021 it will issue its
first sentences defining responsibilities of individuals for crimes committed during
the conflict within some of its macro-cases. President Duque has indicated that the
Government will request the Security Council to expand the Verification Mission’s
mandate to include verifying compliance with sentences to be issued by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. FARC and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have expressed
their support for the Mission to perform this task as envisaged in the Final Agreement.
68. Several victims’ organizations have continued presenting reports on conflictrelated sexual violence and calling for the opening of a specific case investigating
sexual and gender-based violence. While the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is
considering this request, it is investigating conflict-related sexual violence within
most of its cases.
69. Based on the testimonies of former members of the public security forces, the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace has located six mass graves in Dabeiba, Antioquia,
containing remains of potential victims of extrajudicial executions and forced
disappearances. To date, it has handed over four remains, including of two minors, to
their families.
70. Since October, FARC leaders have acknowledged responsibility, apologized and
pledged to contribute to the truth regarding emblematic crimes committed during the
conflict, including several high-profile assassinations. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which is determining its jurisdiction over these assassinations, requested the
Office of the Attorney-General to share its investigations and called several FARC
20-17496

11/19

S/2020/1301

leaders to render their versions. Several victims have deemed these recognitions as a
step towards reconciliation, some have accepted the apologies by FARC, and some
have asked for evidence and the full truth. Victims’ organizations continue calling on
all actors, including current and former State officials, members of the public security
forces, members of the private sector and former members of other illegal armed
groups, to fully contribute to the truth and acknowledge their responsibility for crimes
committed during the conflict.
71. The Truth Commission has continued receiving testimonies from actors from
different sectors of Colombian society, including former presidents, members of
Congress, and other senior State officials, as well as social leaders, members of
military forces, and former members of illegal armed groups. The Commission
appointed Afro-Colombian social leader Leyner Palacios, a victim of the conflict
whose community in Chocó department continues to be affected by illegal armed
groups to replace commissioner Ángela Salazar, who passed away.
72. The Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing recovered 24
bodies of potential victims of enforced disappearance in a cemetery in Caldas
department. The Unit also found several persons alive who had been declared as
missing and helped them reunite with their families. The Unit began the identification
of some of the bodies it has located, using DNA samples from 182 relatives of victims
of forced disappearance.
National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence
73. Section 3.4 of the Final Agreement mandates the National Council for Peace,
Reconciliation and Coexistence to produce a public policy on reconciliation,
coexistence and non-stigmatization. In October, the Council presented the guidelines
for the public policy to President Duque, following a two -year participatory process
that included inputs from more than 1,700 individuals and organizations. In
December, the Council and the Ministry of Interior validated the public policy with
civil society organizations. According to the framework plan for the implementation
of the Final Agreement, the policy must be approved by 31 December. Council
members have expressed concern regarding the lack of resources allocated for the
implementation of the policy in the 2021 national budget.
74. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace has provided technical
assistance to 32 departmental and 497 municipal authorities for th e establishment of
local councils for peace, reconciliation and coexistence, which are important spaces
for civil society and institutions to engage in dialogue in the territories.
Cross-cutting issues
Role of municipal and departmental authorities
75. Departmental and municipal authorities continue taking on an increasingly
active role in the implementation of the Final Agreement. Authorities in several
municipalities and departments met with former FARC-EP members during the
“Pilgrimage for life and peace” and facilitated logistics for the mobilization. Local
and departmental governments in Antioquia, Meta and Caquetá have also provided
support for the relocation of former territorial areas for training and reintegration
owing to security risks.
76. Two new departmental working groups on reintegration were established in
Risaralda and Tolima, and another one in Bogotá. The latter is a milestone for
promoting reintegration opportunities for approximately 800 former combatants
living in the capital. The existing 15 regional coordination mechanisms play a critical
role in the reintegration process by supporting socioeconomic initiatives at the local
12/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

level. According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, 198
municipalities, hosting 84 per cent of former combatants, have included a
reintegration component in their development plans.
77. In November, the Office of the Inspector-General, the Office of the Ombudsman
and the National Federation of Departments organized a Round table for the
Protection of Life with departmental authorities from Cauca, Antioquia, Norte de
Santander, Huila, Nariño, Córdoba, Putumayo and Chocó to discuss measures to
address the killings of social leaders and human rights defenders in those departments.
Gender
78. While the Final Agreement continues to be praised as a global example of a
gender-inclusive peace process, the implementation of its gender provisions,
including those related to reintegration and security guarantees, continues to show
limited progress. Women’s organizations have expressed particular concern about
insufficient delivery of gender-sensitive services and programmes for women former
combatants and over the worrying security situation facing women leaders and human
rights defenders. The High-Level Forum on Gender of the Government has reported
some progress in the 51 gender indicators of the framework plan for the
implementation of the Final Agreement. Additional technical and financial resources
remain necessary to accelerate the implementation of the gender provisions related to
reintegration and security guarantees.
79. Social leaders and human rights defenders from the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community suffer additional discrimination and limited
access to protection measures. In November, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community, two of whom were registered victims of the
conflict, were displaced in Tumaco, Nariño, due to threats. In December, a lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex leader was killed in Antioquia. In October, the
non-governmental organization Colombia Diversa presented a report to the Truth
Commission documenting over 30 cases of violence, including sexual violence and
torture, against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons during the
conflict in Nariño, Putumayo and Tolima departments.
80. The Mission and the United Nations country team participated in various
activities to commemorate the anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, including an event with the Deputy Secretary General of the United Nations and the Vice-President of Colombia, Marta Lucía
Ramírez. During her virtual visit marking the anniversary, the Deputy Secretary General also met with the President and top peace officials, national women
organizations and female human rights defenders as well as with women peacemakers
in Meta. As part of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against
Women on 25 November, the Mission, in partnership with local actors, organized 18
local events with women former combatants and from local communities to raise
awareness on prevention and response to violence against women, which has
increased during the pandemic.
Ethnic affairs
81. Security conditions in ethnic territories remain critical in Cauca, Chocó, Nariño
and Antioquia, including for indigenous and Afro -Colombian leaders and their
communities, as well as for former combatants, owing to the actions of illegal armed
groups and criminal organizations fighting over control of illicit economies. In
Chocó, the Emberá indigenous peoples and Afro-Colombian communities have been
particularly affected by illegal armed groups and criminal organizations, with mass
displacements and confinements, including the displacement of over 900 individuals
20-17496

13/19

S/2020/1301

after the killing of one of their leaders in Bahía Solano municipality in December. In
Cauca, indigenous organizations denounced the forced recruitment of at least 32
indigenous children in 2020, allegedly by former FARC-EP dissident groups. During
the reporting period, these groups twice attacked an indigenous senator, Feliciano
Valencia, of the Alternative Indigenous and Social Movement (MAIS) political party
and also declared 23 indigenous leaders as military targets. In Nariño, clashes
between armed groups combined with the installation of anti-personnel mines led to
the confinement and displacement of the Awá people, and 12 members of the
community were killed during the reporting period.
82. Former combatants of ethnic origin continue to face challenges in accessing
housing opportunities and productive projects tailored to their specific circumstances,
and the National Reintegration Council has yet to establish a working group on ethnic
issues, as recommended by the High-Level Forum of Ethnic Peoples.
83. The Ministry of Interior is currently reviewing a draft decree with measures to
improve protection in indigenous territories, including strengthening the indigenous
guards and the development of individual and collective protection road maps tailored
to the security challenges facing indigenous people.
Children
84. Of the 123 participants (68 women) in “A Different Path of Life”, the
programme for adolescents who were separated from FARC-EP as children, 69 have
received compensations and 14 have received resources for productive projects.
Reparations for members of the programme are on hold following a resolution of the
Victims Unit prioritizing other vulnerable groups.
85. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization continued working to trace and accredit 263
individuals (111 women) recognized in 2020 as being children at the time of the
signing of the Final Agreement. The Mission is supporting tracing efforts for several
of them. Further details are needed regarding how to include them in the “A Different
Path of Life” programme, as well as in the victim’s registry so that they can receive
reparations.
86. Currently, 2,191 children of former combatants are beneficiaries of the
programmes of the Colombian Institute for Family Welfare, 389 of whom are in
former territorial areas for training and reintegration. The parties continue designing
a programme to provide education to former combatants’ children up to five years
old. With support from the Peacebuilding Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund
and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), in coordination with FARC and the Government, childcare areas were
built in five former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
87. In December, the Office of the Ombudsman reported that, between March and
September, it registered the forced recruitment of 83 children and adolescents (34
female) by various illegal armed groups, mostly in Caquetá and Cauca, with 21 and
19 cases respectively. Twenty of these children are indigenous and two are
Afro-Colombian.
Youth
88. The Truth Commission carried out four regional dialogues with youth to di scuss
their perspectives on the conflict and the specific ways that they were and continue
to be affected by violence. The youth representatives expressed concern over
stigmatization against youth leaders and emphasized the importance of guaranteeing
youth participation in peacebuilding spaces at the local, regional and national level.

14/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

Various youth platforms in Colombia commemorated the fifth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 2250 (2015) in December.
89. In addition to forced recruitment, there are reports of increasing threats against
youth leaders by illegal armed groups and criminal organizations. In November, a
FARC-EP dissident group spray-painted the house of a youth indigenous leader in
Caloto, Cauca, giving him 24 hours to leave the municipality.
90. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and FARC continue working
through the technical working group on youth of the National Reintegration Council
to consult at the regional level a draft reintegration road map for young former
combatants.
Developments related to the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
91. Amid ongoing hostilities, civil society organizations and communities in the
areas affected by the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN) continue to call for a
resumption of talks between the Government and the ELN.
92. In October, the Government announced that a prominent commander of an ELN
front operating mostly in Chocó, was killed by the public security forces. The
authorities held him responsible for acts of kidnapping, homicide and forced
recruitment, among others.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
93. The United Nations country team adopted the joint workplans for the
implementation of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework, signed with the Government in March 2020. For the 2020 –2023 period,
the country team estimates $496.5 million in investments for peacebuilding.
94. The Mission and country team continued coordinating closely on the SecretaryGeneral’s outlined priorities for 2020 through the reintegration and security guarantees
working groups. Regarding reintegration, the United Nations multi -partner trust fund
for sustaining peace in Colombia has provided support for access to land and housing
in former territorial areas for training and reintegration , including for feasibility
studies and designs for housing projects, and for 20 initiatives by grass -roots
organizations to promote coexistence and reconciliation in reintegration settings.
95. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), the World Food Programme and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations continued providing technical and
financial support for the sustainability of former combatants’ productive projects,
including by ensuring Internet access in the context of the pandemic to allow them
access to technical assistance and education. In addition, UNDP and the Mission
began the implementation of 12 community-based reintegration initiatives. Regarding
security guarantees, the multi-partner trust fund provided support for human rights
defenders organizations to reactivate 13 territorial round tables for security
guarantees, through which they were able to advocate with national and local
institutions for prevention and protection plans. Twenty-two former combatants (6
women) were certified for humanitarian demining activities with the
non-governmental organization Humanicemos DH, out of a total of 124 that have
been trained by the United Nations Mine Action Service. In October, Humanicemos
DH began demining operations in Caquetá.
96. The country team continues to support the COVID-19 pandemic response in the
regions most affected by violence. Health care was provided to more than 10,200
people in regions under development programmes with a territorial focus through the
health brigades from the “Health for Peace” programme implemented by IOM, the
United Nations Population Fund and the World Health Organization, while 170
20-17496

15/19

S/2020/1301

municipalities under the development programmes with a territorial focus received
personal protective equipment for their health personnel.
Mission support
97. The Mission continues its COVID-19 prevention efforts while taking measures
for a safe return to offices. As part of the Mission’s continued efforts to better focus
mandate delivery and make more effective use of existing human resources and
assets, field offices in Antioquia and Caquetá departments were reconfigured.
98. As at 25 November 2020, women constitute 49 per cent of the Mission’s civilian
personnel, 60 per cent of United Nations volunteers, and 33 per cent of international
observers.
Safety and security
99. In areas mentioned in paragraph 12 where FARC-EP dissident groups pose
heightened risks for former combatants and communities, security incidents also
affected United Nations personnel. In October, members of a FARC -EP dissident
group forced a team from OHCHR, the Truth Commission and the Office of the
Ombudsman out of their vehicles and incinerated the OHCHR vehicle in
La Macarena, Meta. Also during the reporting period, a team of United Nations
Department of Safety and Security personnel was stopped by an illegal armed group
in Toribío, Cauca; and two UNODC teams in Puerto Rico and Solita, Caquetá had to
be evacuated after being questioned by illegal actors; the Department of Safety and
Security continuously updates the corresponding security risk management measures.
Conduct and discipline
100. The Mission continued its efforts to prevent misconduct and sexual exploitation
and abuse. The Mission will distribute a brochure with information on its Code of
Conduct, including reporting mechanisms, to local communities in regions where the
Mission is deployed.
101. No cases of sexual exploitation and abuse were reported during the reporting
period.
Observations
102. For Colombia and the entire world, 2021 is set to be marked by the recovery
efforts from the COVID-19 pandemic. I once again urge Colombians to view the
comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement as part of these efforts. The
Final Agreement provides instruments to bring development opportunities, security
and peace to the communities that were most affected by th e conflict and have now
been affected by the pandemic.
103. President Duque’s meeting with former combatants in November was a positive
step forward in constructive dialogue between the parties on concrete measures to
address issues facing the reintegration process and security guarantees for former
combatants. I trust that the relevant Government institutions will make all the necessary
efforts to implement the commitments made by President Duque during the meeting.
104. Bearing in mind those commitments, and in the context of the priorities for
implementation outlined in the present report, I will focus my observations on concrete
recommendations to make progress on these priorities, especially in the short term.
105. Ongoing violence in several departments – the product of limited State presence,
illicit economies and the presence of illegal armed groups, exacerbated by high levels
of poverty – has a direct and damaging effect upon the reintegration process, the
implementation of the Final Agreement and peacebuilding more broadly. Improving
16/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

security in conflict-affected areas requires simultaneous progress on various fronts,
such as improved protection measures for the individuals and communities who are
being targeted; effective action against the illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations responsible for much of this violence; and ensuring that individuals and
actors responsible are brought to justice.
106. Regarding protection, ensuring the full staffing of the Specialized
Subdirectorate for Security and Protection of the National Protection Unit is
necessary to prevent the killing of any more former combatants. It is also important
to ensure that women former combatants have equal access to protection schemes,
including through the full implementation of internal guidance within the National
Protection Unit regarding the equal use of collective protection schemes by men and
women. Given the heightened vulnerability of former combatants outside of former
territorial areas for training and reintegration, it is essential to strengthen protection
and security measures tailored to their specific circumstances. A focused strategy for
providing security to new reintegration areas is key, including through effective
deployments of public security forces around these areas. Once again, I urge all actors
to respond in a timely and effective manner to the risks identified in the early
warnings of the Office of the Ombudsman, including through the Intersectoral
Commission for Rapid Response to Early Warnings.
107. A public policy for dismantling illegal armed groups and criminal organizations
and their support networks, the principal mandate of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees, is long overdue. I recognize the preparatory work that has taken
place thus far by its subcommissions and concur with Security Council members in
once again urging the Commission to promptly adopt the public policy, bearing in
mind the recommendations of civil society.
108. Reinforced support for the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the
Attorney-General, and for local judicial entities, is key to bring to justice perpetrators
of threats and killings of social leaders and former combatants. Such support includes
additional efforts to prosecute and convict intellectual authors, which is crucial for
dismantling the criminal organizations behind this violence. The public security
forces also have an important role to play in assisting the Special Investigations Unit
in executing arrest warrants and providing timely access t o crime scenes and
information.
109. On reintegration, I welcome the Government’s efforts to move forward with the
purchase of land for former territorial areas for training and reintegration and hope this
momentum continues for the remaining areas. I trust that President Duque’s
commitment to accelerate access to land for former combatants, including for
productive projects, will soon translate into additional positive results. Furthermore, I
encourage the parties to advance in jointly finding permanent housing solutions,
including through the establishment of a working group on housing in the National
Reintegration Council. The parties’ decision to hold sessions of the Council at the
regional level is also welcome, as an opportunity to listen directly to the concerns of
former combatants, including of those living outside of former territorial areas for
training and reintegration, and define local-level action plans with clear commitments,
responsibilities, resources and timelines that also ensure that loca l communities benefit
from the process. It is also key to ensure greater focus by the National Reintegration
Council on measures to support the long-term sustainability of productive projects,
including through enhanced technical assistance and greater access to markets, and
implementation of measures to increase women former combatants’ participation in
decision-making spaces. Finally, it is important to ensure that former combatants who
have had to relocate due to security concerns continue receiving institutional support.
110. I once again urge the Government and FARC to work together to make progress
in the gender provisions of the national reintegration policy, including through the
allocation of necessary technical and financial resources. Given the di fficulties
20-17496

17/19

S/2020/1301

indigenous and Afro-Colombian former combatants face, the National Reintegration
Council should give due consideration to the recommendation of the High -Level
Forum of Ethnic Peoples to create a working group on ethnic issues. I trust that the
National Reintegration Council technical working group on youth will soon finalize
its reintegration road map for youth former combatants, following the consultations
in the territories. I also encourage all actors to reinforce measures to facilitate spaces
for greater participation of young people in peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts.
111. Consolidating an integrated presence of the State in conflict-affected areas
remains a necessary condition for lasting peace and sustainable development.
Continued implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus
will bring much-needed investments to those communities, particularly in the context
of the recovery from the pandemic. It will be important for the technical committees
of the comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories to make progress during 2021 on the pilot initiatives
in the regions, in order to strengthen local capacities for conflict resolution,
prevention and response. It is also key to ensure the success of the next phase of the
National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, which is to
provide families with licit and sustainable income-generating opportunities so that
their transition away from illicit economies can be complete and sustainable. Finally,
it is fundamental to ensure complementarity among these programmes and between
them and the rest of the Final Agreement, including the reintegration process.
112. Constructive dialogue between the Government and FARC regarding
implementation of the Agreement, at the political and technical levels, has proven
effective for overcoming challenges on various issues. In that spirit, I encourage the
parties to continue discussions in the tripartite working group regarding the former
FARC-EP assets. It is in the interest of victims, and with a view to upholding their
right to reparations, that the Government and FARC continue to work jointly and
make every possible effort to find ways to meet that commitment. As always, the
Mission stands ready to assist them. Similarly, I urge the parties to fully utilize the
Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement to hold substantive discussions and agree on conc rete solutions.
113. Transitional justice is at the heart of the peace process and its prospects to carry
Colombia from violent conflict to a peaceful future. Colombia’s innovative
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non -Repetition is built to
guarantee rights and reparations to victims, to provide spaces for society to come to
terms with its past, and to ensure that the crimes committed during the conflict are
never repeated. In 2021, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace will deliver its first
sentences and the Truth Commission is scheduled to issue its final report. The Special
Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing continues determining the
whereabouts of victims. It is therefore more important than ever for all individuals
who were involved in the conflict to acknowledge their responsibilities, for all
institutions to fully cooperate with the three components, and for Colombian society
to extend its full support for the System so that it can continue its contribu tions to
reconciliation.
114. The recommendations I have outlined in the present report underscore the
interconnected nature of the various sections of the Final Agreement and, hence, the
importance of ensuring its comprehensive implementation. Progress in the
reintegration process and the development programmes with a territorial focus must
be matched by more vigorous implementation of other sections, particularly those
geared towards improving security in the territories, which is the necessary
pre-requisite for a firm and lasting peace to take root. As the country enters the fifth
year of peacebuilding in the framework of the Final Agreement, I congratulate
Colombians on the achievements the peace process has delivered so far and encourage
the parties to persevere so that its transformative potential can be truly realized.

18/19

20-17496

S/2020/1301

20-17496

19/19
