174

General Assembly-- Thirt)-eightb Session

- - - - - - - - ---~-- - - - - - -----------------

Noting that from Junc to Scptcmbcr 1982 Nicaragua
suffered a serious drought that considerably affected thc
agricultura! and livestock sectors. which constitutc thc
most important economic activities of the country.
Considering that, despitc the efforts of thc Government
and people of Nicaragua, the economic situation has not
returned to normal and continues to worsen.
Deeply conccrncd that Nicaragua is expcricncing scrious
economic difficultics directly affecting its developmcnt
efforts,
1. Expresscs its apprcciation to thc Sccrctary-Gcncral
for his efforts regarding assistance to Nicaragua;
2. Expresses its apprcciation to the States and organizations that have provided assistancc to Nicaragua;
3. Urges ali Governments to continuc contributing to
the reconstruction and dcvelopment of Nicaragua;
4. Requests the organi1.ations of the United Nations
system to continue and to incrcasc their assistancc in this
endeavour;
5. Recommends that Nicaragua should continue to
receive treatment appropriatc to the special needs of thc
country until the economic situation returns to normal;
6. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present rcsolution.
104th plenary mcctmg
20 Dccemhcr 1983

38/224.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Equatorial Guinea

The General Asscmbly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 35/ 105 of 5 December 1980
and 36/204 of 17 December 1981, in whirh, intcr afia, it
recognized the need for the adoption of special measures
of assistance to enable Equatorial Guinea to rebuild its
economy and to restore to normal the social and public
services ofthe country, and drew the attention ofthc international community to the critica] situation confronting
Equatorial Guinea and to the list of urgent short-term and
long-term projects required by the Govcrnment to carry
out its programme of rehabilitation.
Recalling its resolution 3 7/133 of 17 Dccember 1982,
by which Equatorial Guinea was included in the list of thc
least developed countries,
Recognizing the critica! situation still confronting Equatorial Guinea and the difficult task of reconstruction and
development facing the Government of that country.
Recognizing a/so the essential role of both short-term
and long-term international assistance in support of the
efforts of the Govemment of Equatorial Guinea,
Noting that the Intemational Conference of Donors for
the Economic Reactivation and Development of thc
Republic of Equatorial Guinea took place at Geneva in
April 1982 under the auspices of the United Nations
Development Programme and the Govemment ofEquatorial Guinea,
l. Appeals to ali Member States to respond generously,
through bilateral or multilateral channels, to the reconstruction and development needs of Equatorial Guinea as
presented at the International Conference of Donors:
2. Calls upan regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, as well as intcrnational financia! and devel228 See Otficial Records o(thc Ft"11nom1/' ami So1 wl <'1111110( /()83, \'up¡Jh
men/ No. 9 (E/1983nO). annex 1

opment institutions, to give urgent consideration to the
establishment of a programmc of assistance to Equatorial
(iumca or. whcrc ,me is already in cxistence. to the expansion of that programmc. in response to the lnternational
( onferencc of Donors;
-'- Rec¡ucsts the appropriate organizations and
programmes of thc United Nations system-in particular
thc Unitcd Nations Developmcnt Programme, the Food
ami Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
lntemational Fund for Agricultura] Development, the
World Bank. the World Food Programme, the World
Hcalth Organi1.ation, the United Nations Children's Fund
and the United Nations Fund for Population Activitiesto maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to
Equatorial Guinea. to co-operate closely with the SecreLary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance, to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they have taken and the
resources thcy havc made available to help that country
and to provide, as appropriate, ali possiblc assistance to
meet the critica! humanitarian needs of the population and
to provide food, medicines and essential equipment for
hospitals and schools;
4. Requcsts thc Secretary-General:
(a) To continuc his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effertive programme of financia!, technical
and material assistancc to Equatorial Guinea;
(h) To keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under
rcview. to maintain close contact with Member States, the
spccialized agencies. regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and international financia! institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular scssion of 1984, of the status of assistancc to Equatorial Guinea:
(e) To submit to the C,eneral Assembly at its thirtyninth session a repon on the economic situation of Equatorial Guinea and the progress made in implementing the
present resolution. in particular the response of the international rnmmunity to thc lnternational Conference of
Donors.
104th plenar_v meeting
20 Dccemher 1983

38/225.

Implementation of the medium-term and
long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region

Thc General ,lsscmbl_r.
Recalling its resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October
1973, 3253 (XXIX) of4 December 1974, 3512 (XXX) of
15 December 1975, 31/180 of21 December 1976, 32/159
of 19 December 1977. 33/133 of 19 December 1978, 34/
16 of 9 Novembcr 1979. 35/86 of 5 December 1980, 36/
203 of 17 Decemher 1981 and 37/165 of 17 December
1982.
Taking note of decision 83/26 of 22 June 1983 of the
Goveming Council of the United Nations Development
Programme 228 concerning the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme in the Sudano-Sahclian region,
Noling 11·ith sar1s(action the importan! activities of the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in helping to comhat the eflects of drought and to implement the mediumterm and long-tcrm recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region adopted by the

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee
on Drought Control in the SaheL as well as in mobilizing
the necessary resources to finance priority projects,
Noting a/so the continued collaboration of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
with the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sahel through its arid and semi-arid zone
programmes,
Bearing in mind the statement made before the General
Assembly on 28 September 1983 by the President of the
Republic of Cape Verde, as current Chairman of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the
Sahel, 229 in which he emphasized the continuing gravity
of the drought situation in the countries of the Sahel and
its devastating consequences on the development of those
countries,
Noting with concern the critica! food situation in the
countries ofthe Sahel as highlighted in the statement made
by the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations on 27 October
1983, 23 º
Noting with satisfaction the collaboration between the
Permanent lnter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sahel and the Club du Sahel and urging that this collaboration be continued and strengthened,
Taking into account the fundamental priorities of the
Permanent lnter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sahel aimed at implementing strategies for rural development and striving to achieve food self-sufficiency and
food security, as well as restoration of an ecological balance in the region,
Considering the nature and magnitude of the needs of
the States members ofthe Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel and the need for the
continuation and further strengthening of the support of
the international community for assisting the recovery
efforts and the economic development of those countries,
Taking into account that the First-Generation Programme, adopted by the Biennial Conference ofthe Heads
of State of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahel, has received only 60 per
cent of the financing required,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation ofthe medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region, 231 as well as the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit on the activities of the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office, 232
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the implementation of the medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region;
2. Welcomes the report ofthe Joint Inspection Unit on
the activities of the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian
Office, in particular its recommendation that the Office
should energetically continue its specific activities, under
its first mandate, to combat drought in the countries ofthe
Sahel; 233
3. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments, organizations of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations, prívate organizations and individuals that
have contributed to the implementation of the medium229 Ojficia/ Records of the General Assemhly. Th1m'-eigh1h Session, Plenar{' Meetings, 7th meeting, paras. 2-73.
2- 0 !bid., Second Cvmmillee, 19th meeting. paras. 25-31.
23 I A/38/1 52-E/ 1983/38.

175

term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region;
4. Strongly urges ali Governments to make special
efforts to increase the resources of the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office. including through voluntary contributions to the United Natíons Pledging Conference for
Development Activities, as well as through bilateral channels, so as to enable it to respond more fully to the priority
requirements of the Governments of the Statcs members
ofthe Permanent Inter-State Committce on Drought Control in the Sahel;
5. Requests the international community to support
the implementation of the Second-Generation Programme
of the States members of the Permanent lnter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel, inter afia, in
regard to:
(a) Development projects already conceived and
approved by the respective Governments;
(b) Regional projects for the struggle against desertification;
(e) Basic surveys nceded for establishment of the
potential for development at national and regional levels;
(d) Strengthening and/or establishment of institutions
for research and training, at national and subregional
levels, designed to find solutions to the problems confronting the Sahelian countries;
(e) Strengthening of national and subregional capacity
for planning, management and evaluation of integrated
development actions;
6. Requests ali Govcrnments and the organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to
give special attention to thc critica( food situation in the
countries of the Sahel;
7. Commends the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme for the results
achieved, through the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian
Office, in assisting the States members of the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel in
the implementation of their medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme:
8. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations SudanoSahelian Office as the co-ordinator of the efforts of the
United Nations system to help the countries of the Sahel
to implement their recovery and rehabilitation programme;
9. Invites the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office
to continue to strengthen its co-operation with the States
members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahel and with the Committee
itself, with a view to hastening the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region;
1O. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report to the General Assembly, through the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
and the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the medium-term and long-term recovery and
rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region.
104th plenary meeting
20 December 1983
232 A/381180.
233 lh1J.. para. 129.
