S/PV.9255

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9255th meeting

Tuesday, 7 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Dame Barbara Woodward
Ms. Jenkins

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 January 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/69)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-03634 (E)
*2303634*

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 January 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/69)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs; Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW); and Mr. Santiago Oñate-Laborde, Coordinator
of the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have a point of order. We would like
to go on record with our categorical disagreement
about the presence at this meeting of the Coordinator
of the Investigation and Identification Team of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Mr. Santiago Oñate-Laborde. We see no
grounds for his participation at this meeting, given
that the legitimacy of that body is not recognized by a
number of members of the Security Council.
In addition, his presence is clearly redundant;
we already have two agreed briefers, that is, OPCW
Director-General Fernando Arias and Under-SecretaryGeneral Izumi Nakamitsu. As the Head of a specialized
international organization, in our opinion, Mr. Arias is
duty-bound to possess complete information about its
work, including technical details, and bears political
responsibility for his briefing to the Council. We expect
that that is exactly what he will do today and that he
will not shift responsibility onto his subordinates.
We have never received a convincing explanation,
either from the presidency or from any of the Western
2/28

07/02/2023

colleagues who advocated inviting Mr. Oñate-Laborde,
as to why the Head of the Investigation and Identification
Team, whose status, as far as we understand it, is not
part of the OPWC administrative leadership, should be
invited as a separate briefer in this Council meeting
along with the Head of the OPCW. Does that mean that
Mr. Arias himself is not able to answer the questions
of Member States and requires cover from an expert?
Or is it that, after half a year of ignoring invitations to
speak to members of the Security Council, he is now
afraid to appear before us alone, even via video link?
Certainly, that does not enhance the authority to the
OPCW Technical Secretariat.
We also have serious questions about the position
taken by the presidency on this issue. Unfortunately, in
stark contrast with the practice adopted by the Security
Council, which presupposes the search for consensus,
the presidency actually openly took the side of a group
of Western delegations demanding the invitation of
Mr. Oñate-Laborde and ignored the concerns and
specific compromise proposals of other members of
the Council. Of course, we perfectly understand the
purpose behind Western delegations forcing through the
participation of Mr. Oñate-Laborde at today’s meeting.
But we are categorically against turning the Council
into a platform for such political games. That has
already happened to the OPCW via the determination
of certain Western delegations and with the connivance
of its leadership. It must not be allowed to happen now
to the Security Council.
Of course, we will not engage in discussions
with Mr. Oñate-Laborde, ask questions or react to
his observations, whether at this meeting or during
consultations, and we call on other Council members to
adopt a similar principled position on the matter.
The President: The representative of France has
asked for the floor.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
The Investigation and Identification Team of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) has drawn up a serious and detailed report, the
result of a two-year investigation of the chemical-weapon
attack in Douma in 2018. We would therefore like
Mr. Oñate-Laborde to be invited to comment in detail
on the technical contents of the report that he helped to
draft, together with Mr. Arias, who supervised the work.
We cannot accept that the Investigation Team, made up
of experts with a clear and legitimate mandate, should be
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

reduced to silence. Despite what we just heard from my
Russian colleague, there is clear interest in the Security
Council in hearing Mr. Oñate-Laborde and giving him
an opportunity to respond to questions from Council
members. We therefore call on Council members to
accept the participation of Mr. Oñate-Laborde to inform
our debate as precisely and objectively as possible.
I will conclude by saying that I absolutely support
the view of my Russian colleague with regard to the
importance of ensuring that the Council invites only
qualified individuals with true expertise, and I count
on the Russian Federation to adhere to that principle
in future.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/69, which contains the text of a letter
dated 27 January 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: Before we begin, please allow
me to express my deep sadness about the devastating
earthquakes in Türkiye and Syria and to extend my
condolences to the families of the victims. Türkiye is
where I started my United Nations career in 1989 with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. I visited the areas that are now affected
by the earthquakes countless times and witnessed the
amazing generosity of the people there. I also visited
Syria many times when I was Director of Asia and
the Middle East of what was then the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. As we all know, many of the
people there were already in dire need of humanitarian
aid because of the ongoing conflict. My sincere
sympathy goes to them all. The United Nations, as
Council members know, is mobilizing to support them
with an emergency response, and it is time for all of
us to show solidarity and work together in such an
extremely difficult situation.
I thank Council members for the opportunity to brief
them on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013),
on the elimination of the chemical-weapon programme
of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is a pleasure to be joined
at this meeting today, albeit virtually, by Mr. Fernando
Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as well
as Mr. Santiago Oñate-Laborde, Coordinator of the

S/PV.9255

OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team (IIT).
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my
appreciation to Director-General Arias and the OPCW
for their professional and impartial efforts to uphold
the norm against the use of chemical weapons and
for our partnership in the pursuit of the elimination
of those inhumane weapons. Since the Council’s last
consideration of this matter (see S/PV.9235), and
consistent with established practice, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs has been in regular contact with
its counterparts at the OPCW on activities related to
resolution 2118 (2013). In the light of Director-General
Arias’s participation in this meeting, my statement will
be very brief.
The efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration and subsequent declarations of
the Syrian Arab Republic have not progressed since the
Council last met on this matter. Unfortunately, all the
efforts by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to organize
the next round of consultations between the DAT and the
Syrian National Authority are so far still unsuccessful.
As Council members were previously informed, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has provided the Syrian
Arab Republic with a list of the pending declarations
and other documents requested by the DAT since 2019,
with the aim of assisting the Syrian Arab Republic in
resolving the 20 issues currently outstanding. However,
I have been advised that the Technical Secretariat has
not yet received the requested information.
In view of that situation, and in pursuit of its
ongoing efforts to implement its mandate, a reduced
team consisting of some members of the DAT was
sent to conduct limited in-country activities in the
Syrian Arab Republic from 17 to 22 January. It is my
understanding that the team was returning from the
mission as of the date of the most recent report and
that the mission’s outcome will be included in the next
DAT report. I note that Director-General Arias may
elaborate on the efforts to resolve the outstanding issues
related to Syria’s initial declaration. I want to take
this opportunity to reiterate the support of the United
Nations for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality,
objectivity and independence of the work of the OPCW.
With regard to the inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies and
Research Centre, I have been advised that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat continues to plan the next round
of inspections, to be held this year. As Council members

23-036343/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

will recall, the OPCW Technical Secretariat requested
that the Syrian Arab Republic provide sufficient
technical information or explanations that would enable
the Technical Secretariat to close the issue related to
the detection of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah
facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre
in November 2018. I regret to inform the Council
that the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide that
information. Mr. Arias may be able to provide Council
members with an update on efforts to ensure the timely
resolution of that issue.
I have been advised that the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission is still in the process of studying all the
available information related to allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
In the context, I understand that the Fact-Finding
Mission was deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic
from 6 to 12 November 2022 and is currently preparing
upcoming deployments. I look forward to any updates
from Director-General Arias on that matter.
On 27 January, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
submitted to the OPCW Executive Council and to
the Secretary-General a note entitled “Third Report
by the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team
Pursuant to Paragraph 10 of Decision C-SS-4/DEC.3
‘Addressing the Threat from Chemical Weapon Use’”.
The Secretary-General has shared the report with
Council members as document S/2023/81. I am sure
that the Director-General and the Coordinator of the
IIT will say more about the report’s conclusions and
will provide an update on when it will be considered by
the OPCW Executive Council.
In closing, I would like to reinforce what the
Secretary-General has repeatedly stated. There is
an urgent need to not only identify but also hold
accountable all who would dare to use chemical
weapons in violation of international law. Any use of
chemical weapons is unacceptable, and the absence of
accountability for their use is a threat to international
peace and security and a danger to us all. It is my
sincere hope that members of the Council will unite
on the issue and show leadership in demonstrating that
impunity in the use of the chemical weapons will not be
tolerated. The Office for Disarmament Affairs stands
ready to provide whatever support and assistance it can.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the Floor to Mr. Arias.
4/28

07/02/2023

Mr. Arias: On behalf of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and on
my own behalf, I would like to convey our deepest
condolences to the representatives of Türkiye and Syria
on the deadly earthquake that struck both countries
yesterday. In this period of grief, our thoughts and
prayers here in The Hague are with those who lost loved
ones. We wish those who were injured in the disaster a
speedy recovery in such difficult circumstances.
I will start with the briefing to the members of the
Security Council on the third report of the Investigation
and Identification Team (IIT).I very much appreciate
the presence of the Under-Secretary-General in
the Chamber today and her very good statement. I
also thank members of the Council for inviting me
to brief them to today, together with Ambassador
Oñate-Laborde, Coordinator of the Investigation and
Identification Team.
This is the fifth time, in less than five years, that
I have been provided with an opportunity to brief the
Security Council, which demonstrates the interest
of the Council on matters of common interest. Every
month, the Council meets pursuant to resolution 2118
(2013) to address the Syrian chemical weapons dossier
and is briefed by Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu.
At each meeting, the Council is supported in this task
by the OPCW and the monthly report we address
through the Secretary-General to the President of
the Security Council. In addition, Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu and I have periodic conversations
to update her with the latest information.
We will brief the members of the Security Council
today on the third report of the Investigation and the
Identification Team on the chemical-weapons attack
that took place in Douma, in the Syrian Arab Republic,
on 7 April 2018. On Friday, 27 January, the report was
shared in The Hague with the 193 member States of the
OPCW and with the Secretary-General, as mandated
by the OPCW Conference of the States Parties in its
decision of 27 June 2018. Later, the report was also
published on the OPCW official website. I believe that
everyone here has already had an opportunity to read
the findings of the report. Translations in all official
languages are being processed, and we will make them
available them in due course.
The Council will recall that, on 27 June 2018,
the OPCW Conference of the States Parties decided
to mandate the Technical Secretariat to put in place
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9255

arrangements to identify the perpetrators of the use
of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. In
accordance with the decision, the Investigation and
Identification Team was established. The Team began
its work in June 2019 and subsequently issued two
separate reports, on 8 April 2020 and 12 April 2021,
about four different cases. The report before us today
is therefore the third report issued by the IIT. It sets out
the findings of the investigation that took place over a
period of two years, from January 2021 to December
2022. It elaborates on the conclusions reached by the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s Fact-Finding Mission,
which determined in its report published on the 1 March
2019 that highly concentrated chlorine gas had been
used in the Douma incident of 7 April 2018.

air strikes that were taking place at the same time. It
conclusively demonstrates that craters found on top
of the buildings could not be caused by dropping the
cylinders from the adjacent buildings, because the
highest one is highly is hardly 16 metres higher than
those on which the cylinders fell. That difference in
height is not sufficient for the cylinders to reach the
needed speed to produce the damage that was found
on top of the buildings. The IIT found that on the basis
of all the information analysed, there are reasonable
grounds to believe that at least one helicopter was used,
and that it was operated by the Tiger Forces, an elite unit
of the Syrian armed forces. The details of the IIT report
will be presented by Mr. Santiago Oñate-Laborde,
Coordinator of the IIT, following my statement.

Beyond the work of the Fact-Finding Mission, the
IIT led its own independent investigations. It reviewed
a wide range of information, part of which it received
and part of which it directly collected. On the basis of
the analyses and studies carried out, the IIT concluded
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that, on
7 April 2018, between 7.10 p.m. and 7.40 p.m. local time,
at least one helicopter of the Syrian Arab Air Force,
departing from Dumayr airbase and operating under
the control of the Tiger Forces, dropped two yellow
cylinders that hit two residential buildings in a civilianpopulated area, killing 43 named individuals and
affecting dozens more. Several contradictory scenarios
were examined by the IIT against the backdrop of
evidence collected and analysed. The evidence not only
validated and corroborated the conclusions reached, but
also discarded all other scenarios.

The Syrian people have now been suffering from
war for about 12 years. Among the war’s atrocities, the
grim record of the conflict includes chemical weapons.
Chemical weapons have been used in the Syrian
Arab Republic, both before and after its accession in
September 2013 to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Those well-documented and repeated uses took
place despite the successful destruction of more than
1,300 metric tons of declared Syrian stockpiles under
stringent OPCW verification measures. All 193 States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention solemnly
and voluntarily agreed and committed to excluding
completely the possibility of the use of chemical
weapons. That has been upheld, as we have seen from the
international reactions to the use of chemical weapons
at various levels in various organizations, entities
and forums. Accountability for the use of chemical
weapons has been requested on many occasions at the
highest level.

The work of the IIT confirmed that highly
concentrated chlorine gas coming from one of the two
cylinders killed 43 persons in one of the buildings.
Some of the individuals who were in the building
sought refuge in the basement, thinking that they would
be better protected there during what they thought was
a conventional air strike at the time. Others, who were
aware that the chemical used would be heavier than air
and sink to the lower part of the building, tried to reach
the upper floors. Both the basement where the chlorine
gas expanded, as it is 2.5 times heavier than air, and
the upper floors of the building where the cylinder was
releasing chlorine gas in high concentration were lethal
places to shelter.
The work of the IIT also provides proof that it would
have been impossible to stage the attack by manually
placing the cylinders, even less so in the middle of the

The Security Council has repeatedly called for
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons to be
held accountable. Council resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209
(2015) and 2235 (2015) all contain that strong message.
The Secretary-General has also supported that call in
his statements by emphasizing that accountability is
an essential part of deterrence in the use of chemical
weapons. The General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council have both echoed the call that those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons must be
held accountable. Several international entities have
been created to address the alleged crimes committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic as part of the accountability
framework. In August 2011, the Human Rights Council
created the Independent International Commission

23-036345/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

of Inquiry with the purpose of investigating alleged
abuses of international human rights in the Syrian
Arab Republic. In December 2016, the General
Assembly established the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
The General Assembly has addressed the issue
of chemical weapons through its annually adopted
resolution on the implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, submitted this year by Poland.
General Assembly resolution 77/73, adopted this
year, expresses the firm belief that individuals
responsible for the use of chemical weapons must be
held accountable. It also stresses the importance of
the implementation of the decision on 27 June 2018
of the OPCW Conference of the States Parties, which
mandated the Technical Secretariat to identify the
perpetrators of chemical-weapon use in Syria, creating
the IIT. The Conference and the Executive Council of
the OPCW have also stated in a number of decisions
that those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
must be held accountable.
In addition to all of this, countless national
statements have been delivered in past years at the
OPCW, the United Nations and other international
forums expressing the view that those responsible for
the use of chemical weapons must be held accountable.
There is one common principle underlying those
reactions that has never been contested by any State
party — the absolute prohibition of the use of chemical
weapons and the unanimous and repeated condemnation
of any use by anyone under any circumstances, in
addition to the belief that the perpetrators must be
identified and held accountable.
I would like to point out that every report produced
by the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW, including
those of the IIT, follows the highest standards and best
practices used by international investigative bodies
for reaching solid conclusions. That standard consists
of a comprehensive and consistent combination and
corroboration of all the information and evidence
collected as a whole. The IIT’s conclusions are based
on an overall assessment and a thorough analysis of all
the various and numerous pieces of evidence received
and collected. It is the corroboration of all those
elements — the testimonies of victims and witnesses,
medical records, sample collections and extensive
6/28

07/02/2023

analyses and studies of chemistry, ballistics, military
elements, forensic expertise, computer modelling,
satellite imagery, remnants of munitions, as well as
the authentication of videos and photos, to name a
few — which, taken together, have enabled the IIT to
reach its conclusions.
I also want to remind the Council that corroborating
consists in gathering as much information as possible,
analysing all the elements, comparing them with
one another and against all scenarios and arriving at
incontestable conclusions. All views were considered
and put up against the facts. Many relevant units of the
Technical Secretariat provided valuable support to the
Team in the course of its activities. The IIT report was
prepared with strict respect for the independence of the
Team’s investigation and on a clear need-to-know basis.
I can guarantee that the investigations were performed
under the sole authority of the IIT Coordinator and that
the substantive results were completely respected.
It is worth mentioning that the IIT attaches the
utmost importance to the quality of its work, despite
the difficult conditions, which have included numerous
and sophisticated cyberattacks, a massive spread of
disinformation about our work and sometimes even
disrespect of some staff members, in addition to
the restrictions imposed by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which are very familiar to all of us. Lessons
have been learned and continue to be learned. Just as
with all the missions of the Technical Secretariat in
Syria — the Declaration Assessment Team, the FactFinding Mission and others — the Technical Secretariat
will continue to ensure that the knowledge, skills
and expertise acquired remain embedded in all of its
relevant units.
The construction of the OPCW Centre for
Chemistry and Technology was just been completed.
The building is ready. The Technical Secretariat will
use all of the Centre’s new capabilities to ensure that
knowledge, capacity and skills are kept and developed
in the organization for a better implementation of
the Convention.
Before I conclude, I wish to recall a few essential
points. The IIT is part of the Technical Secretariat of
the OPCW and is not a judicial body, special court or
tribunal. The IIT does not have the authority to assign
individual criminal responsibility. Its mandate, provided
by the OPCW Conference of the States Parties, is to
establish the facts and identify the perpetrators of the
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

use of chemical weapons. However, through its work,
the OPCW provides the international community with
materials and evidence that will assist accountability
mechanisms in their task. The States parties to the
OPCW and Members of the United Nations have to
decide on the next steps.
Since the day I took office as Director-General
of the OPCW, in July 2018, I have been making every
effort to engage the Syrian Arab Republic to find ways
to address and resolve various issues related to its
chemical weapons dossier. In relation to the mandate to
identify the perpetrators, despite my several attempts
to engage the Syrian authorities, the authorities have
refused to recognize or engage with the IIT. It should
be recalled that all mandates given under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the decisions of the OPCW
policymaking organs concerning the Syrian chemical
weapons dossier remain binding on all States parties
and on the Technical Secretariat.
The report is now in the hands of the Security
Council, and it will be up to the United Nations, the
OPCW and the international community in general to
take further steps or actions — those that members will
deem necessary.
I very much appreciate the opportunity to brief the
Council. I will now hand over to the Coordinator of
the IIT.
The President: I thank Mr. Arias for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Oñate-Laborde.
Mr. Oñate-Laborde: I thank the Security Council
for this opportunity to present to it some key elements
contained in the third report of the Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT).
I would like to start by mentioning that the mandate
of the IIT is to establish the facts related to perpetrators
of the use of chemical weapons by identifying all
information that is potentially relevant to the origin
of those weapons. It is important to keep in mind, as
was mentioned by the Director-General, that the IIT
is not a judicial body. It does not have the authority
to assign individual criminal responsibility. The IIT
also does not have the authority to make final findings
of non-compliance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Those two essential activities in the fight
against impunity belong to the policymaking organs
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and to judicial entities.

S/PV.9255

In its third report, the IIT presents its findings
on the investigation of one of the many incidents that
have taken place in the Syrian Arab Republic related
to the use of chemical weapons. We are dealing with
the incident that took place in the town of Douma, in
the vicinity of Damascus, on 7 April 2018. The incident
was investigated and analysed by the IIT in the period
between January 2021 and December 2022.
On the basis of all of the information obtained, to
which I will refer in a moment, and its analysis, the IIT
concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that between 7.10 p.m. and 7.40 p.m. on 7 April 2018,
during a major military offensive aimed at regaining
control of the city of Douma, at least one Mi-8 or Mi-17
helicopter of the Syrian Arab Air Force, departing from
the Dumayr airbase and operating under the control of
the Tiger Forces, dropped two yellow cylinders, which
hit two residential buildings in the central area of
the city.
One cylinder hit the rooftop floor of a three-storey
residential building, the one referred to in the report as
location 2, without fully penetrating the roof. It ruptured
and rapidly released toxic gas — chlorine — in very
high concentrations, which rapidly dispersed within
the building, killing 43 named individuals, among
them nine young boys and 10 young girls, and affecting
dozens more.
The second cylinder hit the roof of a three-storey
residential building, at the time uninhabited, and is
the one referred to as location 4 in the report. It broke
into the apartment below. The cylinder ruptured only
partially and started to slowly release chlorine, mildly
affecting those who first arrived at the scene.
The conclusions reached by the IIT are based on the
degree of certainty of reasonable grounds to believe,
which is the standard of proof consistently adopted by
international fact-finding bodies and commissions of
inquiry. In particular, the IIT conducted the following
activities. It analysed information received from the
Fact-Finding Mission (FFM). It requested information
from the States parties, including the Syrian Arab
Republic, and upon receipt, reviewed that information.
It assessed statements previously provided by witnesses
and conducted interviews itself with persons of interest.
It obtained videos, documents and other materials from
various sources. It requested analytical data underlying
the FFM report, including data mining for specific
chemicals from OPCW-designated laboratories, as

23-036347/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

well as new analysis and technical assessments from
a number of forensic institutes and specialists. It also
requested and analysed satellite imagery, collected
information from open sources and consulted with
several experts.
In carrying out those activities, the IIT relied on
the same methods and procedures it had applied during
the investigations described in its previous reports,
including with regard to obtaining and securing
information, its information and case management
systems and the degree of certainty applied to the
identification of perpetrators.
As with some previous investigations, the
collection of information in respect of the Douma
incident involved reaching out to States parties,
international and non-governmental organizations and
individuals, as well as several internationally reputable
forensic institutes, experts and other relevant entities.
Since the IIT is not judicially empowered to compel the
submission of information and materials, it relied once
again on the voluntary cooperation of all States parties.
Regarding the States parties, the IIT expected them
to provide access to relevant information and locations,
consistent with paragraph 7 of article VII of the
Convention — nothing more, nothing less. In the past
few months the IIT held several bilateral meetings with
States parties and other entities. It reviewed more than
19,000 files, amounting to more than 1.86 terabytes;
obtained and assessed statements from 66 witnesses,
five of them women; requested and obtained analysis
results and additional data for 70 samples related to
the investigation; and engaged in consultations with 10
different experts.
Recognizing the role that the information from the
Syrian Arab Republic could also play, the IIT engaged
in several good-faith attempts to allow the Syrian Arab
Republic to discharge its obligations, under paragraph
7 of article VII of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and pursuant to Security Council resolution 2118
(2013), to cooperate fully with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat by providing information to the IIT. The IIT
made extraordinary efforts to allow the authorities of
the Syrian Arab Republic to discharge its obligations
to cooperate and provide information and any other
input it deemed relevant to the IIT’s work. The Syrian
Arab Republic decided not to reply to the Technical
Secretariat’s request. Of course, despite the lack of
engagement, the ITT did not draw any inferences
8/28

07/02/2023

from that lack of cooperation for the purposes of its
substantive conclusions. The IIT took specific note
of positions previously expressed by the Syrian
Arab Republic on the incident in Douma, including
information submitted in some of its notes verbales
to the Technical Secretariat in 2018 in the aftermath
of the incident, in 2019 and in 2021. The information
presented by the Syrian Arab Republic was therefore
considered by the IIT when analysing possible scenarios
concerning the use of chemical weapons in Douma
on 7 April 2018. That information and its validity are
discussed in various sections of the report.
The IIT also took into due consideration the position
expressed at several stages by the Russian Federation on
the incident in Douma. The information presented by the
Russian Federation in notes verbales to the Technical
Secretariat and other official communications and
statements — for example, to the Security Council, the
OPCW Executive Council and the OPCW Conference of
States Parties — was also taken into account by the IIT
in the course of its investigation. On 28 January 2022,
the Technical Secretariat addressed a note verbale to
the permanent representation of the Russian Federation
to the OPCW, requesting any concrete information
that would potentially be relevant in establishing the
origin of the chemical weapons used in Douma on
7 April 2018 or useful in identifying the perpetrators,
including information related to actors that might
have had the capabilities to develop such weapons. On
15 February 2022, the permanent representation of the
Russian Federation responded via note verbale to the
Technical Secretariat, reiterating its determination that
decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 had been adopted ultra vires
and that paragraph 7 of article VII of the Convention
was therefore not applicable to any activities carried
out by the Technical Secretariat in connection with
the decision. No further elaborations or supporting
evidence were provided.
In preparing its investigations, the IIT built up a
plan. In that plan, it considered various hypotheses as to
how the incident might have occurred before proceeding
to develop concrete scenarios based on the information
available. There were two scenarios — one was that the
incident was staged, and the other was that it involved
the use of barrel bombs dropped from above. In order to
explore those two scenarios and assess their validity, the
IIT considered the views of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Russian Federation, both of which stated that
the incident had been staged by terrorist armed groups
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9255

with the support of Western States in order to forge
accusations against the Syrian army.

not obtain any information indicating that military
targets had been placed in proximity to either location.

In its report, the IIT started by examining the
general situation in eastern Ghouta at the time of the
incident. Regarding the military activities in Douma in
early 2018, and with respect to the offensive referred
to as Operation Damascus Steel, the IIT made its
assessment based on accounts by witnesses and experts,
flight observation data, satellite imagery and open
source information, as well as through consultations
with several external entities and experts.

A few hours after the attack, on the morning of
8 April 2018, Jaysh Al-Islam negotiated its surrender
with the Russian mediators. After the attack, Syrian
forces, supported by Russian military police, regained
control of Douma. The OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
(FFM) was then allowed to visit the sites on 21 and
25 April. After the investigation, the FFM was able
to determine in its report that there were reasonable
grounds that the use of a toxic chemical as a weapon
took place on 7 April 2018 in Douma. The FFM further
concluded that the toxic chemical contained reactive
chlorine and was likely molecular chlorine. The FFM
also assessed that it was possible that two yellow
industrial cylinders found at the two sites of alleged
use were the source of the substances containing
reactive chlorine.

According to the information obtained, on
13 February 2018, the Tiger Forces began to arrive in
the opposition-controlled enclave of eastern Ghouta,
which had been besieged by the Armed Forces of the
Syrian Arab Republic since April 2013 in what has
been described as one of the longest sieges in modern
history. The Tiger Forces’ deployment to the area was
corroborated through images and videos posted on
accounts linked to both the Syrian Arab Army and to
the Tiger Forces. On 18 February, Syrian Arab Republic
forces, alongside the Tiger Forces and other Syrian
and foreign militias supported by Russian Federation
forces, launched a full-scale air and ground assault to
recapture eastern Ghouta. Aircraft activity originating
from Dumayr airbase continued until 23 March,
followed by a 10-day lull. The temporary suspension
of air operations coincided with negotiations taking
place between Jaysh Al-Islam and representatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic, mediated by a representative
of the Russian Ministry of Defence. Negotiations
continued through early April, yielding no results.
Simultaneously, on 28 March, pro-Government
media reported that the Syrian forces were mobilizing
around Douma and preparing a major assault should
the negotiations with the Jaysh Al-Islam fail. As of
that day, according to United Nations sources, 70,000
people remained besieged in the enclave.
On 6 April, negotiations between Jaysh Al-Islam
and the Russian Federation broke down. Amid reports of
shelling on Damascus suburbs from the Jaysh Al-Islam
position, intense air strikes on Douma resumed after a
10-day break. On the evening of 7 April, as the barrage
of large-scale conventional shelling continued, reports
of a chemical attack on two locations in Douma started
circulating in the media. Dozens of casualties were
reported by medical staff on the ground. The IIT did

The IIT undertook several steps to clarify and
deepen its understanding of the findings of the FFM.
It must be recalled that, during its visit to the sites, the
FFM collected and obtained 49 samples from location 2
and 20 samples from location 4, including dry and wet
wipes of surfaces, concrete debris, wood, fabric, plastic
material, paint flakes, metal and biomedical samples
from victims.
A subset of those samples were sent out for analysis
to two OPCW-designated laboratories. Considering the
FFM’s analytical findings, the IIT focused specifically
on the anthropogenic subset of the identified chlorinated
organic chemicals — that is to say, on chemicals that
are not naturally present in the environment. The fact
that there are no natural sources of those chlorinated
chemicals means that their presence can be due only to
chemical events involving reactive chlorine.
Then, in addition to assessing the analytical
data supporting the FFM report, as relating to both
locations, the IIT also undertook the analysis of two
supplementary samples and electrical copper wire from
location 2 and a piece of concrete collected by a third
party at location 2 in Douma, on 8 April. For that item,
the IIT was able to reconstruct the chain of custody
between the date it was collected and the date it was
first received and analysed by an OPCW-designated lab.
In the light of the analytical results obtained and
presented in detail in the report, the IIT has reasonable
grounds to believe that chlorine gas was used at both
relevant locations in Douma and that the cylinders were

23-036349/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

the origin of the chlorine gas released at both locations.
For both occasions, the assessment of the analytical
data of 17 samples reveals the presence of chlorine-gas
markers, whose formation and specific position at both
sites can be explained solely by the release of a high
concentration of chlorine gas from the cylinders. Those
allow the IIT to rule out the hypothesis that the incident
may have been staged using household bleach products
or pesticides or that no chemical event may have taken
place at all.
At the two sites, identical chemical fingerprints
were identified in conifer wood present in the basement
of location 2 and at the base of location 4 as a result
of exposure to chlorine gas. Additionally, the staging
scenario finds no support in the chemical data,
considered in its totality, nor in the pattern of how
the relative levels of the chlorinated chemicals are
distributed. It would have been extremely difficult,
if not impossible, to mimic the spread of gas such as
chlorine gas. Laborious staging operations would have
had to be performed, according to a detailed plan, in
order to produce the exact concentration gradient
and pattern observed in the results at two different
locations. Moreover, all that would have had to be done
in the middle of combat. The IIT was therefore not able
to identify any evidence, including from open-source
information or from the Syrian Arab Republic or other
State parties that would corroborate that any of the
staging actions were performed at either location.
In its analysis, the IIT also considered in detail the
symptoms of the affected persons. The IIT consulted
several specialists and requested an independent
toxicologist not involved in previous assessments
of the incident to make their own evaluation of the
reported symptoms. The IIT provided the expert with
anonymized accounts and data from 55 individuals
interviewed by either the FFM or the IIT, including
affected persons and others who were present at the
scene or otherwise involved in the rescue operations in
the hours after the incident.
Furthermore, while the symptoms of the victims
are consistent with chlorine exposure, the IIT
considered it useful to assess possible chlorine-gas
dispersion from the cylinder found at location 2, the
one on the rooftop, where most fatalities were reported.
The IIT obtained and reviewed two sets of data and
visual representations of the gas-dispersion modelling
independently elaborated based on several parameters,
including locations of the crater, prevailing weather
10/28

07/02/2023

conditions, as well as variations in the filling capacity
of the cylinder and of the dispersion rate of the gas.
The two independent gas dispersion models
considered by the IIT indicate that the accounts of the
witnesses on the rapidity at which the symptoms began
are indeed reliable, and that those persons were affected
by chlorine gas used as a weapon in particular. Those
who died in the building at location 2 did so because
of exposure to the chlorine gas released rapidly from
the rooftop. The IIT further assessed that several of
the fatalities were exposed to chlorine while seeking to
escape from the shelter in the basement to upper floors.
At location 4, the absence of severe symptoms and
fatalities, compared to those at location 2 and in the
surrounding area, can be explained by the fact that the
relevant building was not inhabited at the time, and
that the bulb of the cylinder found at location 4 did not
rupture, unlike the one at location 2.
I rely on my report, which was distributed to the
Security Council. I am sure that those who are interested
will find in it the answers to what happened.
I would like to conclude by thanking you, Madam
President, and those who were willing to listen to this
report. Finally, I would say that the IIT must once again
conclude that the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic is the responsibility solely of the armed
forces of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Finally, I wish to express my most sincere
condolences to the victims of the earthquake in the
Syrian Arab Republic and in Türkiye.
The President: I thank Mr. Oñate-Laborde for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Jenkins (United States of America): I want
to start by expressing my deep sadness for the tragic
loss of life in both Türkiye and Syria during this week’s
devastating earthquakes. In addition to supporting our
Turkish allies, the United States is also supporting
humanitarian organizations inside Syria. It is not lost on
us that many of the Syrian first responders now pulling
civilians from the rubble were, just a few years ago,
helping civilians who had been burned or suffocated
by the Al-Assad regime’s chemical weapons. The
humanity and bravery of the Syrian first responders is
astounding, and we salute them.
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

I want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu, Director-General Arias and Coordinator
Oñate-Laborde for their briefings. I also want to
express my gratitude to the dedicated staff of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) for so compellingly establishing the facts
surrounding the Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical
weapons in Douma in 2018. Reading this report, one
can first and foremost only remember the victims and
survivors — men, women and children — of the horrific
7 April 2018 attack on Douma. By extension, we also
remember the victims and survivors of the many other
chemical attacks perpetrated by the Al-Assad regime.
On behalf of the United States, I offer our most sincere
condolences to the families of those who lost their lives
on that sombre day.
I also want to salute the Syrian and international
organizations that responded to those attacks, assisted
the victims and collected much of the evidence that made
this report possible. As the Director-General briefed,
and as the OPCW’s Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) made clear in their report, the facts of what
occurred on that fateful day are not in dispute. The
Al-Assad regime dropped two chlorine gas cylinders
on two apartment buildings, killing 43 men, women
and children and injuring countless more.
Unfortunately, such findings are not surprising.
It is indeed the fifth separate instance of the use of
chemical weapons that the IIT has attributed to the
Al-Assad regime — all clear violations of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). Those are in addition to
the four chemical weapon attacks previously attributed
to the Al-Assad regime by the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Let us also not overlook the questions raised
by the IIT findings regarding the role of Russian
forces in Douma at the time of the attack. The report
highlights the fact that Russian forces were co-located
at the base from which Al-Assad’s helicopters launched
their deadly chemical attack and that they controlled
the air space over Douma, along with the Syrian Air
Force. The United States and others have also long
pointed out the extremely troubling role of the Russian
forces in the aftermath of the attack, when Syrian and
Russian military police denied and delayed the OPCW
inspectors’ access to the site. In an effort to set up
their own staged investigations, they also attempted to
sanitize the site and remove incriminating evidence of
the use of chemical weapons.

S/PV.9255

We continue to have serious CWC compliance
questions regarding Russia’s assistance to the Al-Assad
regime with regard to the regime’s use of chemical
weapons in Douma. The report also puts to rest Russia
and Syria’s baseless allegations that opposition forces
were to blame for the Douma attack. The IIT made
clear that it had found that such a fable lacked any shred
of credibility. That should come as no surprise to most
Council members, who bear witness on a near-daily
basis to Russia’s blatant disinformation regarding its
brutal war of aggression in Ukraine.
As my colleagues have done countless times
before me, I am reiterating the call by the United
States for accountability for those responsible for the
numerous chemical-weapon attacks carried out by the
Al-Assad regime, including the one in Douma. We also
urge the members of the Council not to overlook the
classified annex of the Douma report. It is available
to all members of the OPCW, and its findings must
also be discussed. The Al-Assad regime must comply
with its international obligations and provide OPCW
staff immediate and unfettered access so that they
can conduct inspections and continue investigating
Syria’s incomplete accounting for its chemical weapons
stockpile. In particular, we remain deeply concerned
over the serious efforts to reconstitute its chemical
weapons programme. For its part, Russia must stop
shielding the Syrian Government from accountability.
There must also be no impunity for the use of
chemical weapons, and the United States remains
determined in its efforts to seek accountability for
the individuals responsible for chemical attacks in
Syria. We have already imposed sanctions and visa
ineligibilities against more than 300 individuals and
entities linked to Syria’s chemical-weapons programme,
and we will continue to use such tools and others to
promote accountability for those responsible for those
heinous attacks.
With the Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention fast approaching,
such findings also strengthen our resolve to work with
other responsible nations to strengthen the Chemical
Weapons Convention and keep the OPCW fit
for purpose.
We also support investigative efforts, such as
the United Nations International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism (IIIM), which is building case
files on violations and abuses in Syria, including the use

23-0363411/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

of chemical weapons. It is sharing the information and
evidence that it collects with prosecutors. The IIIM’s
work has already helped to facilitate convictions of
former regime officials in Europe, and we look forward
to more investigations and prosecutions, possibly
even here in the United States, thanks to the Justice
for Victims of War Crimes Act, which President Biden
recently signed into law.
I understand that the Security Council may at
times have grown a bit weary of the Syrian chemical
weapons issue. However, in the light of this most recent
report on Syria’s blatant disregard for its international
obligations under the CWC and resolution 2118 (2013),
we are reminded that now is not the time to reduce our
oversight of the regime’s compliance with Security
Council resolutions or to turn a blind eye to the further
deterioration of its dismal cooperation with the OPCW.
The serious blatant disregard for its obligations is an
affront to the Council and the international order. The
heinous acts documented in the OPCW’s report and the
Syrian regime’s brazen attempts to deny and deflect
responsibility once again show why the United States is
not normalizing relations with the Al-Assad regime. We
therefore strongly urge any country engaging with the
Syrian regime to consider the regime’s atrocious human
rights record over the past 12 years and the violations
the OPCW has documented in Douma and elsewhere.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to start by expressing
our condolences to the families of the victims affected
by the horrific earthquakes yesterday in Türkiye and
Syria, whose representatives are at today’s meeting.
We have recently had many completely empty
meetings on the Syrian chemical dossier, and their
uselessness is obvious to everyone. That is why we
and many other Council members have called, and
are calling, for the streamlining of our scheduled
discussions on this topic. Our Western colleagues
all along have stubbornly blocked any attempts by
sensible Council members to use our common time
more productively. It may well be that the new report of
the illegitimate Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) on the incident on 7 April 2018 in Douma, Syria,
the issuance of which was announced in the fall, was
intended, in accordance with Western expectations,
to make the case that the Council has something to
discuss on the Syrian dossier. But today’s meeting and
the briefings that we heard were empty. For more than
12/28

07/02/2023

an hour, we heard the same things being repeated over
and over.
If we have anything to discuss today, it is the
decline of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical Secretariat,
which instead of being a respected and impartial
international entity designed to facilitate compliance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention by the States
parties has become an impotent tool in the hands of the
collective Western States, covering up outrageous fraud
and violations of the Convention. The current DirectorGeneral of the OPCW, Fernando Arias, who has finally
magnanimously deigned to address the Security
Council today, bears considerable responsibility for
that. We will use this opportunity and ask him specific
questions that he has consistently avoided answering.
I will not comment on the activities of the IIT
today. For us, that entity does not exist because its
establishment was pushed through the Executive
Council of the OPCW in violation of the principle of
consensus and article XV of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. We have repeatedly stated that we reject in
advance any products that have already been issued, or
will be issued, by the IIT. Its destructive and politicized
activities have nothing to do with the principles of
impartiality and objectivity. The IIT, by definition,
cannot produce anything worthwhile unless the
original sin in the methodology of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat, including the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
(FFM), which fabricated and forged its report on the
Douma incident for the benefit of Western countries,
is corrected. As with the FFM report, the IIT product
ignores scientific, logical and causal connections. We
are not going to engage in a detailed discussion of that
opus — our attitude towards it was already made clear
in the statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation on 30 January and in a joint
statement by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation and the Syrian Arab Republic on
6 February.
In my statement I would like to recall the incident
in Douma, which has become something of a vial for the
Security Council, like the one former Secretary of State
Colin Powell waved in this Chamber about 20 years ago
(see S/PV.4701). On 7 April 2018, the infamous White
Helmets non-governmental organizations reported an
alleged incident in Douma, Syria, in which allegedly
as a result of dropped chlorine cylinders, several dozen
people had died and the wounded had been transported
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

to a nearby hospital. Very few people recall that, on
10 April, Damascus officially sent an invitation to the
OPCW to send inspectors to Douma. Those inspectors
were in Damascus and continued to delay their
departure for Douma. That we prevented their visit to
Douma, as was just stated by the representative of the
United States, is an outrageous lie.
On 14 April 2018, the United States, the United
Kingdom and France launched a massive missile
strike against Syrian civilian and military targets as
punishment for the Douma incident. In other words,
Paris, London, and Washington, without waiting for any
investigation, identified and punished the guilty party
themselves. If they had been interested in determining
the truth, they would not have struck Syria in violation
of the norms and principles of international law, which
could have destroyed important evidence.
At the same time, the Western media continued
its propaganda campaign blaming Damascus for the
incident. The OPCW came under pressure, which
resulted in the fabricated FFM report. It was fabricated
because its original version did not contain any
conclusions about the culpability of Damascus. We have
repeatedly asked Mr. Arias to comment on that, but
we have not received any clear answers either during
our meetings or in closed consultations or in any other
format. I will remind Mr. Arias of our questions.
First, we would like to know, on what grounds are the
IIT and the FFM violating the fundamental principle of
the chain of custody? What motivates Mr. Arias to sign
documents whose conclusions are based on information
received from a third party, such as the White Helmets,
who make no secret of their bias? Have the working
principles of the Technical Secretariat changed? Are
the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons no longer its guiding principles?
I would like to recall that the United Nations Mission
to Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical
Weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic stated clearly in
its 2013 report (see S/2013/553) that,
“the independent verification of information on
the use of chemical weapons is not possible in the
absence of data on their means of delivery and
of biometric samples collected and analysed in
accordance with the principles of chain of custody.”
Now the organization freely uses information from
open sources and third parties. Evidence of an incident
can apparently be sent to the OPCW by mail and

S/PV.9255

anonymously, because if it fits the right narrative,
it will be considered “reasonable grounds” for
drawing conclusions.
We would still like to hear from Mr. Arias clear
answers about the outrageous scandal that occurred
during the preparation of the FFM report on the Douma
incident, the final version of which was basically
rewritten under pressure from Western countries, in
particular with regard to chemical, toxicological and
ballistic tests and witness testimony. The inspectors
who disagreed with such a blatant forgery, which
directly undermines the principles of the organization,
were, with his permission, removed and persecuted and
became victims of genuine harassment. Why has he
still not taken any action to address that situation? Even
his predecessor, Mr. Bustani, expressed the need for an
investigation in that regard.
Furthermore, as far as we can tell, the main
inconsistencies in the FFM’s report have been directly
incorporated into the new IIT report, which also has new
inconsistencies. After all, lies beget lies, and Mr. Arias
is condoning them. According to the current version
of the event, the victims seem to have rushed to the
area with the highest concentration of toxic chemicals,
even though people usually try to flee a contaminated
area. No mention is made of the fact that none of the
residents of the affected building identified the people
who had allegedly died of chlorine poisoning as their
neighbours, or of the testimony of numerous witnesses
that the bodies of the victims had been transported
from nearby areas ahead of time and were found to
have bullet and explosion wounds rather than signs of
chlorine intoxication.
The scandal surrounding the White Helmets is also
being ignored because the staged version of events is
not being disputed.
The interpretation of what happened simply does
not correspond to elementary laws of physics. In some
incomprehensible way, a 100-kilogramme cylinder
broke through the roof and ricocheted off a bed without
damaging the building. In the area of the breach in the
roof, there were no traces of the steel reinforcements
that would have had to be sticking out after such a
heavy blow. No signs of damage were found on one
of the cylinders, despite the fact that it had allegedly
been dropped from the air. And the causal relationships
have been upended too. How, for example, could
the IIT have analysed the remnants of the cylinders

23-0363413/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

used in the so-called chemical attack if both had
been destroyed by an Israeli air strike on the Syrian
airbase? The actual explanation of what transpired is
that the chlorine cylinders were simply brought into a
residential building by representatives of the notorious
White Helmets to stage the incident. That was ignored,
despite the evidence for it, such as traces of distinctive
paint in the building lobby from where the cylinders
were carried up.
Nevertheless, Mr. Arias, as the head of an important
international organization, which must observe the
principle of impartiality and neutrality, not only
voluntarily signed the IIT report but also commented
on its release with the words, “The world now knows
the facts. It is up to the international community to take
action at the OPCW and beyond”. Does that mean that
he is deliberately ignoring the information provided
by us and other countries to the OPCW, and is openly
siding with the Western countries that sponsored the
White Helmets and continue to advance their own
anti-Syrian agenda? Is he able to disclose the sources of
the information on which the IIT report is concocted?
Given the way in which its insinuations have been
rapidly picked up by the United States, Britain, France
and Germany, which were also quick to dump out yet
another load of anti-Russian accusations in a joint
statement by their foreign affairs departments, there
can be no doubt as to the politicization of the document.
We are hoping that Mr. Arias will answer our
questions here at this meeting in the Chamber,
without attempting to limit the discussion to closed
consultations. We have nothing to hide, and he should
have no secrets from members of the Security Council
or from the States parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Furthermore, we expect that in future he
will find the time to appear before the Security Council
when it considers it necessary to invite him.

07/02/2023

attack carried out in Douma on 7 April 2018. The
detailed and well-documented report marks the ninth
case of the use of chemical weapons attributed to the
regime by independent United Nations and OPCW
mechanisms. The report details how the Tiger Forces
of the Syrian Arab Air Force took off from Dumayr
airbase and deliberately dropped two barrels of chlorine
on residential buildings on the city centre, killing
43 people and affecting dozens more. France firmly
condemns that act, which constitutes a war crime and a
crime against humanity. We once again urge the Syrian
regime to comply immediately with its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention. Almost 10
years after the unanimous adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), the regime must finally shed light on its existing
stockpiles, because as we all know, they have not all
been destroyed. It must allow OPCW personnel to
deploy to Syria as soon as possible.
There is credible information in the report,
corroborated by multiple sources, that Russian forces
were stationed at Dumayr airbase, together with the
Tiger Forces, while the airspace over Douma was
exclusively controlled by the Syrian army and Russian
air defence forces. I say this very firmly — Russia
must stop covering for the Syrian regime. As early
as the day after the attack, Russian military police
helped the regime bar the OPCW from having access
to the site. It attempted to clean up the site of the
attack. In the aftermath, Russian and Syrian troops
posted photographs of staged scenes online to support
fabricated accounts of the incident. No one was fooled.
The attack was not staged by the opposition or by armed
groups, as some would have us believe. No amount of
disinformation can hide the guilt of the regime and
its allies.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, let me express my condolences to the bereaved
families in the wake of the devastating double
earthquake that hit southern Türkiye and north-western
Syria yesterday. I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu, Mr. Arias and
Mr. Oñate-Laborde for their briefings.

Let me conclude by commending the independent,
impartial and professional work of the OPCW. It
is essential to expose the truth if we are to hold the
perpetrators of those attacks accountable. There must
be no impunity for war criminals. The fight against
impunity is a priority for France and the foundation
of the effectiveness and credibility of the prohibition
regime. France will continue to work with its partners
to that end.

France has taken note of the third report issued on
27 January by the Investigation and Identification Team
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). Its conclusions are damning. The
Syrian regime was responsible for the chemical-weapon

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): On
behalf of the United Kingdom, I express our condolences
to the people affected by the earthquake in Türkiye
and Syria. Our thoughts are with the families still
searching for answers and loved ones from the rubble,

14/28

23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

those in mourning in the aftermath and aftershocks of
the earthquake and those helping them in any way. The
United Kingdom is contributing immediate support and
stands ready to support further humanitarian efforts.
I would like to start by thanking High Representative
Nakamitsu, Director-General Arias and the Coordinator
of the Investigation and Identification Team of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Mr. Oñate-Laborde, for their briefings. We
welcome the publication of the OPCW Investigation and
Identification Team’s latest report, which has decisively
found the Al-Assad regime responsible for the 2018
chemical-weapon attack on Douma, which killed 43
men, women and children and injured dozens more in
horrifying circumstances. We are faced yet again with
undeniable evidence that the Syrian State has used
chemical weapons to murder its own citizens. This is the
ninth such finding of the Syrian regime’s responsibility
for chemical-weapon attacks in investigations by the
United Nations and OPCW. We welcome the report
and once again commend the expertise, independence,
dedication and professionalism of the OPCW staff. We
owe it to the victims of Douma and the thousands of
other victims of chemical-weapon attacks across Syria
to hold the Syrian regime to account.
Moreover, today we are gravely concerned about the
possibility that the Al-Assad regime has been working
actively to rebuild its chemical-weapon stockpile since
at least 2018, in flagrant violation of its obligations and
the commitments that 193 States parties have made
under the Chemical Weapons Convention in pursuit
of a world free from chemical weapons. That is why it
remains vital that we support the OPCW in efforts to
resolve inconsistencies and discrepancies with Syria’s
chemical-weapon declaration. The Syrian regime must
now change its behaviour on chemical weapons and
provide the Security Council with concrete and credible
assurance that it has destroyed all stockpiles and no
longer possesses the capability or intent to use chemical
weapons anywhere, under any circumstances. Despite
the latest overwhelming evidence of Syria’s chemical
weapons use, we have heard again today Russia’s usual
barrage of lies, denials, disinformation and unfounded
criticism of the OPCW. But the OPCW’s painstaking
report, which considers the alternative scenarios put
forward by Russia, specifically, comprehensively and
credibly rejects them on the basis of evidence.
If the Al-Assad regime and its protector, Russia,
prevent progress, block accountability and deny justice

S/PV.9255

for the victims, they also risk the further erosion of the
global norm against those abhorrent weapons. All of us
here today have a responsibility to support the OPCW
to uphold the Chemical Weapons Convention, insist
on compliance with the resolutions of the Council and
continue to seek accountability for the victims of those
heinous attacks.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu and
Mr. Fernando Arias for their briefings today. We
welcome the participation of Mr. Arias in this meeting.
We also listened to the thorough report by Mr. Santiago
Oñate Laborde.
Before addressing the subject of today’s meeting,
I would like to express our sincere condolences to the
representatives of Syria and Türkiye, who are with
us today, as well as to the families of the victims of
the devastating earthquake that hit the two countries.
The United Arab Emirates stresses its continued
commitment to providing the relief support needed
during this difficult time.
I would like to reaffirm the steadfast position
of the United Arab Emirates that explicitly rejects
and condemns the use of chemical weapons under
any circumstances, by anyone and anywhere. Their
use constitutes a flagrant violation of the provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and
international law.
In the context of today’s discussion on Syria’s
chemical dossier, my country would like to note
the following.
First, we reiterate the need to address the gaps and
pending issues between the Syrian authorities and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and to keep that matter at the centre of our
discussions on Syria’s chemical dossier. In that context,
we welcome the visit undertaken by a reduced team
from the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) to Syria
last month and emphasize the importance of hearing
the outcome of that visit at the next Council’s meeting
on the matter.
Secondly, the United Arab Emirates values the
role of the OPCW in ensuring the implementation of
the CWC, including the investigation of incidents that
involve the alleged use of chemical weapons. We stress
the technical nature of the OPCW’s mandate and the
importance of it remaining an independent organization,

23-0363415/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

separate from various political developments, in order
to achieve the objectives and purposes of the CWC.
We emphasize the importance of the investigations
following a rigorous and systematic approach so that
their findings do not leave any room for doubt or
uncertainty. Any allegation of potential use of chemical
weapons must be taken with the utmost seriousness. In
that context, we refer to the report issued by the OPCW
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) about the
Douma incident in 2018, which raises further questions
and inquiries.
Thirdly, my country calls for further investigations
into the development and use of chemical and biological
weapons by the Da’esh terrorist organization in Syria
and Iraq. We commend the investigative efforts in
that regard by the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to ensure
that Da’esh is held accountable for its terrorist crimes.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of
achieving tangible progress on the chemical dossier,
and we reiterate that the ultimate goal of banning
chemical weapons is to protect humankind from their
horrific effects.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to reiterate
our heartfelt condolences to those who lost their lives
and their families in the recent devastating earthquake
in Türkiye and Syria. I sincerely pray for the prompt
reconstruction of the affected areas, and Japan has
started — and will continue — to extend its support.
I would first like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu, Mr. Arias
and Mr. Oñate-Laborde for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings.
The use of chemical weapons can never be tolerated
anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances. Their
use in Syria is a flagrant breach of international law,
including the Chemical Weapons Convention, and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and the non-proliferation regime.
In April 2018, 43 individuals, including women
and children, lost their lives, and dozens more were
affected in the horrific chemical weapons attack in
Douma, according to the findings of the Fact-Finding
Mission and the Identification and Investigation Team
(IIT). The latest report of the IIT concluded that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that the Syrian Arab
Air Force perpetrated those attacks. Japan condemns
16/28

07/02/2023

the Government of Syria’s use of chemical weapons,
as concluded by the report. We deeply regret that the
report has once again confirmed the Government of
Syria’s continued failure to cooperate with the OPCW
and the IIT, violating its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
The decision made by the twenty-fifth session of the
Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention should be taken seriously by Syria. Syria
must engage in good faith with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and provide all the required documents in
order to resolve the outstanding issues related to the
initial and subsequent declarations submitted by Syria.
It is imperative that Syria immediately declare and
completely eliminate its chemical weapons programme
and grant full and unhindered access to OPCW staff
to verify compliance. In addition, it is our shared
responsibility to hold accountable those who have used
chemical weapons and to bring justice to the victims.
No Member State should provide shelter to those
responsible for committing such brutal and inhumane
acts against their own people.
We commend the professional, impartial and
independent work conducted by the OPCW and its
staff. We strongly oppose any attempts to undermine
their invaluable work. Furthermore, in order to prevent
the recurrence of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, Japan continues to fully support the efforts of
the OPCW, including the IIT, and to work closely with
the international community toward a settlement of the
Syrian crisis.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by expressing our condolences
to the Governments of Türkiye and the Syrian Arab
Republic following the large-scale earthquakes that
occurred on 6 February. We express our solidarity with
all the families of the victims.
I would like to thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu; the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Ambassador Fernando
Arias; and the Coordinator of the Investigation
and Identification Team, Ambassador Santiago
Oñate-Laborde, for their informative briefings.
The report of the OPCW issued on 24 January,
presented in line with paragraph 12 of resolution
2118 (2013), holds particular importance for Ecuador
as an elected member of the Security Council. It is
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

also important for us to maintain open dialogue and
consultations in which we can count on the presence of
those in charge of the mechanisms and organizations
that contribute to the deliberations of the Council. Our
country’s position on the issue is as follows.
First, we deplore the lack of cooperation and
commitment on the part of the Syrian authorities with
respect to their responsibilities under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013), for
which September will mark 10 years since its adoption.
It is unacceptable that, more than nine years after the
Syrian Arab Republic acceded to the Convention, its
national declaration still cannot be considered accurate
and complete, despite the efforts of the Technical
Secretariat, through the Declaration Assessment Team,
dating back to 2019.
Secondly, since February 2021, the Security
Council has been awaiting the organization of a
fresh round of consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority,
as well as a meeting between the Director-General and
the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, which was
proposed by the OPCW in June 2021. Based on its report,
we know that a streamlined team conducted a visit from
17 to 22 January to carry out limited activities in the
country. We hope that that will be the first step towards
effective cooperation, and we request, at the earliest,
information on the development of such cooperation.
Thirdly, it is alarming to learn of the conclusions
of the third report of the OPCW Investigation and
Identification Team, which states that there are
sufficient grounds to point to the Syrian Arab Air Force
as the perpetrator of the chemical attack that took place
in the city of Douma on 7 April 2018. It is hoped that
investigations will continue. Ecuador reiterates its
absolute condemnation of that horrific event and its
overall condemnation of the development, possession
and the use of chemical weapons by whomever,
wherever and under any circumstances. The Council
cannot allow such criminals to go unpunished.
Lastly, as we recognize the work of the OPCW and
the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity
and independence of its technical teams, Ecuador
once again strongly urges the Syrian authorities to
demonstrate their willingness to ensure the full and
effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

S/PV.9255

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to join my colleagues in once again
extending our deepest condolences to the families of
the thousands of victims of the earthquake that struck
Türkiye and Syria. The disaster of a magnitude not seen
in decades adds to the already serious humanitarian
crises affecting the region. Switzerland stands with the
victims and their families. We hope that the maximum
number of people will be rescued in the coming hours.
On 7 April 2018, other very grave events claimed
innocent Syrian victims in Douma, on the outskirts of
Damascus. On that day, 43 civilians — seven men, 17
women, nine boys and 10 girls — died as a result of a
chlorine gas attack. We know from the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
that it was not an accident, but a deliberate attack
using chemical weapons, which are prohibited by
international law.
Over the past 10 years, there have been repeated
violations of obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention in Syria. The third report of the Investigation
and Identification Team, issued on 27 January,
concerning the attack that took place in Douma in
April 2018 is another example of such violations. The
OPCW report, for which I would like to thank DirectorGeneral Arias and the Coordinator of the Investigation
and Identification Team, Mr. Oñate-Laborde, presents
the following facts.
It documents that on 7 April 2018, at least one
helicopter of the Syrian Arab Republic dropped two
cylinders that struck residential buildings in Douma.
Chlorine gas was released from those cylinders. The gas
affects several systems of the body — the skin, mucous
membranes, the digestive tract and the respiratory
system, where it is absorbed by the lungs, giving us an
idea of the fate suffered by those who were affected.
The OPCW concludes that “there are reasonable
grounds to believe that the perpetrators of the attack
were members of the Syrian Arab Air Force at the time
of the incident”. To date, nine of the approximately 25
chemical attacks documented by the United Nations
and the OPCW in Syria have been attributed to the
Syrian Government.
Switzerland fully supports the conclusions of the
report. We have full confidence in the OPCW, including
the Investigation and Identification Team. Their work
is crucial. Their professionalism and integrity are not
in doubt.

23-0363417/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

Switzerland condemns the use of chemical weapons,
including in Douma in 2018. We call on all parties to
refrain from using such weapons and to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
We echo the Secretary-General’s repeated calls for
those responsible for the use of such weapons to be
held accountable.
Fact-finding is crucial to preventing further
attacks and impunity for those crimes. In that regard,
we welcome formal cooperation between the OPCW
and the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious
Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which we fully
support. Such cooperation is in line with the wishes of
the Security Council, which, by unanimously adopting
resolution 2118 (2013), 10 years ago, expressed its firm
belief that those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria must be held accountable.
We call on Syria to cooperate fully with the OPCW,
accept OPCW-designated personnel and provide them
with immediate and unhindered access to all sites. We
hope that the recent visit by the streamlined Declaration
Assessment Team, whose report is expected in March,
will mark the resumption of Syria’s full cooperation
with the OPCW.
As the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu — whom I thank — just
reminded us, Syria must provide the OPCW Technical
Secretariat with answers to the 20 outstanding issues so
its initial declaration can be verified. We also note that,
since 15 July 2021, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has been awaiting all relevant information from Syria
regarding the unauthorized movement and destruction
of the two cylinders used in the Douma attack.
In conclusion, I would like to remind us of the 43
victims of the use of chemical weapons in Douma. To
honour their memory, it is our duty to ensure that those
weapons are never again used by anyone, at any time,
under any circumstances.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — Gabon,
Mozambique and my own country, Ghana (A3).
We thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
18/28

07/02/2023

Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), as well as Mr. Santiago Oñate-Laborde,
for their enlightening briefings on the status of the
elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapon programme.
We welcome the participation of the representatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the Republic of Türkiye in this meeting.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the A3, permit me to reiterate
our deepest sympathies and condolences to the
Governments and peoples of the Syrian Arab Republic
and Türkiye following the tragic deaths and extensive
infrastructural damage resulting from the 7.8- and
7.5-magnitude earthquake and tremor that struck parts
of the two countries. Our thoughts and prayers are
with the Governments and peoples of both countries at
this difficult time. We call for increased international
support for the emergency response and remain
confident that the fortitude and resilience of the peoples
of the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye will see them
through the disaster.
We thank the OPCW for its 112th report covering
the period from 24 December 2022 to 23 January 2023
(see S/2023/69), and express our support for its work
as the foremost body responsible for ensuring the full
elimination of Syria’s chemical-weapon programme.
In that regard, we welcome the conduct of limited
in-country activities by a small group of members of the
Declaration Assessment Team as part of the continued
efforts of the OPCW Technical Secretariat to carry
out its mandate in line with resolution 2118 (2013),
and we look forward to the outcome of that mission.
We also take note of the contents of the third report
by the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team on
the use of chemical weapons in Douma in the Syrian
Arab Republic in April 2018. We take cognizance of the
Syrian National Authority’s submission to the Executive
Council of its 110th monthly report regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical
weapons, as well as its chemical-weapon production
facilities, as required of it by the Executive Council.
The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, must continue to be concerned
about the potential re-emergence and increasing
threat of chemical warfare and take urgent steps to
accelerate action towards a world free from chemical
weapons. The A3 stands collectively against the use of
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any
circumstances. We remain committed to the established
norms against the use of chemical weapons and to all
efforts to eliminate their production, storage and use,
and we reiterate our support for resolution 2118 (2013).
We believe that enhanced cooperation between the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian National
Authority would be useful in making progress in
that regard. As we have expressed in our previous
statements, direct high-level exchanges between the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW Director-General
would be helpful in building confidence and providing
the impetus needed to advance the various aspects of
the programme and encourage greater commitment to
strengthening cooperation. We hope that the two sides
will expedite their efforts to prepare a meeting as soon
as possible.
Finally, we urge the Council’s support in
finding more constructive ways to address the
issues that constrain meaningful progress on the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). The early
completion of the elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme represents an important part of
our common goal for international peace and security.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Like others. first
and foremost, I would like to express Brazil’s solidarity
and most sincere condolences to the peoples of Syria
and Türkiye for the losses they have suffered in the
devastating earthquake that has hit both countries.
I would like to thank the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Ambassador Fernando Arias, for being with
us today and for his detailed briefing. I also thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing and
Mr. Oñate-Laborde for his additional remarks. And I
welcome the delegations of Syria, the Islamic Republic
of Iran and Türkiye to this meeting.
We have taken note of the latest report by the
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), released
on 27 January, regarding the use of chemical weapons
in Douma in April 2018. As with previous IIT reports,
the document has been submitted to Brazil’s national
authority, which will carry out a strict technical
assessment of its content. Given the seriousness
of the conclusions, we are of course committed to
giving the report its due consideration. From Brazil’s
standpoint. the events described in the IIT report must

S/PV.9255

be addressed with transparency and subject to thorough
and impartial analysis in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Furthermore, in cases like this it
is important to highlight the need for close cooperation
between the OPCW and the United Nations — especially
the Security Council, recalling that the ultimate
responsibility for attribution rests with this organ,
according to the Charter of the United Nations.
We are in full agreement with Mr. Arias when he
says that the use of chemical weapons anywhere is
unacceptable and a breach of international law. That is
in line with Brazil’s long-standing position regarding
the incompatibility with international humanitarian law
of the threat or use of any weapons of mass destruction.
We hereby reaffirm that Brazil strongly condemns the
use of any chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone, in
any circumstances. Any use of such weapons represents
a serious threat to international peace and security in
direct violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In the Syrian case, we hope that the investigations
conducted so far will provide a basis for proper
accountability for the perpetrators of illegal acts.
Furthermore, we expect the Syrian authorities and the
OPCW to engage in effective cooperation in order to
clarify the episodes of the use of chemical weapons and
to address the outstanding questions regarding Syria’s
declared chemical-weapon arsenal and its destruction.
We believe that those are necessary steps to close the
so-called Syrian chemical file and prevent any future
occurrence of the use of those abominable weapons.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I join my colleagues today in
once again expressing our most sincere condolences to
all affected by the terrible losses and destruction caused
by the devastating earthquakes in Türkiye and Syria.
Our first search-and-rescue team is already in Türkiye
in Malatya, working with others in a race against time
to save lives.
I would like to thank High Representative
Nakamitsu, Director-General Arias and Coordinator
Oñate-Laborde for the information they have provided.
Their briefings were indeed long, but they were full of
the kind of information and details we need, showing
what it takes to get the truth and to the bottom of issues
professionally and impartially.
The developments over the past 11 years in Syria
are a perfect example of a user’s manual for how a
despotic regime can engineer the destruction of its
country to the detriment of its people through the

23-0363419/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

use of extreme brutality against civilians, including
torture, siege, collective punishment and the issue
under discussion today — the use of chemical weapons.
The use of poisonous and deadly chlorine gas by the
Syrian army has been denounced many times in The
Hague, in this Chamber and outside, as one of the most
despicable modus operandi in that regard, in violation
of the international standards and norms against
chemical weapons.
After the dreadful events of 7 April 2018,
witnesses, reporters, human rights groups and
Governments were right to quickly point the finger in
the right direction — the regime. Now the third report
of the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) has clearly concluded that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that the Syrian Arab Air Force
used chemical weapons in Douma, an area populated
by civilians — killing 43 people and affecting dozens
more. I will therefore not repeat the details, which were
presented here and are included in the report.
What matters is that those who used helicopters to
drop barrel bombs on civilians are the same ones who
used those helicopters for their barbaric attacks with
chlorine. The report is unambiguous in its attribution.
Once again, it was the regime. This is the ninth
case of the use of chemical weapons independently
attributed to the Syrian regime by the United Nations
and OPCW mechanisms. This is not an accident. This
is not an incident. This is not an issue of dysfunction
somewhere in the chain of command. This translates a
clear intention.
The report refers to Syria’s continued lack of
cooperation with the IIT, the obstruction of the
investigation at the scene of the incident where it
happened and the destruction of potential evidence — all
despite the communication efforts of the IIT. That is
not the behaviour of someone who is innocent and has
nothing to hide.
We condemn, in the strongest terms, the repeated
use of those atrocious weapons, in flagrant violation
of international obligations. Syria has an obligation
to cooperate with the OPCW and comply fully with
resolution 2118 (2013). We welcome the work carried
out by the IIT, which has pursued its activities with firm
determination, total independence and unquestionable
professionalism. We commend all the witnesses who
contributed to the report, despite the intimidation of the
20/28

07/02/2023

regime. Risking their lives and those of the families,
they chose the truth and have contributed to justice.
The 112th monthly report of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat (see S/2023/69) clearly shows that, based on
the information of the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies that remain unresolved, the
statements submitted by Syria still cannot be considered
accurate and complete. We deplore the continued lack
of cooperation. We look forward with interest to the
conclusions of the visit of the reduced Declaration
Assessment Team in Syria, conducted from 17 to
20 January, and we also await the results of the ninth
round of inspections, conducted in September 2022, at
the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities.
Let me conclude by highlighting that, if we want to
support Syria, we should start by supporting justice and
accountability. That can be done by showing unity on
the critical and unforgivable issue of the use of chemical
weapons. Those attacks must not go unpunished; the
perpetrators must be brought to justice. Impunity for
the use of chemical weapons must not be tolerated
in any circumstance, by anyone, anywhere, and we
believe that the reaction of the Council must be up to
par. A democratic Syria will not be born by supporting
and shielding the very regime that did everything to get
the country to where it finds itself today. It will come
by effectively supporting the Syrian people in their
legitimate quest for a peaceful and democratic future.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to once again express its deepest
condolences to the Governments and the peoples
of Türkiye and Syria for the strong earthquakes that
led to heavy casualties and property damage. In the
face of this major disaster, China is doing its utmost
to provide assistance. The Chinese Government will
provide an initial batch of ¥40 million in emergency
aid to Türkiye. Chinese rescue teams are now rushing
to the affected areas of Türkiye in order to join the
rescue work. We are also coordinating the delivery of
urgently needed relief supplies to Syria and expediting
the implementation of ongoing food aid programmes.
We sincerely hope that the people of Türkiye and Syria
will overcome the disaster and rebuild their homes as
soon as possible.
We thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing and welcome Director-General Arias to
today’s meeting.
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

On issues related to chemical weapons, China’s
position is consistent. China firmly opposes the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, under any circumstances
and for any purpose, and hopes that our world will be
rid of all chemical weapons as soon as possible. We urge
countries that possess chemical weapons to destroy
them all as soon as possible.
China has always believed that dialogue and
negotiations are the only right way to resolve the issues
related to Syria’s chemical weapons. We note that the
Syrian Government has stated on many occasions
that it firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons
by anyone and under any circumstances, and is ready
to work with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in order to resolve
outstanding issues.
Regarding the divergent interpretations of many
issues by the Syrian Government and the Technical
Secretariat, we maintain that science and facts should
be respected and an objective and fair approach upheld.
Both parties should continue thorough discussions and
work towards meeting each other halfway, striving to
jointly resolve outstanding issues as soon as possible.
Recently, the Syrian Government and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat reached consensus on the conduct
of activities in Syria by a small team of members of the
Declaration Assessment Team. Such a development is
welcome. China calls on the international community
to view Syria’s efforts objectively, and hopes that the
Technical Secretariat can respond to Syria’s concerns
and appeals in a professional and transparent manner.
On the new report recently released by the IIT,
we must first point out that the initial establishment
of the IIT went beyond the remit of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) and violated the tradition
of consensus in the OPCW. Its working methods and
procedures do not meet the requirements of the CWC
and its Verification Annex. Many countries, including
China, have expressed their objections from the very
beginning. China’s position on this has not changed.
Based on that position, we would like to express
our reservations on the choice of briefers for this
meeting and regret that the President did not conduct
extensive consultations with Council members in that
regard. China reiterates that the investigation and
handling of the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Syria must return to the framework of the CWC. We
hope that Director-General Arias and the Technical

S/PV.9255

Secretariat will promote the resumption of the tradition
of consensus by States parties and effectively maintain
the authority and effectiveness of the OPCW.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I too wish to start by expressing Malta’s condolences
to the people of Türkiye and Syria following the
devastating earthquake. A humanitarian assistance
team from Malta is already on the ground in order to
assist in the recovery.
I thank High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu, Director-General Arias
and Ambassador Oñate-Laborde, Coordinator of the
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), for their insightful briefings today.
Malta underlines its full support for the
independent, unbiased and expert work of the OPCW
and its Technical Secretariat. As the implementer of
the global prohibition of chemical weapons, the OPCW,
including its Investigation and Identification Team, the
Fact-Finding Mission and the Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT), plays a vital role in ensuring the complete
elimination of all chemical weapons in Syria. Let me
assure the Director-General of Malta’s full confidence
in the organization.
Since our meeting last month (see S/PV.9235),
the Investigation and Identification Team published
its third report, concluding that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that the Syrian Arab Air Force
was the perpetrator of the chemical-weapon attack in
Douma on 7 April 2018, killing 43 people and affecting
dozens more. This represents the ninth occasion,
thus far, that OPCW and joint United Nations-OPCW
investigations have concluded that Syria used chemical
weapons against its own people. That is unconscionable
and deeply concerning.
This latest report is clear on its methodology and
findings, adhering to best practices of international
fact-finding bodies and commissions of investigation
and to applicable OPCW procedures, including on
chain of custody. The IIT was unable to obtain any
concrete information supporting lines of inquiry and
scenarios suggested by Syria and its allies despite
thorough investigations.
The report demonstrates Syria’s continued failure
to fully cooperate with the OPCW. Malta regrets that

23-0363421/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian authorities failed to grant access to the sites
of the incident despite Syria’s obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013). That follows an unfortunate pattern of behaviour
by Syria on this file.
We regret to note that the list of pending declarations
and other documents requested by the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) since 2019 has not yet been
provided by the Syrian Arab Republic, and that the
declaration submitted is still considered inaccurate and
incomplete. Malta welcomes the Technical Secretariat’s
initiative in sending a reduced DAT team to Syria, and
we look forward to reading the next DAT report.
On the proposed meeting between the DirectorGeneral and Foreign Minister Mekdad, Malta hopes
that the resumed communication between focal points
will lead to progress so that the meeting can finally
take place.
Malta firmly believes in the universalization of the
global norm on the prohibition of chemical weapons,
underpinned by the Chemical Weapons Convention.
It goes without saying that there can never be a
justification for their use. The Security Council must
uphold the international ban on the use of chemical
weapons. Those who use those abhorrent weapons must
be held accountable.
We call on Syria to cooperate with the OPCW
and to present the necessary assurances on its
chemical weapons programme, in accordance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. That is the only
way in which the world can be assured that Syria’s
chemical weapons programme has been completely and
verifiably eliminated.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Arias to respond to comments
and questions raised.
Mr. Arias: It was said that the briefing was empty.
Everything is related to a report that has 124 pages,
which is comprehensive, extensive and accurate, and the
statements by the representatives of France, the United
Kingdom, the United Arab Emirates, Japan, Ecuador,
Switzerland, Ghana, Brazil, Albania, China and the
United States of America demonstrate that the meeting
is truly substantive. A certain ambassador questioned
the responsibility of the Director-General. I want to
say that the Director-General is delivering, but he is
22/28

07/02/2023

delivering on the basis of the mandates that he received,
together with his team. The mandates are given by the
policy-making organs; they are not received from a
single ambassador or Permanent Representative.
My so-called predecessor was mentioned. The
delegation said that Mr. Bustani was my predecessor.
Mr. Bustani was the Director-General who left the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) 21 years ago, and he has no knowledge of the
substantive affairs with which we are currently dealing
at the Organization.
With regard to my briefings to the Security Council,
it is always a great pleasure for me to speak before the
Security Council. I have addressed it five times. This
is the fifth time that I have been here in four and a
half years. My predecessors were never at the Security
Council as frequently. But, when I address the Security
Council, it is when there is something really new and
substantive that can complete the very good reports
and very good briefings given on monthly basis by the
High Representative.
Let us now turn to more substantive questions.
The legality and legitimacy of the Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT) have been called into question.
Article VIII, paragraph 19, of the Chemical Weapons
Convention provides that the Conference of the States
Parties shall consider any questions, matters or issues
within the scope of the Convention. It also provides
that the Conference may make recommendations and
take decisions on such questions, matters or issues
raised by a State party or brought to its attention by
the Executive Council, and the Conference can do that
on its own authority. It is for the Conference to decide
on its own competence, as set out in rule 64 of its rules
of procedure.
The decision adopted on 27 June 2018, on the
basis of which the IIT was established, was adopted by
the Conference in accordance with the rules that are
clearly set out in the Convention and the Conference
rules related to the procedure. It was adopted by a vote
of member States. I recall that there are 193 States
members of the OPCW. As was mentioned here several
times, the decision was adopted in line with a very wellestablished position of the international community,
namely, that the perpetrators of the use of chemical
weapons must be held accountable.
Subsequent to the adoption of that decision, the
Technical Secretariat carried out the mandate entrusted
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9255

to it under the Convention and by the Conference.
Accordingly, the Technical Secretariat will continue
to implement the mandates that it receives, because
the role of the Technical Secretariat is not to interpret
or evaluate the decisions of the Conference or the
Executive Council. The role of the Technical Secretariat
is to implement them in the best way that we can, and
that is what we do.

Technical Secretariat cannot bend the facts we find
to accommodate some people’s or States’ perceptions
of reality. We work only on the basis of facts. On the
other hand, it is very clear that we work on the basis of
reasonable grounds to believe. The theories that have
been discarded were discarded because we found that
there were no reasonable grounds to believe that any
other hypothesis put forward so far was credible.

The decision was adopted according to the rules.
The IIT was set up by the Technical Secretariat
according to the rules. I must recall that any decision
of the Conference or the Executive Council of the
OPCW is legally binding for both States parties and
the Technical Secretariat. That is in relation to the
legitimacy of the OPCW.

Once and for all, it is clear that the concept of
reasonable grounds to believe is the standard approach
used by international investigative bodies. I have in
front of me a list of at least 20 international bodies that
use the same method — the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine; the International
Commission of Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia;
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and the Independent Fact-Finding Mission
on Libya. I can continue reading. I can give the Council
a copy of the text I have, but the most interesting
thing is that, among other information from important
legislation and organizations, I have here articles 376
and 431.1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation,
which also refer to reasonable grounds to believe in
cases of inquiries of investigations. That is the standard
method, and the method we have been using.

The methodology of the IIT regarding its
investigations was also called into question. Ambassador
Oñate Laborde will complete my information, but I
want to say something that must be said here in the
Chamber. The methods of the IIT follow the highest
standards regarding the procedures generally accepted
by international organizations and best practices
of fact-finding bodies and commissions of inquiry.
We follow the method of corroboration. But what is
corroboration? I want to clarify what corroboration is
in the investigation of an international case.
In the context of the work of the IIT, and, more
generally, in all the units of the Technical Secretariat
concerned, the definition of corroboration is the action
of confirming whether information of diverse natures
and origins supports a finding, theory or statement. It is
about adding support and credibility to such findings,
or to an idea previously presented. Corroboration
also takes place in the context of supporting elements
already previously supported or confirmed by other
means. Ambassador Oñate Laborde already mentioned
that in his briefing. The IIT works on the basis of that
method. Together with his team, he has been gathering
as much information as possible, and the IIT has indeed
gained access to a great deal of information of diverse
natures and origins in the course of almost two years
of investigation. The IIT has assessed the credibility
and authenticity of that information and has analysed
and studied it, supported by the best experts. It finally
identified when such corroboration, as just defined,
could take place, and that is the only way to investigate.
Sometimes the idea of reasonable grounds to
believe has also been questioned. I have to say that the

During this meeting, the work of the IIT and the
Technical Secretariat has been put in question. It was
said that the work was falsified and that we produce
lies, and so forth. I have to react to what I heard from
one delegation. We read the comments, and we listen
attentively to what is said. In all the documents of the
Technical Secretariat, no one will ever find a single
inappropriate comment with regard to any person,
State or institution. We respect everybody. In all our
documents, it can be seen that we read, we listen,
we analyse, we report and, accordingly, respecting
everybody, we deliver. It is very unfortunate that this
is not always reciprocated. I want to tell the Security
Council that I cannot and will not accept personal
discourtesies of the kind I have heard today in this
Chamber and read in the past. It is important for the
Council to know that I am very proud of the Technical
Secretariat’s members and their work. And in this
instance, I am particularly satisfied with the team
led by Ambassador Oñate-Laborde, a high-ranking
diplomat and lawyer. Perhaps he would like to complete
the discussion of my methodology.

23-0363423/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I am sorry, Mr. Director-General,
but the questions were posed to you, Sir, and I therefore
feel that it is you who should complete the replies. If
you are done with responding to the questions, I will
give the floor to other Council members who have
requested it.
Mr. Arias: I do not mind continuing to respond.
With regard to the question concerning the two
yellow cylinders found in Douma and the different
hypotheses that have been put on the table, I took
notes on the question and can respond. As Council
members know, the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) was unable to access the site of the two
locations of the incident in Douma. Despite resolution
2118 (2013) — which states in paragraph 7 that the
Security Council decides that the Syrian Arab Republic
shall cooperate fully with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
United Nations by providing their personnel with
immediate and unfettered access to and the right to
inspect all sites in discharging their functions — the
IIT could not access the sites because the Syrian Arab
Republic did not issue the team members’ visas. That
means that the IIT had to work on the basis of other
information. We have pictures, but we should say that
we had a lot of information because of the fact that the
mission had access to the site just about three weeks
after the incident, when it took more than 100 samples
and many photos and videos.
On 9 July 2021, the Syrian Arab Republic informed
the Technical Secretariat that the two cylinders had
been destroyed. They were destroyed 60 kilometres
from the place where the OPCW inspectors had
deposited them in the custody of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The IIT requested information related to the
destruction, including why those two cylinders were
located 60 kilometres away — far away — from the
place where they had been deposited and sealed with
the agreement that the cylinders would not be touched,
unsealed or removed except with the written permission
of the Technical Secretariat.
Since we could not access the site, but did have access
to a lot of information, the IIT decided to work on that
information. The information was basically imagery
and the expertise of top institutions and persons in a
number of places. The images we had were subjected to
imagery analysis to obtain the metadata extraction and
corroboration of that metadata extraction by several
24/28

07/02/2023

different experts. Three munitions specialists were
consulted, and a specialized forensic institute was in
charge of conducting the study.
I should say that similar cylinders were found in
the incidents in Latamenah, an attack that as Council
members know took place on 25 March 2017, and
in Saraqib, on 4 February 2018. Those incidents
are related to the first and second report of the IIT.
The cylinders are very similar because the attack,
logistically speaking, was similar. At location 2, which
is the building where most of the people were and where
the 43 fatalities occurred, the valve of the cylinder
ruptured and released chlorine gas in big quantities in
a very short period of time. At location 4, the valve of
the cylinder did not rupture, and the cylinder released
the gas more slowly.
What can we see from the results of the study
of the cylinders at location 2? The cylinder was
visibly deformed. The cylinder was blackened by
soot. Immediately after the incident, part of it was
white-coloured, and the following day it was yellow.
The metal cradles attached to the cylinder were
detached and very corroded. Two circular metal
plates are visible in the photos. One was recovered
by the Fact-Finding Mission. Why is everything I
said relevant? How do we explain those observations?
The deformation of the cylinder is due to the strong
impact against the top of the building. The black soot
was caused by the fire that ignited after the incident.
The white colouration that could be seen in the first
photos that we have of the cylinder was formed by
frost on its surface, which is consistent with the autorefrigeration phenomenon, having occurred upon the
rapid release of a liquefied gas from the cylinder. The
white colouration disappeared the next day, uncovering
the original yellow colouration. It is a very well-known
phenomenon. The metal cradles were detached upon
impact and suffered heavy corrosion as a consequence
of the released chlorine gas, which is highly corrosive
to metals.
At location 4, the other building that was inhabited,
the cylinder and the cradle showed deformations that
were studied and underwent calculations through
dynamic simulations by experts. The cradle was
still attached and was of the same design as that at
location 2, and was also similar in design to the those
in the previous incidents I already mentioned. The
relatively faster degradation of the cradle indicates
that a corrosive chemical substance remained on site
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

for a period of time, indicating that the valve was
not ruptured and released the chlorine little by little.
The first instance of corrosion could not have been
caused by natural humidity. It took place at a slower
rate than at location 2, through the slow release of gas
from the cylinder. Both cylinders were designed with
multiple straps, handles and a set of wheels to facilitate
loading and unloading them from aircraft. They were
especially designed to be delivered by air. Mi-8 or Mi17 helicopters are particularly suitable for dropping
that kind of cylinder. They have a large cargo bay, and
the cylinders can be easily pushed out.
Let us turn to the hypotheses that, as some have
proposed, the cylinders were delivered by surface,
manually placed or launched from adjacent buildings.
Why have those three hypotheses been discarded —
The President: I am very sorry. We have
interpretation only until 1 p.m. We have other members
who need to speak. We very much appreciate the
technical replies that Mr. Arias is giving us. But I think
that we have gotten the gist of the fact that he has ample
information and evidence to substantiate the claims of
the report of the Investigation and Identification Team.
I think that perhaps they should be sent to the Security
Council, which we can share.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to once again state that, despite
Mr. Arias’ detailed explanations in the course of this
meeting today, he has continued to fail to provide a
substantive answer to any of the questions asked not
just by us, but also by the community of experts who
are outraged by the unprecedented violations of the
work of the Technical Secretariat of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
We have not heard anything except assurances of
the highest standards of the OPCW investigations.
I wonder whether Mr. Arias can differentiate the
information that the OPCW was provided by the White
Helmets from the evidence first collected by the Douma
inspectors and subsequently rejected by the OPCW
Technical Secretariat, which was ordered to rewrite its
initial report.
The situation involving the fabrications of the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission report on Douma, including the
sanctions against the inspectors who were not afraid
of telling the truth, remains a stain on the reputation

S/PV.9255

of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. We have once again seen today that the
Director-General has nothing to say when confronted
by glaring facts. The Syrian chemical dossier, not least
because of him, is becoming a vivid example of, and
a synonym for, lies, fabrications and settling political
scores on behalf of Western States, which are being
served obediently by the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
We have seen that very clearly once again today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
wish you every success. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Japan,
for his efforts during his country’s presidency of the
Council last month.
I would like to address my thanks and appreciation
to the Member States that have expressed their
condolences to the Government and the people of the
Syrian Arab Republic for the victims of the devastating
earthquake that hit many Syrian cities early Monday
morning. The Government of my country has called on
the States Members of the United Nations to support
the Syrian people and the Government’s efforts to
address that humanitarian disaster, in terms of search
and rescue or providing emergency food and medication
assistance. Time is of the essence, and urgent assistance
will save many lives.
The Syrian Arab Republic took a strategic decision
in 2013 to join the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) and completely destroyed its stockpile of
those weapons in record time, despite the difficult
circumstances it was going through. The United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) confirmed that.
The Syrian Arab Republic has cooperated openly
and transparently with the OPCW, facilitated the visits
of its various teams and was keen to work with it in
order to correct its wrong working methods that affected
the credibility of its reports and distanced it from the
professional role and technical mandate entrusted to it
by the CWC.
During a significant part of this meeting, the report
of the so-called Investigation and Identification Team

23-0363425/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

(IIT) on the alleged incident in Douma was addressed.
My delegation would like therefore to clarify its position
as follows.
First, the Syrian Arab Republic has consistently and
repeatedly affirmed its firm position of condemning the
use of chemical weapons by anyone, anytime, anywhere
and under any circumstances.
Second, immediately after claims of an alleged use
of chemical weapons in Douma on 17 April 2018, the
Syrian Arab Republic requested the Director-General of
the OPCW to send a Fact-Finding Mission to investigate
that incident. However, its arrival to Damascus was
delayed for a whole week for unknown reasons.
Third, on 26 April 2018, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Russian Federation brought 17 witnesses from
the site of the incident in the city of Douma to the
OPCW’s headquarter at The Hague to testify about that
alleged chemical attack. At a press conference, they
refuted all the allegations that had been fabricated by
terrorist groups and their supporters, stressing that they
were all staged allegations. However, the Fact-Finding
Mission did not interview them and their testimonies
were not heard.
Fourth, in the same context, many academics,
independent military experts and specialists from the
OPCW, such as Mr. José Bustani, the first DirectorGeneral of the Organization, and inspector Ian
Henderson, who led the team that investigated the
Douma incident, as well as many others, provided
accurate scientific analysis and professionally refuted
the conclusions contained in the report of the FactFinding Mission on the alleged Douma incident and
proved that the report was unprofessional, biased
and unfair.
Fifth, the Syrian Arab Republic had stressed that
the Fact-Finding Mission’s incorrect and unprofessional
approach to the Douma incident would naturally lead
to erroneous conclusions. Unfortunately, the FactFinding Mission did not rectify the incorrect and
unprofessional working methods that it followed during
its investigation despite all the calls for it to adhere
to the rules stipulated in the CWC and the terms of
reference agreed with Syria. The collection of evidence
without the slightest level of credibility, the samples
without a legal chain of custody and the reliance on
suspicious open sources and fabricated and misleading
information provided by terrorist organizations and
their affiliates — namely, the White Helmets, who are
26/28

07/02/2023

sponsored by Western intelligence services — cannot
constitute a scientific or professional basis and cannot
lead to objective conclusions. Mr. Arias said that some
samples had been collected and some samples had been
received. Does that reflect the provisions of the CWC,
which he is entrusted to implement? He used the term
“highest standards and best practices”. Does that phrase
exist in the Convention? Where did he get it from?
Sixth, the decision adopted on 27 June 2018 by the
fourth special session of the Conference of the States
Parties to the CWC, according to which the so-called IIT
was established, constituted a dangerous turning point in
the history of the OPCW, clearly reflecting the colossal
politicization carried out by the United States and its
Western allies, pushing the technical organization into
a political labyrinth that has undermined its credibility.
That decision, which was supported by less than half
of the OPCW member States — only 82 out of 193
countries — following the flagrant manipulation of the
provisions of the CWC and the clear infringement of its
provisions by attributing responsibility not stipulated
in the Convention, has made the establishment of
the IIT illegitimate. Accordingly, the Syrian Arab
Republic and other countries announced that they do
not recognize that illegitimate Team and therefore do
not recognize its reports.
Seventh, the so-called IIT took years to inform
us of a conclusion identical to the accusations that the
countries of the tripartite aggression against Syria,
namely, the United States, France and the United
Kingdom, levelled only hours after the fabrication of the
alleged incident in Douma. They used the incident as a
pretext for acts of aggression on several military and
civilian sites in Syria and to impose more sanctions and
an unjust siege on the Syrian people. That aggression
clearly demonstrates that the alleged Douma incident
is the product of a plot invented by those countries to
strike the Syrian Arab Army forces at a time when
the latter was making progress in its battle against
terrorism by targeting terrorists’ cells and fortifications
with focused and accurate strikes using its conventional
weapons. Therefore, the report of the IIT was issued
only to justify the aggression of those three countries
against Syria on 24 April 2018, and that explains the
applause and welcome with which those three countries
received the report in today’s meeting.
The Syrian Arab Republic stresses its
non-recognition of the so-called IIT and its reports.
We categorically reject those reports, including their
23-03634

07/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

erroneous conclusions. We consider the issuance of the
IIT report as yet another confirmation of the continued
politicization of that dossier by the United States and its
Western allies and their manipulation of such reports to
serve their agendas.
Twenty years ago, and specifically on 5 February
2003, Colin Powell, the United States Secretary of State
at that time, was in this Chamber to play a theatrical role
in a play of deception prepared in advance to justify the
United States invasion of Iraq under the pretext of its
possession of weapons of mass destruction. It turned
out later that all of that was just baseless lies, and
Mr. Powell himself described what he said before the
Council as a “disgrace”.
Today is similar to that day — the same theatrics, the
same lies and the same mastermind — but this time the
target is Syria, under a similar pretext of it possessing
and using chemical weapons. Therefore, the world must
learn from the lessons of the past, and not allow the
United States and its allies to play such a misleading
game once again. The crimes committed by the United
States in Iraq are incontestable, and that is why we say
to those who talk about accountability and get excited
about it that they should demand that the United States
be held accountable for those crimes. We wanted them
to have the courage to demand accountability for the
countries that provided all forms of support to terrorist
organizations in Syria and enabled them to possess and
use toxic weapons and chemicals. They should have the
same enthusiasm to hold the United States of America
accountable for the crimes it has committed against
the Syrian people and the destruction by its planes of
Syrian cities over the heads of their residents.
Before concluding my statement, I would like
to address the Director-General, Mr. Arias, who
dedicated one third of his statement to talk about
accountability, and ask the following: who entrusted
him with implementing that task, and what provision
in the Convention mandated him to carry out that task?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate Malta on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and acknowledge
Japan for the successful completion of its presidency
in January.

S/PV.9255

We express our sincere condolences to the
Governments and the people of Türkiye and Syria for
the devastating earthquake that struck both countries.
Our thoughts are with our brothers and sisters in
both countries who have been devastated by that
tragic earthquake.
We welcome the presence of Mrs. Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, as well
as Mr. Arias, Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), at
today’s meeting.
As the main victim of chemical weapons in
contemporary history, Iran strongly condemns the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, under any
circumstances. The use of such weapons and other
types of weapons of mass destruction is a crime against
humanity and a blatant violation of international law.
The use of chemical weapons is a source of great
tragedy, as our people have experienced its devastating
effects first-hand. During the eight-year war imposed
by Saddam’s regime on Iran, some Western countries
either remained silent or actively supported the
systematic use of chemical weapons against the Iranian
people by supplying and providing such weapons of
mass destruction to Saddam’s regime. Now those same
countries are manipulating the OPCW to further their
own political agendas, potentially misusing it and its
mechanisms in the case of Syria.
We are deeply concerned about the exploitation
and politicization of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the OPCW. The abuse of their processes by certain
Western States has caused division among Member
States, eroded the OPCW’s legitimacy and credibility
and weakened the trust in the multilateral disarmament
machinery. Such political exploitation is demonstrated
in the recent premeditated scenario against the Syrian
Arab Republic by certain Western States that have used
the illegal mandate of the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) for furthering their political goals. The IIT
report of 27 January, as similar reports before it, is
based on unauthorized sources and lacks the required
legal conclusions. It also disregards the observations
of the Syrian Government. Those flaws must not be
overlooked, but must be addressed responsibly in order
to ensure the integrity of OPCW reports.
We have stated time and again that technical issues
must be resolved collaboratively rather than through
political pressure, which has repeatedly proven to be

23-0363427/28

S/PV.9255

The situation in the Middle East

a failed strategy that jeopardizes the entire process
aimed at resolving outstanding issues. It is unfortunate
that the credible information provided by the Syrian
Government regarding the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups has been ignored by the OPCW.
Meanwhile, the Israeli regime, a non-party with a
clandestine weapons of mass destruction programme, is
being rewarded by certain Western countries. It is clear
that the timely consideration of the information could
have led to the elimination of terrorist groups, instead
of concealing their actions. That is especially true
considering the potential exposure of false allegations
made by some Western countries, which, in some cases,
resulted in military action against Syria.
The primary responsibility of the OPCW is to
destroy chemical weapons, as the first pillar of the
Convention, but its efforts are being hindered by the
ongoing delay by the United States, the only major
remaining possessor of those inhumane weapons. A
politically motivated approach by the organization will
divert attention from that urgent need and serve the
interests of the United States, a possessor State party.
Iran supports Syria and the OPCW in engaging
in constructive dialogue at the highest level and their
cooperation to resolve outstanding issues within a
specific time frame and, finally, close the file. To that
end, any investigation must be impartial, professional,
credible, objective and fully comply with the
Convention’s requirements and procedures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): Let me start by sincerely
thanking you, Madam President, and other Security
Council members, as well as Mrs. Nakamitsu, Mr. Arias
and Mr. Oñate-Laborde, for their expressions of
condolences, support and solidarity at this difficult time.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu,
Director-General Arias and Coordinator Oñate-Laborde
for their briefings. We commend the independence,
impartiality and professionalism upheld by the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW).

28/28

07/02/2023

The OPCW Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) was established with a mandate to identify
those responsible for the chemical weapons attacks
in Syria. Türkiye co-sponsored the decision granting
that mandate to the OPCW in 2018. Last month, in its
third report, the IIT concluded that the Syrian regime
was the perpetrator of the chlorine gas attack that
took place in Douma on 7 April 2018. That follows the
IIT’s two previous two, both of which confirmed the
responsibility of the regime in three chemical weapons
attacks in Latamenah in March 2017 and the chlorine
gas attack in Saraqib in February 2018.
The use of chemical weapons is a grave violation
of international law and unacceptable under any
circumstances. Türkiye strongly condemns the repeated
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We will continue to
support the efforts, first and foremost, of the United
Nations and the OPCW that are aimed at ensuring
accountability in Syria. That is also our collective
responsibility for the hundreds of innocent lives lost
due to the chemical weapons attacks in the country.
We have heard from High Representative Nakamitsu
that the outstanding issues in relation to the Syrian
regime’s initial and subsequent declarations persist. We
once again call on the Syrian regime to fully cooperate
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat and provide the
necessary information, as it is obligated to do so under
the Convention.
Lastly, at Council meetings held in recent months
under this agenda item, we have emphasized the
significance of continued regular consideration by the
Council of the Syrian chemical weapons programme.
The recent developments, including the third IIT
report, only reaffirm that necessity. Therefore, as a
neighbouring country, we urge the Council to maintain
this crucial item on its monthly calendar.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

23-03634
