V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/69 C of 24 July 1981 on renewable sources of energy
for human settlements,
Taking note, in this connection, of the Report of the
United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources
of Energy, 22 held at Nairobi from 10 to 21 August 1981,
l. Welcomes the contributions made by the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to the preparations for and success of the United Nations Conference
on New and Renewable Sources of Energy;
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements to take the appropriate
steps for the implementation of those recommendations of
the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable
Sources of Energy which are within the mandate of the
Centre.
84th plenary meeting
4 December 1981

C
MOBILIZATION OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES FOR THE UNITED
NATIONS CENTRE FOR HUMAN SETTLEMENTS (HABITAT)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/77 D of 5 December 1980, in
which it urgently appealed to all States and appropriate
financial institutions to make or to incr'.!ase their voluntary
contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human
Settlements Foundation in support of the activities of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat),
Noting the continued need for financial resources for the
full implementation of the projected activities of the Centre
under the work programme for the biennium 1982-1983 and
the draft medium-term plan for the period 1984-1989 approved by the Commission on Human Settlements at its
fourth session, 23
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/69 A of 24 July 1981, in particular paragraphs 4 and
5 thereof which refer to the need for adequate financing for
the projected activities of the Centre,
Expressing its appreciation to those Governments that
have so far made financial contributions to the activities of
the Centre,
Reiterates its urgent appeal to Member States to contribute and, if possible, to increase their contributions to the
United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation
in support of the activities of the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat) and appeals to those that have
not yet contributed, particularly developed countries and
other countries in a position to do so, also to make voluntary
contributions.
84th plenary meeting
4 December 1981

'36/73. Living conditions of the Palestinian people
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 24 and the relevant recommendations for na-

103

tional action25 adopted by Habitat: United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements,
Recalling also resolution 3, entitled "Living conditions
of the Palestinians in occupied territories'', contained in the
recommendations for international co-operation adopted by
Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, 26 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2026
(LXI) of 4 August 1976 and 2100 (LXlll) of 3 August 1977,
Recalling further its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 197 4, 31/ 110 of 16 December
1976, 32/171 of 19 December 1977, 33/110 of 18 December
1978, 34/113 of 14 December I 979 and 35/75 of 5 December 1980,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the living conditions of the Palestinian people; 27
2. Denounces Israel for refusing to allow the Group of
Experts on the Social and Economic Impact of the Israeli
Occupation on the Living Conditions of the Palestinian People in the Occupied Arab Territories 28 to visit the Palestinian
territories occupied by Israel;
3. Condemns Israel for the deteriorating living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories;
4. Affirms that the elimination of the Israeli occupation
is a prerequisite for the social and economic development
of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories;
5. Recognizes the need for a comprehensive report on
the deterioration of the social and economic conditions of
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive and analytical report on the deteriorating living
conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories and to submit it to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session, through the Economic and Social Council;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
above-mentioned report, to consult and co-operate with the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the
Palestinian people.
84th plenary meeting
4 December 1981

36/74.

Comprehensive outline of a world survey on the
role of women in development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December I 974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of I6 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling further the provisions concerning the participation of women in development contained in the documents
adopted at the World Conference of the United Nations

22

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.1.24.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/36/8), annex I, decisions 4/17 and 4/18.
23

24
Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements,
Vancouver, 3/ May-/ 1 June 1976 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. I.

2

Ibid., chap. II.
Ibid .. chap. III.
" A/36/260 and Add. 1-3
'" For the report of the Group of Experts. see A/35/533 and Corr. I,
annex I
'

16

104

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, 29
Recalling its resolution 35/78 of 5 December 1980 on the
effective mobilization and integration of women in development, in which it, inter alia, called for the preparation
of a comprehensive and detailed outline for an interdisciplinary and multisectoral world survey on the role of women
in over-all development,
Bearing in mind the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, in particular the special provisions relating to the integration of
women in over-all development with a view to securing
women's equal participation both as agents and as beneficiaries in all sectors and at all levels of the development
process,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on a
comprehensive outline of a world survey on the role of
women in development, 30
1. Emphasizes the need for a multisectoral and interdisciplinary survey on the role of women in development;
2. Recommends that the survey should analyse the role
of women in relation to key developmental issues as envisaged in the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, focusing in
particular on trade, agriculture, industry, energy, money
and finance, and science and technology;
3. Further recommends that, in its analysis, the survey
should cover:
(a) The present role of women as active agents of development in each sector;
(b) An assessment of the benefits accruing to women
as a result of their participation in development, namely,
income, conditions of work, and decision-making;
(c) Ways and means of improving women's role as
agents and beneficiaries of development at the national,
regional and international levels;
(d) The potential impact of such improvements on the
achievement of over-all development goals;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, in preparing the survey, to give due attention to the problems and requirements
of women in every region and to the contribution of women
to the achievement of goals of self-reliance and to economic
and technical co-operation among developing countries;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General to include in the
survey an overview analysing interrelationships among key
developmental issues with regard to women's current and
future roles in development with a view to providing a basis
for future action for women's effective mobilization and
integration in development;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare the survey
in close collaboration and co-operation with the appropriate
organizations of the United Nations system and with contributions from all organs and organizations concerned of
the United Nations system, including the regional commissions and the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women, as well as national institutions having expertise on this subject;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a
progress report on the preparation of the survey to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session and to submit the
survey in its final form to the Assembly at its thirty-ninth
session.
84th plenary meeting
4 December 1981
29
See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14 to 30 Jul_v
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum).

chap. I.
30 A/36/590.

'36/75.

United Nations Institute for Training and
Research
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
Recalling its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic cooperation,
Recalling further its resolutions 35/53 A and B of 5 December 1980 on the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research,
Acknowledging the value of the research and the studies
on the future undertaken by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research in assisting, through training and
other services within its mandate, members of permanent
missions to the United Nations and other national officials
concerned with the work of the United Nations,
I. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research 31
and of his introductory statement on 2 October 1981 ;32
2. Welcomes the emphasis on, and urges the continuation of, the concentration of the work of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research in the sphere of
economic and social training and research and the inclusion
of specific projects on the problems that exist in the areas
identified by the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh
special sessions and in the relevant decisions adopted by the
Assembly at its twenty-ninth and subsequent sessions, taking into consideration the statements on the programme of
work of the Institute made at the present session;
3. Calls upon the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research to continue to
rationalize the activities of the Institute and, in this context,
to seek further co-ordination of its research programme with
similar activities of other institutions, within and outside
the United Nations system, and to continue to present research results, as far as possible, in a manner relevant to
policy making;
4. Welcomes also, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 35/53 B, the steps taken so far by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research to enhance its
effectiveness, to reduce its costs and to increase its resources, and calls upon the Institute to organize its programme of work and activities and to adjust its administrative
costs so as to ensure that, as from 1982, estimated expenditure does not exceed estimated revenue;
5. Urges all States that have not yet contributed to
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to
do so, and calls upon all donor countries, especially those
that are not contributing at a level commensurate with their
capacity, to increase their voluntary contributions in order
to meet the needs of the Institute.
84th plenary meeting
4 December /981

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/36114 and Corr. I.)
"/bid., Thirty-sixth Session. Second Committee, 6th meeling, paras.
2R-n.
