VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

ternational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international ecm1omic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 35/136 of 11 December 1980
and 361126 of 14 December 1981 , in which it endorsed the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Womf .,, 57
Affirming the role of the i.. rntre for Social Development
and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as the focal point
for the organizations of the United Nations system with
regard to activities undertaken in implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling also its resolution 36/ 128 of 14 December 1981
on the establishment of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1982/27 of 4 May 1982 concerning the programmes and activities of the Institute,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for
Women, 59 on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women6() and
on the programmes and activities of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women, 61
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women; 62
2. Welcomes the steps taken by Governments and by
the organizations of the United Nations system, including
the regional commissions, to achieve progress towards the
effective realization of the objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
3. Calls upon Governments, the organizations of the
United Nations system, including the regional commissions,
intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations to pay increased attention to the need to take practical
measures to implement the relevant recommendations of the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women and, in particular, to expand
technical co-operation activities which would ensure women's full and equal participation, as agents and as beneficiaries, in all sectors and at all levels of development;
4. Emphasizes the continuing role of the Centre for
Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs as the focal
point for the organizations of the United Nations system
with regard to activities undertaken in implementation of
the Programme of Action;
5. Notes with satisfaction the contribution made by the
Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women
to the implementation of the Programme of Action, mainly
through innovative and experimental projects at the grassroots level;
6. Notes with satisfaction the commencement of the
work of the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women and invites it to continue
contributing to the objectives of the Decade;
1. Notes with satisfaction that, as at I November 1982,
forty-five Member States had ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women; 63
•• Ai37/421.
A/37/349 and Add. I.
61 F11982/33.
62 A/37/458 and Add. I.
63 Resolution 34/180, annex.

60

191

8. Invites all States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention;
9. Welcomes the commencement of the work of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, which held its first session at Vienna from 18 to
22 October 1982;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the steps taken
to implement the present resolution;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the status
of the Convention;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-eighth session the item entitled "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace".
90th plenary meeting
3 December /982

37/59.

Improvement of the situation of women in rural
areas

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling its resolution 35/136 of 11 December 1980, in
which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Second
Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 57
Reaffirming the importance attached in the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade58 to the need to improve the status of women
and ensure their full participation in the development process
as agents and beneficiaries of development,
Reaffirming further the importance attached in the Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations
Decade for Women, as well as in the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 63
to the need to improve the situation of women in rural areas
in many parts of the world,
Recalling the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, 64 particularly with
regard to the integration of women in rural development,
Bearing in mind that a majority of women, particularly
in developing countries, live and work in rural areas and
suffer most from the exploitation of agricultural labour, in
particular by transnational corporations,
Convinced that the eradication of apartheid, all forms of
racial discrimination, colonialism, neo-colonialism, aggression and foreign occupation and domination is essential to
the further improvement of the situation of rural women,
Considering that the strengthening of international peace
and co-operation is one of the most important conditions
for further improving the situation of rural women,
Convinced also that the effective implementation of fundamental human rights is essential for the improvement of
the situation of rural women,
Recognizing the urgent need to take additional appropriate
measures aimed at further improving the situation of women
in rural areas,
Recognizing also the importance of exchanging experiences in this field among States,
64 See Report of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development. Rome. /2-20 Julv 1979 (WCARRD/REP).

192

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

1. Calls upon Member States to take additional appropriate measures for further improving the economic and
social conditions of women in rural areas;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, the Commission on the Status of Women, the regional commissions
and other bodies of the United Nations system, in particular
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, to devote greater attention to the problem of elevating the status of rural women;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, within the
framework of the integrated reporting system on the status
of women which the Economic and Social Council, in its
resolution 1980/38 of 2 May 1980, decided to continue, a
comprehensive report containing the observations and comments received from Governments on national experience
relating to the improvement of the situation of women in
rural areas, paying special attention to such aspects as social
insurance, mother and child care, health facilities, training,
education and employment opportunities;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to consider holding, within the framework of the Programme of Action for
the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women,
as a matter of priority, an interregional seminar on national
experience relating to the improvement of the situation of
women in rural areas, with special emphasis on the problems
of developing countries;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, through
the Commission on the Status of Women and the Economic
and Social Council, the report requested in paragraph 3
above.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/60.

Preparations for the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the
United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it endorsed, inter alia, the action proposals
contained in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 65
Recalling its resolution 3490 (XXX) of 12 December
1975, in which it expressed its conviction that a comprehensive and thorough review and appraisal of progress made
in meeting the goals of- the World Plan of Action was of
crucial importance for the success of the Plan and recognized
that the results of the implementation of the Plan would
contribute to the consideration of the review and appraisal
of the International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade 66 and would consequently promote the role of women in the development
process,
Recalling also its resolution 35/136 of 11 December 1980,
in which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women 67 as
adopted at the World Conference of the United Nations
65
Repon of the World Conference of the International Women·s Year,
Mexico City, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.J), chap. II, sect. A.
06
Resolution 2626 (XXV).
61 Repon of the World Cor!ferenc,, of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen. /4-30 July /980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.J and corrigendum), chap.
I, sect. A.

Decade for Women, and decided to convene in 1985, at the
conclusion of the Decade, a World Conference to Review
and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women.
Recalling further that the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade68
stressed that the important set of measures to improve the
status of women, contained in the World Plan of Action
adopted at Mexico City in 1975, 65 and the important agreed
measures relating to the International Development Strategy
in the Programme of Action for the Second Half of the
United Nations Decade for Women, adopted at Copenhagen
in 1980, should be implemented,
Recalling its resolution 36/ I 26 of 14 December 1981, in
which it requested the Commission on the Status of Women,
at its session to be held in 1982, to give priority to the
question of the preparations for the Conference,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council, at its first
regular session of 1982, considered the recommendations
of the Commission on the Status of Women as set forth in
its report69 and adopted, on 4 May 1982, resolution 1982/
26 on the preparations for the Conference,
Bearing in mind all its relevant resolutions and decisions
regarding preparations for special conferences, in particular
its resolution 33/189 of 29 January 1979,
I . Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/26 on the preparations for the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women, to be held in 1985;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social
Council that the Commission on the Status of Women should
be the preparatory body for the Conference and that it should
operate on the basis of consensus;
3. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to invite the widest possible participation by States
in the preparatory meetings for the Conference and expresses
the hope that they will designate representatives who will
have the background and experience in the area of women
and development;
4. Notes that the first session of the Commission on the
Status of Women as the preparatory body of the Conference
is to be held at Vienna from 23 February to 4 March 1983
and that the report on that session will be considered by
the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1983;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 33/189 when
appointing the Secretary-General of the Conference;
6. Decides to consider at its thirty-eighth session the
recommendations of the Economic and Social Council at its
first regular session of 1983 based on the report of the first
session of the Commission on the Status of Women as the
preparatory body for the Conference, together with the observations, if any, of the Secretary-General;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the progress made in the preparation
of a world survey on the role of women in development 70
and recommends that the survey should be submitted to the
Conference;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "Preparations for the

"" Resolution _,5156, annex.
69
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1982, Supplement No. 4 (E/J9g2/14)
10 N37/381.
