UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

rd

MEETING:

4J

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2373) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . 1
Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 from the Charge d’ Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Panama to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15145) . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SIPV .2373

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supple~~zenrs of the Official Records oJ’ the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resoWions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2373rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
Pwsicknt:

Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

de NANTEUIL

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
United States of
America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2373)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Que.stion concerning the situation in the region of
the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 from the Charg&
d’Affaires a-i. of the Permanent Mission of
Panama to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/ 15 145)
The mreeting was called to order at 5.45 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agerida was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Faikialnd Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 from the ChargC d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Panama to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15145)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In accordance with decisions taken at the previous
meeting:3 on this item [2371st and 2372nd meetings],
I invite the representative of Argentina to take a place
at the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Brazil and Honduras to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitatiorl of the President, Mr. Ros (Argentina) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Co&a da
Costa (Brazil) arid Mr. Lobo (Honduras) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have received copies of two
letters dated 4 June from the representative of Argen-

4 June 1982, at 4 p.m.
tina to the President of the Council. These two letters
will be issued as documents S/l5159 and S/1.5160.
3. I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution in
document S/15156/Rev.2, submitted by Panama and
Spain.
4. Before doing so, I shall call on those representatives who wish to make statements before the voting.
5. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): The
situation facing the Council this afternoon is straightforward. If Argentina had not invaded the Falkland
Islands at the beginning of April, there would be no
crisis and we would not be meeting today. If Argentina
had obeyed the mandatory demand in Council resolution 502 (1982) immediately to withdraw all its forces
from the Falkland Islands, the crisis would have
passed and we would not be meeting today.

6. But Argentina did invade the islands and defied
the mandatory demand of the Council to withdraw.
In these circumstances, it would have been perfectly
legitimate
for my Government to have taken the
attitude that the only course open to us was the
inherent right of self-defence, contained in Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations. But we did not.
Over many rounds of intensive negotiations, we did
everything in our power to bring about compliance
with the resolution by peaceful means. We showed
flexibility.
As the world will know from published
documents, we went as far as we could on 17 May to
achieve the peaceful implementation
of the resolution without
compromising
important
principles
which I have set out many times before the Council.
Our final proposals were comprehensively rejected
by the Government
of Argentina. My Government
then, naturally and rightly, took them off the table.
We then turned, under resolution 505 (1982), to try to
find acceptable conditions for a cease-fire, accompanied by the total withdrawal of Argentine forces, as
demanded by resolution 502 (1982). Again our efforts
were unsuccessful. The Government of Argentina
insisted on pre-conditions.
These were fully set out
by the representative of Argentina in the Council on
2 June [2371st meeting]. As I said at the time, acceptance of those pre-conditions would have led us back
into the morass of procrastination and evasion which
my Government
has experienced on the part of the
Government of Argentina over the last two months of
the most intensive negotiation.

7. At the beginning of the present debate, I circulated
informally
to delegations language which we could
have supported as appropriate to bring about an immediate cease-fire, linked inseparably to the immediate
and total withdrawal of all Argentine forces from the
Falkland Islands. I drew attention to these elements
in my statement to the Council on 2 June [ibid.].

has equally advocated a peaceful solution of the dispute and urged the two parties to continue active
negotiations. As we have stated before, Uganda fully
subscribes to both aspects of the position of the non- ;
aligned countries.
14. My delegation voted in favour of resolutions 502 ;
(1982) and 505 (1982) because of our well-known position against the use of force in international relations.
The use of force or the mechanism of war is contrary
to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations, which enjoins Member States to settle their
disputes by peaceful means.

8. The draft resolution before the Council today in
no way meets these criteria. There is no direct and
inseparable Iink between the cease-fire and immediate
Argentine withdrawal within a fixed time-limit.
The
wording of the draft resolution, without any shadow
of doubt, would enable Argentina to reopen the endless process of negotiation, thus leaving Argentine
armed forces in illegal occupation of parts of the
islands.

15.

I wish to express

my delegation’s
gratitude
for his untiring efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the present conflict, To
judge from his report of 21 May 12360th me&g),
substantial progress had been made towards narrowing the differences
between the two parties
before the breakdown of the negotiations. This in part
motivated the Council to give a further formal mandate to the Secretary-General
to continue his peace I
efforts. In his report to the Council at the beginning /
j
of this debate [2371sr meeting], the Secretary-General
stated:
to the Secretary-General

9. This is totally unacceptable to my Government
and my delegation will vote against the draft resolution
in document S/15156/Rev.2.
10. Mr. IRUMBA
(Uganda): Mr. President, I should
like, at the outset, to congratulate you most warmly
on your assumption of the high office of the presidency
of the Council. The month of May was a trying period
for the Council and for international
peace. Considering current international crises, the month of June
promises to be equally trying. We are confident that,
given your wisdom, your experience as a diplomat and
your political skill, you will conduct the deliberations
of the Council successfully. My delegation is happy to
see you, a representative of France, a country with
which my own country shares cordial and fruitful
relations, presiding over the business of the Council.

“It is my considered judgement that the positions
of the two parties do not offer the possibility of
developing at this time terms for a cease-fire which
would be mutually acceptable. In accordance with
the mandate given to me by resolution 505 (19821,
I shall, nevertheless, maintain close contact with
the parties if,an opportunity can be found in which
the exercise of my good offices can contribute to
bringing this tragic crisis to an end.” [S/lSlSl.]

11. I should also like to pay a very special tribute to
Mr. Ling Qing, of the People’s Republic of China,
for the skilful and dedicated manner in which he performed his duties as President of the Council last
month. It was a pleasure for my delegation to work
under his guidance.

16. It is sad that little progress has been achieved
since the adoption of resolution 505 (1982). On the
contrary, the war has continued, resulting in heavy
casualties on both sides. We regret that lives have
been lost and property damaged. As we stated on
24 May, it is our firm conviction that there is no alternative to negotiations.
Only through the mechanism
of negotiations
can a settlement emerge, one which
will preserve the national honour and prestige of each
party to the conflict. Even at this late hour, we still
appeal to both parties to cease all hostilities and to
resume negotiations.

12. On 3 April and 24 May [235&h and 2364th
meetings], my delegation made known its position
regarding the dispute between the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom over the Malvinas Islands.
Uganda is unequivocally
committed to the principles
of non-alignment
and is an active member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Our position
regarding this issue is consonant with the position of
the Movement contained in the Political Declaration
adopted by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, held at Lima in 1975;’ that position has been
affirmed at subsequent
ministerial
and summit
meetings,

17. The Security Council, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, has the primary role in
the maintenance
of international
peace and security.
What, then, should the Council do to fulfil its obli@
tions in the present circumstances? The Council Cannot remain indifferent while a war in which a great
deal of blood is being spilt and which continues to
claim many lives still rages on. Equally, my de&ation believes, the Council has a duty to see to it that iIS
resolutions are implemented.

13. With regard to the substance of the matter, the
non-aligned countries, without prejudice to the general principle of self-determination,
have recognized,
in the special and particular case of the Malvinas
Islands, the just claim of Argentina. The Movement

18. My delegation, in its attitude concerning the draft
resolution in document S/15156/Rev.2, will be guided
2

by the desire to bring about a cease-fire and to end the
suffering and loss of life, Equally, it will be guided by
the necessity for the Council to ensure the implementation
of its resolutions-in
this particular
instance, the implementation
of resolution 502 (1982)
in its entirety,

27. Secondly, we considered it wrong of Argentina
to try to resolve that dispute in its favour through the
use of force. That action was rightly rejected by the
Council in resolution 502 (1982) of 3 April. Ireland
voted for that resolution; we continue to support it
strongly, and we believe that it must be implemented.

19. We believe that the draft resolution addresses
itself to these concerns. The preambular paragraph
reaffirms the resolutions of the Council on this subject. Furthermore,
paragraph 1 calls for a cease-fire
to take place simultaneously
with the implementation
of resolution 502 (1982). Uganda will therefore vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

28. Thirdly, we know from the past how a dispute
escalates to a conflict, a conflict to a war, and a war
to a level which may escape all calculation. We dare
not risk this in our time. We believe it vital, therefore,
in any such case that the deadly process be halted.
This must be done at the earliest possible stage
because it becomes more difftcult at each successive
stage.

20. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Japan will vote in favour
of the dlraft resolution before us, with the understanding that Argentina will withdraw its military
forces from the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)
within a reasonable period of time.

29. Fourthly, we believe that this process, though
dangerous, is not wholly inexorable or inevitable. It
can be stopped, and it can be stopped without any
betrayal of principle if full and adequate use is made,
and made on a continuing basis, of those methods and
procedures which were evolved over a generation by
the international community and are now embodied in
a particular way in the United Nations.

21. My Government
is profoundly distressed at
the prospect of further bloodshed in the conflict over
the islands and therefore implores Argentina to comply
in good faith with the appeal of the Council to withdraw its forces.

30. Fifthly, if, on the other hand, this process which
I have described is not halted in any particular case,
then the dangers are great. Indeed, in the present
international
situation it is no exaggeration to say that
they could become incalculable.

22. Japan earnestly hopes that, with the withdrawal
of the Argentine forces from the islands and the resultant teirmination of the lamentable use of force in
the region, Argentina’s traditional ties of deep friendship with other countries will be strengthened in the
future.

31. This has been our approach throughout as the
conflict has grown and developed. I have summarized
it several times in the Council by saying that someone
must shotit “Stop!”
At the same time, I have always
emphasized
strongly Ireland’s continuing support
for resolution 502 (1982), which we see as an assertion
of the rule of law and not of force in international
relations.

23. Mr. DORR (Ireland): As I am speaking formally
in the Council for the first time since your assumption
of the presidency, Sir, I should like to offer you my
best wishes for the month ahead, my congratulations
and my promise of our support. I should like also to
offer my congratulations
and my thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing, of China, for the skilful,
patient, calm and wise way in which he directed out
proceedmgs during the previous month.

32. We began trying to say “Stop!” on 1 April,
when we joined in a call by the Council to both parties
not to use force [2345th meeting, pura. 741. We continued on 2 and 3 April in statements in the Council
[2349th and 2350th meetings] and in our vote for resolution 502 (1982), which called for an end to the
fighting,
Argentine
withdrawal and a negotiated
settIement.

24. In the two months since this issue first came to
the attention of the Council, we have seen an old
dispute escalate to a conflict, a conflict to a war. We
fear now to see a war, which is so far limited, become
an even g,reater tragedy, which could lead to greater
bitterness and mistrust and sow the seeds of continuing
conflict.

33. In early May, when other peace efforts seemed to
be at an end, we called for a meeting of the Council
[S//50.37]. We activated our request on 21 May
[2360th meeting], and on 25 May [2366th meeting] we
introduced a draft resolution in the hope that that
could bring an end to the fighting and a return to
negotiation.
That proposal in its original version
envisaged three steps in bringing the conflict to an
end and getting negotiations back on the rails.

25, Since the problem first came to the Council on
1 April, Ireland has tried consistently and constantly
to assert certain basic principles. I would identify five
points which form our attitude and which guide our
approach to the present draft resolution.
26. First, we are aware that the question of sovereignty over the islands has been in dispute and that it
has been subject to negotiation for some time. We
have expressed no position on the merits of that
dispute.

34. The first vital step, we felt, had to be taken by
the parties. In our original draft resolution [S/15/06],
therefore, we asked that they suspend hostilities for
3

the short period of 72 hours. While hostilities were
thus suspended, we envisaged that the SecretaryGeneral couId take a second step by working out with
both sides the practical details for a lasting cease-fire,
including possible United Nations observers.

would reaffirm resolutions 502 (1982) and 505 (1982),
spelling out one by one the provisions of resolution 502
(1982), calling the urgent attention of the parties to
their obligation under the Charter and requiring them
to implement those provisions fully and without delay.
We would, of course, also have requested the Secretary-General to maintain his mission of good offices
under resolution
505 (1982), and we would have
asked both Governments
to signify within a short
time period their acceptance of the provisions of that
resolution.

35. At a third stage, of course, we wanted the Secretary-General to resume his mediation efforts on the
larger issues with a new mandate from the Council.
36. In subsequent discussion with other members of
the Council, and in order to gain the widest possible
support, we modified this proposal. We removed the
request to the parties to take the first step by suspending hostilities for a short period. Ireland, together
with five non-aligned members of the Council, then
sponsored the modified version of our initial draft
resolution, which was adopted as resolution
505
(1982). We were aware that it placed a heavy burden
on the shoulders of the Secretary-General
precisely
because we were no longer asking the parties to
facilitate his efforts by taking the first step. In the
event, the Secretary-General
carried out his mandate with all his customary skill and dedication. We
nevertheless learned to our regret from his report
[Sl/SlSl] that the positions of the two parties did not
make it possible to work out a cease-fire,

42. In the event, Ireland did not press those ideas,
since Panama and Spain, as co-sponsors of the draft
resolution now before us, accepted certain amendments. We are pleased that they did so, and in our
view these amendments clearly link the full implementation of resolutions 502 (1982) and 505 (1982) to
the cease-fire which the Council calls for. For this
reason, we feel it right and necessary to vote in favour
of the present draft resolution.
43. Once again we say “Stop!”
We say this as we
have said it all along, while insisting on full commitment to the principles which we have upheld and for
which we have ah-eady voted in the Council. We lolow
well that there are difficulties. We know that there is
mistrust on both sides. And we do not wish to be
simplistic in our approach, But the negotiations so
skilfully
carried
out by the Secretary-General,
which are endorsed in resolution 505 (1982), offer
hope. Through them the principles we support can be
upheld and grievances can be addressed. Continuation
of the war until this climatic battle takes place can
bring only tragic loss and lasting bitterness.

37. And so the conflict continued. It has now reached
a stage where we may be within hours of a major
pitched battle between the opposing sides for possession of the main town on the islands. There has ah-eady
been much loss of life in this war. There is now a
serious and imminent danger that this loss of life will
greatly increase. Reports say that the land forces confronting each other number about 7,000 on each side
-a total of 14,000, which is more than eight times the
total population of the islands.

44. We will vote in favour of this draft resolution
because we want to say “Stop!” one last time. "Stop
before it is too late.”

38. Must a war which has already cost a great deal
in human life culminate in this major battle, which
threatens even greater bloodshed? For us the answer
is no, as it has been all along at every stage in the
escalation process. Even now we want to stay
“Stop!” The dispute should not have become a conflict through the initial use of force. The conflict
should not have become a war. The war must not now
become an even greater tragedy,

45.

Mr. NGUAYILA
MBELA
KALANDA
(Zaire)
j?om French): It is with great satisfaction, Sir, that my delegation congratulates YOU, a
representative of France, a country which has such
friendly relations with Zaire, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of June.

(it~letpreration

46. The delegation of Zaire wishes to take this Opportunity to pay a well-deserved tribute to Mr. Ling
Qing, of the People’s
Republic
of China, who
presided so competently
and so skilfully over the
work of the Council during May.

39. But does a call for an end to the fighting mean
abandoning the principles which we upheld so strongly
in early April and which are now embodied in resolutions 502 (1982) and SO5 (1982), for which we voted?
My delegation is sure that the answer is no. What
Ireland wants is both an end to the fighting and the
full implementation
of all of the provisions of resolutions 502 (1982) and 505 (1982).
40. That is the background
against
approach the present draft resolution.

which

47. From the beginning of the crisis in the South
Atlantic which has brought into conflict the United
Kingdom and the Argentine Republic, two countries
which maintain friendly relations with Zaire, we have
supported all efforts to reach a negotiated solution of
the conflict. Within this framework, Zaire wholeheartedly supported the two resolutions adopted by
the Council-resolutions
502 (1982) and 505 (1982)

we

41. My delegation, in discussions, had been considering a slightly different approach: a resolution which
4

-

negotiated soIution consistent with Council resolution 502 (1982). My delegation supports him fully in
his continued efforts to bring an end to the current
hostilities.

48. It is in this context that, pursuing the same goal,
Zaire supports the draft resolution presented by
Panama and Spain in document S/15156/Rev.2, in
order to put an end to the bloodshed and because it
calls on the two parties to implement resolutions 502
(1982) and 505 (1982).

54. When the Council met on 3 April [235&h meeting]
to consider the situation in the South Atlantic, it was
in the context of a specific act of aggression committed
by a State Member of the United Nations, an act that
was contrary to fundamental principles of its Charter
and of the international rule of law. That act was the
invasion by Argentina of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas), The Council adopted, as will be recalled,
resolution 502 (1982), the purpose of which was to
express in unequivocal terms condemnation of the use
of force in the settlement of disputes and at the same
time to elevate pacific settlement procedures.

49. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The Council will now vote on the draft resolution contained in document S/15156/Rev.2.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, Ireland, Japan, Panama, Poland,
Spain,. Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Zaire
Against:
United Kingdom
of Great Britain
Northern
Ireland, United States of America
AbstaMzg:

and
55. Guyana has already expressed its regret that
Argentina has not fulfilled the terms of that mandatory
resolution of the Council. Specifically, Argentina has
not shown a disposition to withdraw its armed forces
from the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), as required
by paragraph 2 of resolution 502 (1982). In effect,
Argentina’s non-fulfilment
of one of the fundamental
terms of the resolution is both the cause and consequence of the current level of armed hostility in the
South Atlantic.

France, Guyana, Jordan, Togo

The result of the vote was 9 in favour, 2 against
and 4 abstentions.
The draft resolution was not
udopted, the negative votes being those of permanent
members of the Council.
50. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I shaI1 now call on those representatives who have
asked to be allowed to make statements following the
voting.

56. Guyana profoundly regrets the mounting loss of
li.ves and the material damage that have followed the
escalating level of violence. Guyana believes that this
tragic waste was clearly avoidable. Guyana believes
in the transcendent virtue of peaceful, negotiated
settlement of disputes and situations of conflict.
Guyana deeply abhors the resort to the use of force.
That is why Guyana supported resolution SO2 (1982).
That is why we supported resolution 505 (1982).

51. Mr, KARRAN
(Guyana): First of all, I should
like to extend to you, Sir, my sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of June. Ybu have assumed the presidency at a time when there is every evidence of a busy
time ahead, but your demonstrated skill, experience
and wisd’om give us the assurance that you will guide
the work of the Council impartially and effectively in
this most difficult period.

57. Guyana, in principle and as a logical consequence
of its position, supports the call for a negotiated solution, In the specific case before us, however, my
delegation would have preferred to see an explicit link
between the putting into place of a cease-fire and a
clear statement of intent from Argentina regarding its
readiness to implement the requirement contained in
resolution 502 (1982) to withdraw its armed forces
from the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) within a
clearly defined time-frame.

52. I should like also to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative of the People’s Republic
of China., for the very calm and efficient manner in
which he conducted the business of the Council during
the montlh of May.
53. My delegation listened with great interest to the
interim report of the Secretary-General submitted to
the Council on 2 June [2371st meeting] and to his
account of his efforts to find an agreed formula for a
cease-fire. To him we pay a well-deserved tribute for
his untiring efforts in the cause of international peace
and security. None of us can doubt the difficult nature
of the task assigned to the Secretary-General by the
Council, but he has demonstrated his ability to pursue
resolutely a course in search of peace and with a view
to ending hostilities in the region of the Falkland
Islands (Islas Malvinas). We are indeed indebted to
him for his most commendable
efforts and for his
outstanding patience and devotion in his search for a

58. The draft resolution contained
S/15156/Rev.2 does not do that.

in document

59. It must not be seen at any stage that the Council
is condoning the use of force for the settlement of disputes. It was for that reason that my delegation was
forced to abstain on the draft resolution on which we
have just voted.
60. Mr. de PINIJ& (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish); We have been discussing the situation of the Malvinas Islands for more than two months and during
5

Argentine occupation of the Falklands. Phase two may
well end with British reoccupation of the Falklands.
Where will phase three end?

that time two resolutions, 502 (1982) and 505 (1X2),
have been adopted with the purpose of fulfilling the
responsibility
of the Council, striving to establish
peace and avoid any worsening of the conflict.

68. Affirmed in the vote of the majority today is the
will to negotiation and to peace. Affirmed in the veto
of my Government, to which I will return in a moment,
is the principle that force should not be allowed to
triumph.

61. In resolution 505 (1982), a formal mandate was
given to the Secretary-General
so that negotiations
that had been undertaken aImost from the beginning
of the conflict could proceed in order to achieve implementation of resolution 502 (1982) and put an end to
the hostilities.

]
i
i
ii

69. One of my sons handed me this morning a poem t
of another man who disapproves of Argentina’s force- 1
ful act against the Malvinas Islands. In some lines in 1
“An English Poem”,
the great Argentine writer
Borges wrote:

62. When, in his interim report to the Council submitted on 2 June [237/st !neerirtg], the SecretaryGeneral said that the positions of the two parties did
not offer the possibility for a cease-fire as a prior
condition for the settlement of the conflict, the Council again shouldered its responsibility, and, with a view
to avoiding the continuance of the hostilities with the
attendant tragic loss of life, my delegation, together
with the delegation of Panama, submitted a draft resolution which, in successive stages, has been amended
to arrive at a wording that would be compatible with
the points of view of the largest number of Council
members.

“I offer you my ancestors, my dead men, the
ghosts that living men have honoured in marble, my t
father’s father killed on the frontier of Buenos 1
Aires, two bullets through his lungs, bearded and t
dead, wrapped by his soldiers in the hide of a cow;
my mother’s grandfather, just 24, heading a charge
of 300 into Peru, now ghosts on vanished horses.“’
70. The friends of Argentina, of the Americas and of i
world peace hope that Argentina will have few such
offerings from this war and from the post-war period. [
We hope-al
of us here, I believe-that
co-operation j
can be restored, friendships mended, urgent tasks ’
recommenced,
of building in the New World a trulp
new world.

63. Despite those endeavours and the continued
tokens of goodwill and flexibility shown by the sponsors in adapting the content of this draft to meet the
desires of the parties, the draft resolution submitted
has not been adopted. That should not be regarded
as a failure on the part of the countries that supported
this highly balanced text, which only requested a ceasefire and reaffirmed previously adopted resolutions and
the mandate of the Secretary-General
contained in
resolution 505 (1982). I would say, however, that it
represents a failure of peace.

71. My Government has worked hard for mediation ;
and settlement of this dispute. We have been rent by :
the clash of values, loyalties and friends. That clash
continued down through the registration of the vote
on this issue. I am told that it is impossible for a Gwernment to change a vote once it is cast, but I have
been requested by my Government to record the fact
that were it possible to change our vote we should like
to change it from a veto-a
“no”, that is-to an
abstention,

64. Those of us who have striven to the best of our
abilities to avoid an even more tragic outcome and an
irreparable loss of life have, I feel, met our responsibilities. 1 believe the failure is rather that of those
who have prevented the draft resolution from being
adopted.

72. Mr. KAM (Panama) (interpretation
from Spfltrish): I must, of course, begin by expressing my delegation’s deepest appreciation-and
I am sure that I am
also echoing the sentiments of the delegation of Spainto the delegations of China, Ireland, Japan, Poland,
Uganda, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
Zaire-countries
which supported our draft resolution. I wish that to be stated clearly in the verbatim
record.

6.5. One can only hope that the appeal for moderation and agreement implicit in that draft resolution,
even though it has not been adopted, will not fall on
deaf ears and that its spirit will be taken into consideration, even by those who did not support it.
66. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): The decision taken by the Council today is,
I think we all understand, a terribly important one:
it marks one more failure in a series of failed efforts
to mediate a conflict that is more than 200 years old,
one more failed attempt to substitute reason for force,
negotiation for violence, words for bombs and bullets.

73. Mr. President, both you and the members oftbe
Council are witness to the fact that exactly four days
ago my country called for an urgent meeting of the
Council to continue our consideration of the serious
issue of the Malvinas.
In our letter [S/152451,We
pointed out that it was a matter of great urgency, tn
view of the intensification
of the conflict and the
growing number of lives being lost as a result. None
the less, despite the urgency we attached to the

67. Today’s decision, then, marks one more step in
a process of escalation whose end is not yet in sight.
Phase one of this most recent conflict ended with the
6

matter, the Council could not meet until last Wednesday afternoon. On that day, 2 June, and together,
I repeat, with Spain, we submitted a draft resolution,
intending to have it voted upon immediately,

there are nine countries here honestly concerned
about a settlement
of this dispute, honestly concerned about peace.
81. Regardless of the final outcome of this Malvinas
episode, my delegation feels that it will have resulted in
an important
credit balance for Argentina and for
Latin America. Among other things, we will have on
the credit side the knowledge of who are our friends
and who are not. This episode will have shown that
Latin America is able to unite, that Latin America
can demonstrate its solidarity and that friendship is
tried and tested in difficult times like these. On the
credit side, this episode will have contributed to
our having in future a different kind of Latin America,
above all, a Latin America with a deepeT*and renewed
anti-colonial and anti-imperialist awaT’en:ss. And let us
not be told here that to speak of anti-colonialism and
anti-imperialism
is a cliche, because events are demonstrating to us that colonialism and imperialism still
exist.

74. The fact that it was not voted on immediately
was due to the sincere desire of both Spain and
Panama to enable the Council to adopt a resolution
that would be a first step towards peace,
75. For two days both delegations showed a
sincere, constructive
spirit of compromise in an
attempt to arrive at a text acceptable to the greatest
possible number of Council members. Thus, we cannot be accused of being inflexible or of acting unilaterally because, although my delegation was the only
one to vote against resolution 502 (1982), we agreed,
out of respect for Council decisions, to a specific
reference to that resolution,
reaffirming
it and
requesting the parties to implement it in its entirety.
76. In spite of all our efforts, which, I repeat, were
and still are motivated by a real desire to see a first
step rnade towards peace in that war-torn area, this
afternoon we have witnessed an act which is, to say
the least, unusual. Because of a joint veto-one of
which, that of the United States, was later corrected-we
were, unfortunately, not successful with
our initiative,
which was supported by a number of
countries and upon which many peoples had placed
their hopes. And if our proposal did not succeed, it
was because of the use of the veto by the United
Kingdom.

82. We wish to state that the fact that this evening
the Council was not able to adopt this draft resolution
calling for a cease-fire does not in any way mean that
the Council consents to England’s continued aggression and punitive action, even extending to massacre,
against the Argentine soldiers, who are also defending
principles, principles such as sovereignty, territorial
integrity and, of course, the dignity of the whole of
Latin America.
83. In closing, I wish to state that my delegation
intends to ask for further consultations in the Council
in order to continue our consideration of this item,
because we continue to believe that peace is still possible, despite this intransigence; that peace is still possible, despite attempts at domination. We are still confident that something can be done to avoid the spilling
of blood in the Malvinas and, of course, to avoid any
further deterioration
in inter-American relations.

77. When we requested an urgent meeting of the
Council, we did so with the explicit request that the
Council should carry out the responsibilities and functions ‘conferred upon it by the Charter and that it
should1 act without delay. We were trying to create a
new o.pportunity for the Council to be able to demonstrate its effectiveness. We were trying to enable the
Council “to save face”, if I may use that expression. But, because of the British veto, the Council
has been incapacitated.

84. The PRESIDENT
(irztopretatim
from Frertch):
I shall now make a statement as the representative
of FRANCE.

78. There is not now the slightest doubt as to just
who is responsible for bringing the Council to such a
pass. It is not the third-world countries, but some
permanent
members who are making a systematic
and obsstinate use of their right of veto.

85. First of all, I should like to say clearly that, of
course, France in this matter has but one concern,
but one aim: that hostilities should cease as early as
possible, in respect for law.

79. None the less, what has happened here this afternoon has been a useful lesson. We have no doubt now
as to who here are really for peace and who are for a
continuation
of the war.

86. In this spirit, France has always advocated the
undertaking of negotiations on the basis of and in
accordance with all the provisions of Council resolution 502 (1982).

80. As the representative of Spain so rightly said,
what hlappened here was not a failure for those of
us whcl sponsored the draft resolution or voted for it.
Underlying
any apparent failure there is a lesson.
Underlying
any apparent failure there is a victory,
and our victory has been to show world opinion that

87. Today we had before us a draft resolution submitted in document S/15156/Rev.2. The only question
we had to ask ourselves, in view of the great responsibilities of the Council for the maintenance of international peace and security, was, to my mind, the folIowing: was the adoption of such a text by the Council
7

likely to contribute to a settlement of the conflict; was
it likely to contribute to an effective cessation of
hostilities?
88. This text embodied
positive elements which
were not insignificant, since it clearly, linked the ceasefire to the acceptance of resolution 502 (1982) in its
entirety-in
other words, to the immediate withdrawal
of all the Argentine troops from the valouines,
as
we say in French, and to the search for a diplomatic
solution to the conflict in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, Furthermore,
in making reference to resolution 505 (1982), it confirmed the mission of good
offices entrusted to the Secretary-General.
89. However, it was impossible for us to disregard
one major fact: resolution 502 (1982) was adopted on
3 April, more than two months ago. Despite this long
interval, no start has been made on its implementation, nor has there been any sign of such a start being
made. It is therefore understandable that one of the
parties to the conflict felt it essential to obtain certain
safeguards against the prolongation of such a situation.
90. France considers that negotiations on the draft
resolution should have continued in order to arrive at
a consensus on the effective implementation
of resolution 502 (1982) and, within the framework of that
resolution, at a genuine cessation of hostilities.
91. Without such a consensus, which would have
made it possible to move towards a peaceful and
honourable outcome, the French delegation, which
has spared no effort to attain that aim, was constrained
to abstain from voting on a text which should have
been and could have been further improved in order
to gain the agreement of all.
92.

I now resume my function as PRESIDENT.

93.

I call on the representative

of Argentina,

94. Mr. ROS (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanis/r): Under the draft resolution submitted by Panama
and Spain, the Council would have assumed its
minimal responsibility,
under the Charter of the
United Nations, for maintaining
international
peace
and security. In other words, it would have called for
a cease-fire in order to save lives and to stop a war so
that the United Nations could effectively serve the
cause of peace.
95. The United Kingdom, a permanent member and
a party to the dispute, used its veto to prevent that

from happening and the Council from assuming its
obligations. Let it be clear to the international community and to history that the United Kingdom, by its ;
veto, is solely responsible for all the deaths, whether ;
they be Argentine or British, that will henceforth he ;,
caused in the Malvinas Islands dispute. Let it also bc i
clear that the machinery provided in the Charter for 1
the proper maintenance
of international
peace and i
security is only ineffective when a Power with the right
of veto uses it to serve its own colonial ends, as in
the present case.
96. Today it is the Malvinas; yesterday it was Namibia; tomorrow it may be any other corner of the world
where the hopes of peoples to free themselves
from colonial domination
will be dashed. It is most
unfortunate
that the United Nations must remain
frustrated and unable to act in such tragic situations.
97. I cannot end this brief statement without !
expressing my appreciation to the delegation of Spain. j
the mother country so ably represented by Mr. de
Pin&,
and to Panama, our sister republic in Latin i
America, for submitting
the draft resolution which !
has just been voted upon. I thank Mr. de Pink% and k
Mr. Kam for their strenuous efforts in favour of peace i
throughout these lengthy and arduous Council pro- !
ceedings.
98. I also thank those delegations in the Council i
which, showing a deep sense of responsibility, voted r
in favour of the draft resolution.
99. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Freak): :
I now call on the representative of the United King- 1
dom, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
100. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): The
representative of Argentina has laid the blame on my
country for any further loss of life, As I said at the
outset of my statement in explanation of vote this
afternoon, the responsibility
for the crisis lay in the
Argentine invasion. The responsibility for any further
loss of life lies in the refusal of Argentina to withdraw
from the islands, as demanded by resolution SO?
(1982).
The meeting

rose at 6.55 p.m.

NOTE
I A/10217 and Corr. 1, annex, para. 87.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATlONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Units
monde entier. Informer-vous
auprts
des ventes, New York ou GenPve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES NATIONS

sent cn vente dans les librairies
de votre librnire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de Ias Nacionrs
todas panes de1 mundo.
Cansulte
NUWU York o Ginebra.

Lilho

PUBLICATIONS

publications
ma) be obtained
rrom bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write IO: United
Nations,
Sales Section.
New

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
e&n
en ventn en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UWlES

et lcs agences
a : Nations

dCpositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn
de Ventas,

gg.609gg-October

l%Y--?.i’i~
