134

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Environment Programme, 7 should be accorded high priority by the relevant organs and programmes of the
United Nations system;
5. Endorses the action of the World Meteorological
Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme in jointly establishing an Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change to provide internationally coordinated scientific assessments of the magnitude, timing
and potential environmental and socio-economic impact
of climate change and realistic response strategies, and expresses appreciation for the work already initiated by the
Panel;
6. Urges Governments, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and scientific institutions to
treat climate change as a priority issue, to undertake and
promote specific, co-operative action-oriented programmes and research so as to increase understanding on
all sources and causes of climate change, including its regional aspects and specific time-frames as well as the cause
and effect relationship of human activities and climate,
and to contribute, as appropriate, with human and financia) resources to efforts to protect the global climate;
7. Ca/Is upan all relevant organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to support the
work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;
8. Encourages the convening of conferences on climate
change, particularly on global warming, at the national,
regional and global levels in order to make the international community better aware of the importance of dealing effectively and in a timely manner with all aspects of
climate change resulting from certain human activities;
9. Ca/Is upan Governments and intergovernmental organizations to collaborate in making every effort to prevent detrimental effects on climate and activities which affect the ecological balance, and also calls upon nongovernmental organizations, industry and other productive sectors to play their due role;
10. Requests the Secretary-General of the World
Meteorological Organization and the Executive Director
ofthe United Nations Environment Programme, utilizing
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, immediately to initiate action leading, as soon as possible, to a
comprehensive review and recommendations with respect
to:
(a) The state of knowledge of the science of climate
and climatic change;
(b) Programmes and studies on the social and economic impact of climate change, including global warming;
(e) Possible response strategies to delay, limit or mitigate the impact of adverse climate change;
(d) The identification and possible strengthening of
relevant existing international legal instruments having a
bearing on climate;
(e) Elements for inclusion in a possible future international convention on climate;
11. A/so requests the Secretary-General to bring the
present resolution to the attention of all Governments,
as well as intergovernmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council and well-established scientific institutions with expertise in matters concerning climate;

12. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
theGeneral Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include this question in the provisional
agenda of its forty-fourth session, without prejudice to the
application of the principie of biennialization.
70th plenary meeting
6 December 1988

43/178.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/166 of 11 December 1987,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1988/54 of 26 July 1988,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 8
Recalling the Programme of Action for the Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the lnternational
Conference on the Question of Palestine, 9
Taking into account the intifadah ofthe Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, against the Israelí occupation including its economic
and social policies and practices,
Affirming that the Palestinian people cannot develop
their national econorny as long as the Israelí occupation
persists,
Taking into consideration the recent steps taken by Jordan concerning the occupied Palestinian West Bank,
A ware of the increasing need to provide economic and
social assistance to the Palestinian people,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people; IO
2. Regrets that the programme of economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people has not been developed as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 42/166;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to charge the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
with supervising the development of the programme and
to provide it with the funds needed to engage twenty experts to prepare an adequate programme, in close cooperation with the Palestine Liberation Organization, taking into account the intifadah of the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem,
and its implications;
4. Expresses its appreciation to those States, United
Nations bodies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations that have provided assistance
to the Palestinian people;
5. Urges Member States, organizations of the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to disburse their aid or any
other forms of assistance to the occupied Palestinian territory solely for the benefit of the Palestinian people and in a
manner that will not serve to prolong the Israelí occupation;
6. Calls for the provision of emergency assistance to
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian terri8 Resolution

1514(XV)
Report of the lnternational Conference on the Question of Palestinc,
Geneva, 29 August-7 September 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.83.1.21), chap. I, sect. B.
IO A/43/367-E/l 988/82 and Corr. l and 2.
9

7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session,
Supplement No. 25 (A/43/25), annex, decision SS.1/3.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

tory, including the dispatch of teams of orthopaedic surgeons;
7. Requests Member States, organizations of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to sustain and increase their
assistance to the Palestinian people, in close co-operation
with the Palestine Liberation Organization;
8. Requests ali Member States and donors that provide
any form of assistance to the occupied Palestinian West
Bank to sustain and increase that assistance and to channel it to the Palestinian people through their representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization;
9. Decides to extend to the occupied Palestinian territory the same preferential treatment accorded the least developed countries, pending the elimination of the Israelí
occupation and the assumption of full control by the
Palestinian people over their national economy without
externa! interference;
10. Calls for treatment on a transit basis of Palestinian
exports and imports passing through neighbouring ports
and points of exit and entry;
11. Also calls for the granting of trade concessions and
concrete preferential measures for Palestinian exports on
the basis of certificates of origin issued by Palestinian bodies designated by the Palestine Liberation Organization;
12. Further calls for the implementation of development projects in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the projects mentioned in its resolution 39/223 of
18 December 1984;
13. Condemns the occupying Power, Israel, for its brutal economic and social policies and practices against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory;
14. Requests United Nations bodies not to extend any
form of assistance to the occupying Power, Israel;
15. Stresses that aid is not and cannot be a substitute
for a genuine and just solution to the question of Palestine;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/179.

Second Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/160 of 19 December 1977,
Recalling a/so Economic and Social Council resolution
2097 (LXIII) of 29 July 1977,
Emphasizing the need for full implementation of the
goals and objectives of the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa, especially in the light of continuing inadequacies in the field of transport and communications in Africa,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1988/67 of 28 July 1988;
2. Declares the period 1991-2000 the Second Transport and Communications Decade in Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and existing African regional and subregional economic groups, as well as
relevant United Nations agencies, to undertake the necessary preparatory arrangements for the Second Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa, and to submit to

135

the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council, a progress report at its forty-fourth session and a
final report at its forty-fifth session.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/180.

International Year of Shelter for the Homeless

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolution 37 /221 of20 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the year 1987 International Year of
Shelter for the Homeless,
Recalling also, in particular, the objectives ofthe Year as
contained in resolution 37/221,
Having considered the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) entitled "International Year of Shelter for the
Homeless: activities and achievements", 11 and the comments of the Commission on Human Settlements and of
the Economic and Social Council on that report,
1. Welcomes the success achieved in attaining the objectives of the Intemational Year of Shelter for the Homeless;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the numerous and
encouraging reports, which had been received from a total
of one hundred and thirty countries as at 31 December
1987, on activities, policies, programmes and projects undertaken by those countries within the context ofthe Year
and towards the successful attainment of its objectives;
3. Commends Governments, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations for the efforts and resources that were effectively mobilized for the programme
of activities for the Year;
4. Requests Governments to sustain the momentum
generated by the programme for the Year and to continue
implementing concrete and innovative programmes aimed
at improving the shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor
and the disadvantaged;
5. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to continue
to assist Governments in their efforts towards that goal,
within the framework ofthe Global Strategy for Shelter to
the Year 2000; 12
6. Recommends that Governments indica te, if possible
on World Habitat Day, the concrete actions to be taken
and the specific targets to be achieved during each successive year;
7. Also recommends that Governments maintain,
where appropriate, the national focal points and national
committees for the International Y ear of Shelter for the
Homeless for the purpose of monitoring and assessing the
progress achieved in improving the shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor and the disadvantaged;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly periodically, through the Economic and
Social Council, on progress achieved in improving the
shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor and the disadvantaged.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
11 HS/C/11/~.
12 Officia/ Records

of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session,
S11pplement No. 8, addendum (A/43/8/ Add.1 ).
