S/2018/273

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2364 (2017), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2018 and requested me to report on a quarterly basis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in taking forward the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali (see S/2015/364 and S/2015/364/Add.1) and the efforts of
MINUSMA to support it.

II. Major political developments
2.
On 30 December, the President of Mali, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, appointed
Soumeviou Boubève Maiga as Prime Minister. On 16 January, the signatory parties
agreed on a timeline to accelerate the implementation of key provisions of the
Agreement ahead of the presidential elections in July, but progress towards
implementation has remained slow. Meanwhile, the newly appointed Government has
been working with stakeholders, including the signatory armed groups, to foster
conditions conducive to the holding of peaceful, credible and transparent elections
throughout the country. The 24th session of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
was postponed to allow time for the Malian parties to finalize their discussion on an
agreement detailing the activities to be carried out before and after the presidential
elections. Significant progress was made towards the operationalization of the joint
force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), for which more than €400 million
has now been pledged, including the sum raised at the International High -Level
Conference on the Sahel, held in Brussels on 23 February.
3.
During the reporting period, some progress was achieved on the benchmarks
developed by the Government of Mali and MINUSMA for monitoring the
implementation of the Agreement, notably on defence and security, political and
institutional matters and humanitarian and development measures. Achievements
include the adoption of laws establishing territorial communities in the regions of
Ménaka and Taoudenni, progress in the devolution of competencies and resources to
the regions and the securing of additional funds for the United Nations trus t fund for
peace and security in Mali. The drafting of the national strategy on security sector
reform is ongoing. No significant progress was made on the justice and reconciliation
indicators. Slight progress was registered on the justice indicators relat ing to the
prosecution of terrorism and prison security. A detailed matrix of the benchmarks is
available on the Mission’s website (https://minusma.unmissions.org/matrices).

18-04383 (E)

020418

*1804383*

S/2018/273

A.

Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali
4.
During its regular session on 16 January, the Agreement Monitoring Committee
endorsed a timeline, developed by the signatory parties with the support of
MINUSMA, to accelerate the implementation of key pro visions of the Agreement,
focusing on measures related to: (a) decentralization, involving the harmonization of
laws on territorial communities with the provisions of the Agreement; (b) defence and
security, including mixed patrols, security sector reform and securing the upcoming
elections; and (c) socioeconomic development. The Malian parties established ad hoc
commissions to advance the implementation of the Agreement in all three areas.
5.
For the first time since its designation as independent observer, the Carter Center
attended the session of the Agreement Monitoring Committee on 16 January and
stated its commitment to upholding independence and impartiality in carrying out its
mandate. From 22 to 24 January, the delegation of the Carter Center visite d Kidal,
Gao and Timbuktu, and held meetings with State representatives, interim authorities
and civil society.
Political and institutional measures
6.
On 30 December, the President appointed Soumeviou Boubève Maiga as Prime
Minister. He is the fifth Prime Minister to be appointed during the President’s
mandate. On the same day, a new Cabinet was named. With 9 women out of its 36
members, it continues to fall short of the 30 per cent quota for the representation of
women required by the law of 18 December 2015. In a bid to reinforce the
decentralization process, two new ministries, the Ministry of Territorial Communities
and the Ministry of Local Development, were created to work in conjunction with the
Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization.
7.
Shortly after his nomination, the new Prime Minister reached out to the
signatory armed groups with a view to reinvigorating the implementation of the peace
process and to the majority and opposition political parties, religious leaders and trade
unions to reinforce the social dialogue. On 13 and 14 January, he travelled to Algeria
to discuss the peace process and bilateral cooperation with the President, Abdelaziz
Bouteflika, and the Prime Minister, Ahmed Ouyahia. On 11 February, he travelle d to
Mopti where he announced measures to restore State authority and deliver peace
dividends to the people.
8.
On 31 December, the President announced that his Government would draft a
law of national understanding, which would offer amnesty to individua ls who had
been involved in an armed rebellion, but who had not been not accused of violent
crimes. On 5 March, human rights groups published an open letter calling on the
Government to put the law on hold pending the conduct of impartial investigations
into human rights abuses committed since 2012. On 6 March, the Prime Minister
received a draft law, which would be considered by the National Assembly in April.
9.
Extensive government consultations on a decree to be adopted by the Council
of Ministers on the transfer of authority for the delivery of services and associated
financial resources to regional authorities are ongoing with the signatory armed
groups and other key stakeholders. While this decree will facilitate the
decentralization process, interim authorities are still facing significant technical,
infrastructural and logistical challenges, and additional funds need to be mobilized
for the implementation of their priority action plans. On 9 and 10 February in
Taoudenni and from 27 February to 1 March in Kidal, the Mission and the United
Nations Development Programme provided training to representatives of the interim
authorities, government officials and civil society representatives on the management

2/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

of administrative and financial issues, as well as on procurement and project
management.
10. The number of State officials redeployed to the northern and central regions
decreased by 6 per cent during the reporting period. As at 1 March, only 22 per cent
of State officials were present at their duty stations in the northern regions and in
Mopti Region. The governors of all the northern regions have been deployed to their
respective duty stations, except the governor of Taoudenni, who continues to work
from Timbuktu.
11. Since the previous reporting period, there has been a slight decrease in the
redeployment of judicial and prison officials to northern and central Mali. As at
10 March, only 69 per cent of judicial officials and 37 per cent of penitentiary officials
in the northern regions, and 96 per cent of judicial officials and 92 per cent of
penitentiary officials in Mopti Region, were present at their assigned posts. The
deteriorating security situation resulted in 6.5 per cent of appointed officials
remaining in another jurisdiction and both a slight increase in absenteeism and a slight
decrease in activities such as court hearings.
12. Regional, district and municipal elections are scheduled to be held in April,
presidential elections in July and August and legislative elections in November and
December. In this context, my Special Representative held a number of meetings with
key figures in Malian politics, the political opposition, civil society and the signatory
groups, urging restraint and dialogue in support of the electoral process. In additio n,
the Mission organized workshops aimed at preventing and mitigating potential
election-related violence that could stem from growing insecurity, intercommunity
tensions and limited State presence in Bamako, Gao, Kidal, Mopti, Ségou and
Timbuktu, benefiting over 600 national stakeholders, 40 per cent of whom were
women. It also facilitated the training of 703 elections mediators, including 225
women, who will serve as members of community-based mediation panels.
Defence and security measures
13. The signatory parties agreed on integration criteria and quotas for internal
security institutions and the civil service, but continue to diverge on quotas for the
Malian armed forces and on a long-term vision of the security sector reform. The full
operationalization of the mixed units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
Kidal and Timbuktu will be the first phase in the reconstitution and redeployment of
Malian defence and security forces in the northern regions.
14. On 28 February, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process saw
some progress with the beginning of the pre-registration phase for the identification
and listing of all eligible combatants of the signatory movements by the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, in collaboration with
MINUSMA. At the meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee held on 15 and
16 January, all parties agreed to complete the pre-registration within two months.
15. On 7 March, the National Assembly approved the national border policy and
action plan. In parallel, the Security Sector Reform Commissariat developed its work
plan for 2018 and is currently working with the National Council for Security Sector
Reform to develop a national security sector reform strategy f or the coming years.
MINUSMA continues to assist the General Directorate of Territorial Communities in
the development of regulations for the territorial police.
16. MINUSMA completed the rehabilitation of the camps of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu through infrastructure enhancements
and security improvements. While the Mission stands ready to provide logistical
support for the launch of mixed patrols in Kidal and Timbuktu, the operationalization
18-04383

3/20

S/2018/273

of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in both locations is still pending owing
to disagreements between the signatory armed groups on the modalities.
17. To limit the recruitment of at-risk youth and combatants who are not eligible to
participate in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, the Mission
implemented 17 ongoing community violence reduction projects, including
vocational training and infrastructure rehabilitation, during the reporting period in
Kidal, Gao, Timbuktu, Ménaka, Taoudenni and Mopti Regions. An evaluation of the
89 completed projects in the same regions showed that they had a positive impact on
intercommunity reconciliation and provided direct socioeconomic benefits to 237,822
beneficiaries, including 114,263 women.
18. From 15 to 27 January, MINUSMA conducted Operation Furaji in the tri-border
area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger to protect civilians and prevent the
return of armed elements to inhabited areas. The operation involved human rights
monitoring, reconnaissance, patrolling, medical and veterinary outreach activities and
engagement with community leaders. MINUSMA conducted Operation Foronto from
4 to 15 March in the central region, with a focus on supporting the access of the
MINUSMA civilian pillars to remote places like Dioura and Macina.
19. During the reporting period, the Mission conducted Operation Farrier to monitor
and restrict the movements and equipment of the armed groups. The operation was
part of the agreement by the Technical Commission on Security to enforce additional
control measures for the signatory armed groups in order to ensure their compliance
with the terms of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and reduce the
free circulation of arms.

B.

Support for the Malian defence and security forces
20. MINUSMA, in cooperation with other international partners, continued to
support the Malian authorities’ efforts to combat terrorism and transnational
organized crime, including through technical assistance on evidence collection, crime
scene management and mobile data analysis for the Malian Specialized Judicial Unit
against Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime. For the first time since the
operationalization of the unit, individuals charged with terrorism -related acts
investigated by the unit were brought to trial before the Court of Appeal of Bamako,
with four out of six defendants arrested in Mopti and Kidal Regions in 2015 and 2016
sentenced to prison terms and two acquitted. The United Nations is also finalizing a
project aimed at improving the security conditions of detention for suspected
terrorists and other high-risk detainees at the Bamako central prison.
21. In line with the memorandum of understanding between MINUSMA and the
Government on the Mission’s support for the Malian armed forces, the Mission
provided three casualty and medical evacuations and conducted regular patrols with
defence and security personnel. The Mission shared information with the Malian
defence and security forces, within the limits of its mandate, specifi cally for the
protection of civilians and for the safety and security of United Nations and associated
personnel. The Mission also began to revise the memorandum of understanding to
include operational and technical aspects of support, in addition to capac ity-building.
22. MINUSMA and partners trained 1,279 members, including 204 women, of the
Malian security forces from Mopti, Timbuktu, Gao and Bamako on various policing
modules and respecting human rights in countering terrorism. On 9 February, thanks
to advocacy efforts by MINUSMA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Director General of the national
police nominated 26 gender focal points for the country. On 16 March, MINUSMA
completed an eight-month weapons and ammunition management training cycle,

4/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

through which 147 Malian defence and security forces were trained as ammunition
depot and armoury storekeepers, inspectors and managers.
23. On 26 February, the President signed a decree approving the national policy and
action plan on preventing and combating violent extremism and terrorism for 2018 –
2020, drafted with the support of the Mission, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. The Government has
committed to funding 33 per cent of the priority projects for 2018, while advocacy
efforts continue to mobilize the remaining funding requirements.
24. Since 16 December, the Mission has trained 87 Malian defence and security
personnel in explosive-threat mitigation. The courses provide Malian forces with the
skills required to plan and execute explosive ordnance disposal operations and to
actively search for and detect improvised explosive devices.

C.

Other political developments
25. On 24 December, the former President of Mali, Amadou Toumani Touré,
returned for the first time to Mali from Senegal where he had been living in exile
since 2012. The former President was welcomed in Bamako by the then Prime
Minister, Abdoulaye Idrissa Maïga, other ministers and political party leaders. He has
publicly stated that he does not intend to run for public office.
26. On 16 January, at the Mission’s initiative, a delegation of women representing
the signatory armed groups and civil society met with the presid ent of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee, the High Representative of the President for the peace
process and MINUSMA to advocate their inclusion in the peace process. Engagement
with the signatory parties is ongoing for women’s inclusion in the mechanisms
supporting the implementation of the Agreement.
27. The commissions established between the signatory movements during the talks
in Anéfis in October 2017 held several meetings, but have yet to produce a tangible
impact on the peace process. From 6 to 8 February, the signatory groups met in
Amassine, Kidal Region, where they agreed to conduct joint patrols in Anéfis and
Aguelhok.
28. The social climate remained calm throughout the reporting period, as the
Government fostered a constructive dialogue with trade unions and civil society
organizations, some of which had opposed the constitutional referendum.
29. On 29 January, the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali adopted guidelines for the conduct of its
work, in accordance with paragraph 9 (d) of the aforementioned resolution. During
the Committee’s first informal consultations, held on 5 February, the Panel of Experts
on Mali was introduced to the Committee. The experts visited Mali in February.

D.

Regional developments
30. During the reporting period, a number of high-level meetings sought to advance
the operationalization and define the institutional framework of the G -5 Sahel joint
force. Following a summit convened by the President of France, Emmanuel Macron,
in La Celle-Saint-Cloud, France, on 13 December to discuss financing modalities for
the joint force, G-5 Sahel foreign affairs, defence and development ministers
announced the creation of a G-5 Sahel trust fund in Bamako on 8 January. In addition,
in resolution 2391 (2017), the Security Council noted with appreciation the proposal
by the European Union to channel contributions to the force through its African Peace

18-04383

5/20

S/2018/273

Facility. The need for complementarity of funding mechanisms was emphasized
during a meeting of G-5 Sahel defence ministers hosted by France on 15 January,
while timelines for the deployment of the joint force were validated at the fourth
summit of the G-5 Sahel Heads of State, held in Niamey on 6 February, which also
saw the transfer of the G-5 Sahel presidency from Mali to the Niger.
31. Meanwhile, tripartite negotiations on United Nations support for the joint force,
which were held in January and February in Niamey, Bamako and Nouakchott,
concluded with the signing of a technical arrangement by the G -5 Sahel, the United
Nations and the European Union on 23 February in the margins of the International
High-Level Conference on the Sahel, organized by the European Union in Brussels.
The technical arrangement outlines the modalities of the Mission ’s support,
comprising medical and casualty evacuation and engineering and logistical support,
at an estimated total cost of €44 million. A total of €414 million was pledged in
support of the joint force, including pledges made during the conference in Brussels.
Of the total, €10 million was contributed by the European Union through a separate
financial agreement, also signed in Brussels, to provide for MINUSMA support for
the joint force under the technical arrangement. G-5 Sahel member States committed
to adopt a robust human rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework. They expressed concern, however, over the long-term sustainability and
predictability of funding and reiterated their request to the Security Council to provide
a mandate for the joint force under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
32. From mid to late January, the G-5 Sahel force led Operation Pagnali in central
Mali. This operation targeted a terrorist cell along the border between Burkina Faso
and Mali and reportedly resulted in neutralizing several terrorist elements.
33. The Mission remained an active participant in the Committee fo r Cooperation
in Mali, a periodic conference convened by the commanders of the Malian armed
forces, the G-5 Sahel force, Operation Barkhane and the European Union training
mission to address operational coordination issues, share intelligence within
respective mandates and harmonize plans.

III. Major security developments
34. The security situation worsened during the reporting period, and attacks against
MINUSMA and the Malian defence and security forces intensified. The Group for the
Support of Islam and Muslims appears to have continued to improve its operational
capacity and expand its area of operations, notably in the regions of Mopti and Ségou.
An increase in the lethality of attacks was observed between 2016 and 2017. Indeed,
while the number of attacks with improvised explosive devices remained relatively
stable, with 139 incidents recorded in 2016 and 130 in 2017, the number of casualties
increased substantially, from 70 killed and 184 injured in 2016 to 141 killed and 309
injured in 2017.

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
35. The security situation in northern and central Mali remains of grave concern.
Mopti and Ségou Regions, together with Koulikoro Region, suffered as many attacks
as the five northern regions combined. A series of attacks in Ségou, Timbuktu and
Ménaka Regions that resulted in dozens of deaths between 25 and 28 January led the
President to declare three days of national mourning. The first of these attacks
targeted the camp of the Malian armed forces near Diabali, Ségou Region. Attacks in
the Nampala-Diabali area contributed to decreasing morale among the defence and
security forces, demonstrations by soldiers’ families protesting against their

6/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

redeployment to the camp and the desertion and subsequent arrest of 36 gendarmes
on 17 January. These grave developments call into question the ability of the
Government to protect the population and its armed forces in the area. The surge of
Malian troops in central Mali announced by the Government on 11 February has not
yet translated into an improvement in the security situation.
36. During the reporting period, terrorist groups conducted 63 attacks — 37 against
the Malian defence and security forces, 20 against MINUSMA, 5 against a signatory
armed group and 3 against Operation Barkhane (some attacks involved more than one
target) — in comparison with 71 attacks during the previous reporting period. The
highest number of attacks was carried out in Mopti Region (24), followed by Kidal
(16), Gao (8), Timbuktu (5), Ségou (4), Ménaka (3) and Koulikoro (3). The Group for
the Support of Islam and Muslims was particularly active in Gao, Kidal and Ménaka
Regions and claimed responsibility for most of the attacks conducted during the
reporting period. There were fewer casualties: 4 peacekeepers were killed and 12 were
injured, and 1 MINUSMA contractor was killed (none were injured), whereas in the
previous reporting period 11 peacekeepers had been killed and 44 injured. Of the
personnel in the Operation Barkhane forces, two were killed and four were injured in
the current reporting period, while three had been injured in the previous period.
37. Malian forces were the most heavily targeted and saw an increase in the number
of victims: 45 soldiers were killed and 80 injured, compared with 23 killed and
8 injured in the previous period. Attacks against the Malian security and defence
forces were most heavily concentrated in Mopti (17), followed by Gao (5), Ségou (4),
Timbuktu (3), Koulikoro (2) and Ménaka (2). The attacks most often involved small
arms fire, but also improvised explosive devices or mines, or a combination of small
arms fire and explosive devices (complex attacks). In addition, 20 members of the
signatory armed groups were killed and 12 were injured in terrorist attacks, whereas
during the previous reporting period, 2 members of the signatory armed groups had
been killed and there had been no reported injuries.
38. On 1 February, the Malian military Chief of Staff signed a military order
prohibiting the circulation of motorcycles and pick-up trucks in 12 districts located
in Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu Regions. The measure aims at improving security, and
ultimately ensuring the free circulation of people and merchandise. On 6 February,
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) issued a communiqué
denouncing this measure, arguing that the ban was having a heavy impact on the
livelihood of local populations. The order, initially applicable only to Niafunké
district in Timbuktu Region, was later adopted by the Governor of Timbuktu on
21 February and extended to the other cities in the region as of 1 March.
39. The most active terrorist groups during the reporting period were Islamic State
in the Greater Sahara on the border with the Niger and the Group for the Support of
Islam and Muslims in central Mali and on the bord ers with Mauritania and Burkina
Faso. The latter remained active on social media and claimed responsibility for at
least seven attacks perpetrated in January 2018 against MINUSMA, the Malian
defence and security forces and the police of Burkina Faso. There were also growing
concerns over cooperation between the two groups. On 15 January, Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara issued a threat that they would work jointly with Al -Qaida to
counter the deployment of the G-5 Sahel joint force.

B.

Protection of civilians
40. In the centre of Mali, the protective environment further deteriorated over the
reporting period. The expansion of the presence of radical groups facilitated their
campaign of intimidation, targeted kidnappings and assassinations. They fuel led

18-04383

7/20

S/2018/273

intercommunity tensions and violence, notably between Fulani and Dogon, while
their attacks against national and international forces resulted in an unprecedented
number of civilian casualties.
41. As many as 71 civilians were killed and 22 were wounded in targeted attacks
and intercommunity conflicts during the reporting period. While all districts of Mopti
Region were affected, about a third of the casualties were recorded in Douentza
district, where the targeted killing of a Dogon Qur’anic teacher in Mondoro commune
on 30 December sparked a series of violent events. The most lethal incidents occurred
on 15 January, when up to 12 members of the Dogon community were killed, and on
17 January, when eight members of the Fulani community were killed in Do gon-led
reprisals. While Malian security forces had arrested a number of Fulani individuals
following the assassinations of Dogon community members, they reportedly did not
attempt to stop the subsequent arson of Fulani homes.
42. During the reporting period, the regional reconciliation teams, established by
the Ministry of National Reconciliation, began operating. The Mopti team facilitated
a local reconciliation process, with the support of an international non -governmental
organization and of a local reconciliation commission. It also organized
intercommunity meetings in areas that had been affected by heavy violence in June
2017 and January 2018, respectively. In January, MINUSMA carried out two missions
to Djenné district to assess the situation, appease tensions and liaise with stakeholders
on the ground following repeated incursions by radical armed elements.
43. Five incidents involving improvised explosive devices in Mopti Region caused
the deaths of 36 civilians and wounded 18 others, including on 25 January when a
civilian vehicle hit such a device in Douentza district, killing all 26 passengers
aboard. Malian forces were probably the target of three of these incidents, while
MINUSMA troops were the likely target on 25 January, as their convoy was expected
to pass along the same route. Five days earlier the quick-reaction force had defused
an improvised explosive device in the same area, been ambushed and arrested
13 suspected assailants who were handed over to the Malian defence and security
forces. In addition, three direct fire attacks against Malian forces wounded five
civilians in Mopti and Youwarou districts.
44. In Timbuktu Region, instances of intimidation of civilians by radical elements
were reported in Niafunké and Goundam districts. Following inter- and
intracommunity tensions linked to longstanding land disputes in Alafia and Lafia
communes, MINUSMA worked closely with national authorities and humanitarian
partners, including through joint civilian missions to a disputed island (Iloa) an d to
Houndou Bongo Koyna, where displaced people from the island had moved. Reports
of banditry, especially on the Timbuktu-Douentza axis, flowed in steadily. From 15 to
29 January, as part of Operation Furaji, the MINUSMA force carried out patrols to
deter banditry in the area.
45. In Ménaka Region, MINUSMA contributed to the establishment of coordinated
patrols, including all the signatory and splinter armed groups present in the area.
These coordinated patrols have played an important role in building co nfidence
between armed groups and have decreased the reported incidence of armed banditry
and other types of violence that affect civilians in the city. South of Ménaka and along
the border with the Niger, incursions by armed elements and operations by Ope ration
Barkhane reportedly led to civilian displacement. Severe access constraints hindered
both situational awareness and MINUSMA action.

8/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

IV. Human rights situation
46. During the reporting period, MINUSMA documented 133 cases of human rights
violations and abuses, involving at least 483 victims, compared with 170 cases and
326 victims in the previous reporting period. There were, inter alia, 18 cases of
extrajudicial execution or other arbitrary killing, 18 cases of abduction or enforced
disappearance, 6 cases of torture or ill-treatment and 18 cases of unlawful detention.
Malian defence and security forces were involved in 33 violations (25 per cent of all
cases). Signatory groups (55 cases), non-signatory or splinter groups (6 cases), and
violent extremist groups (37 cases) were responsible for a total of 98 cases (74 per
cent of all cases reported).
47. Nearly two thirds of cases occurred in Mopti and Ségou Regions (38 per cent)
and Timbuktu Region (25 per cent), followed by Bamako district (16 pe r cent) and
Gao Region (14 per cent); other regions accounted for less than 7 per cent of the
remaining cases. Civilian State representatives and local notabilities accused of being
close to Malian defence and security forces were victims of at least three killings and
eight abductions by elements affiliated with the Group for the Support of Islam and
Muslims and other groups affiliated to Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.
48. Counter-terrorism operations continued to raise grave human rights concerns.
On 21 February, in the context of Operation Dambe, Malian armed forces arbitrarily
arrested at least 10 civilians in Sokolo and Dioura communes, Ségou Region, 7 of
whom were summarily executed, and 3 of whom remain missing. In a 27 February
communiqué, the Government acknowledged that civilians had been killed during the
operation, and vowed to conduct an investigation and to uphold human rights and
humanitarian law standards. During the reporting period, the Malian authorities
arrested 116 individuals in connection with the conflict, of whom 80 were arrested on
terrorism-related charges (all adult men). As at 28 February, 17 had been released.
Among those arrested on terrorism-related charges during the reporting period, more
than half were subjected to human rights violations: 15 persons were victims of
extrajudicial execution or enforced disappearance, 14 of torture or ill -treatment, and
15 of illegal detention.
49. During the reporting period, 696 additional individuals provided statements to
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, bringing the total to 7,588
depositions since 3 January 2017. On 23 January, the International Commission of
Inquiry on Mali was formally established. The Commission will investigate
allegations of abuse and serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law committed between January 2012 and January 2018 and will submit
its report to my office by January 2019.
50. On 1 February, MINUSMA published a report on human rights and the peace
process. While focusing on 2016/17, the report captures patterns of human rights
abuses that continue to this day, including the high number of cases of abuse by armed
groups. The report was used by the Mission to discuss human rights and the fight
against impunity with the authorities and the signatory movements.
51. On 14 February, MINUSMA held a workshop in Kidal with seven CMA focal
points on conflict-related sexual violence to validate the CMA plan on prevention of
and response to conflict-related sexual violence. The approved plan contains time bound activities to be implemented by CMA, with MINUSMA support, including
monitoring and reporting on the implementation process.
52. The country task force on monitoring and reporting verified 48 grave violations
against children since 16 December. Seven children were killed and one was maimed
in Mopti and Gao; two boys were separated from an unidentified armed group and are

18-04383

9/20

S/2018/273

following a reintegration program in Gao; at least seven children were abducted in
two incidents; there were two cases of attacks against schools and hospitals; and
29 cases of denial of humanitarian access were verified. Advocacy efforts continued
for the release of three children detained at a Government-run detention centre in
Bamako. In addition, the task force is currently investigating allegations of five
children reportedly killed by unidentified armed elements in Mopti Region.
53. On 21 December, the Mission and CMA agreed on a timeline of activities and
an implementation strategy for the action plan to end and prevent grave violations
against children. The Mission also continued its dialogue with the Platform coalition
of armed groups to prevent and put an end to such violations.

V. Humanitarian situation
54. The humanitarian situation continued to worsen owing to insecurity in northern
and central Mali and limited State presence. While the Humanitarian Response Plan
2018, launched in Bamako on 14 February, seeks to provide life-saving and protection
assistance to 1.56 million people, as of 10 March, only 4 per cent of the $263 million
required had been received. The $8 million made available through the United
Nations Central Emergency Response Fund for 2018 was allocated to life-saving
activities in the sectors of food security, nutrition and water, sanitation and hygiene.
55. During the reporting period, 41 security incidents, mostly involving the break in of compounds and vehicle thefts, affected humanitarian actors , compared with
27 cases in the previous reporting period. On 1 February, a humanitarian worker was
shot and killed in Gao under circumstances that remain to be determined.
56. The already dire food and nutrition situation could deteriorate further owing t o
a looming agropastoral crisis. Insufficient rains in 2017 have affected the food
security of people and livestock in the regions of Gao, Kayes, Mopti, Ségou and
Sikasso. Across Mali, 4.1 million people are expected to be food insecure, of whom
800,000 are expected to need emergency food assistance, during the 2018 lean season
(June to September).
57. As of January 2018, the Government had registered 47,700 internally displaced
persons, 589,600 internally displaced and refugee returnees, and 554 asylum se ekers
from various countries, compared with 40,600 internally displaced persons, 577,438
returnees and 490 asylum seekers in November 2017. While Mali hosts 17,039
refugees from various countries, more than 131,800 Malian refugees remain in
neighbouring countries.
58. On 1 February, the Government endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration,
expressing its support for the protection of education. However, insecurity continued
to have a dramatic impact on the education system. As of March 2018, 715 schools
were closed in Kidal, Gao, Ménaka, Timbuktu, Mopti and Ségou Regions owing to
insecurity, including threats and attacks from violent extremists. As a result, 214,500
children were denied access to education.
59. The United Nations and its partners provided access to safe water for 22,800
people in Gao and Timbuktu Regions and treated more than 13,950 children suffering
from severe acute malnutrition. A total of 343 cases were recorded in the Gender Based Violence Information Management System, of which 63 per ce nt were cases of
sexual violence. Almost all survivors received medical and psychological support.

10/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

VI. Economic development and cultural preservation
60. The rate of economic growth in Mali fell slightly from 5.8 to 5.3 per cent
between 2016 and 2017, owing to the persistent fragility of the security situation,
political uncertainty and a drop in agricultural production caused by low rainfall in
2017. However, real GDP growth is expected to average 5 per cent in 2018–2019,
driven by steady donor support and growth in public investment and agricultural
production.
61. As part of a series of reforms undertaken by the West African Economic and
Monetary Union to increase transparency, efficiency and accountability, in 2018 the
Government switched to an outcome-driven budget regime. In the 2018 budget, grants
from international institutions and foreign governments amount to $229 million,
against $405 million in the 2017 revised budget law. As of February 2018, the
Government had disbursed approximately $3 billion of the total of $4.24 billion
pledged at the International Conference for the Economic Recovery and Development
of Mali. On 30 January, the Parliament created the sustainable development fund to
provide a guarantee for the specific strategy for the development of the northern
regions.
62. In support of the Government’s plan for securing the centre of the country,
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team initiated several projects to promote
social cohesion and support the return of State authority, economic recovery and the
provision of basic social services, including through quick-impact projects. New
contributions raised the amount in the trust fund for peace and security in Mali from
$45.6 million to $62.5 million between September and the end of December 2017.
The trust fund is used for key activities in support of peace and security in Mali,
including the work of the independent observer.
63. The Peacebuilding Fund provided $3 million in financing for an initiative to
promote community security and social cohesion in the Liptako -Gourma region
straddling Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, where a large number of terrorist
elements operate. Moreover, over $10 million was allocated to Peacebuilding Fund
projects that will promote reconciliation, empower women and youth and prevent
conflict in Ségou and Mopti Regions.
64. With regard to cultural preservation, MINUSMA and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization continued to raise awareness of the
protection of cultural heritage and efforts to combat illicit trafficking in cultural
goods.

VII. Mission-wide strategic plan
65. The Mission increased its focus on activities related to its core mandated tasks,
including support for the implementation of the Agreement, the restoration and
extension of State authority and the Malian defence and security forces. The Mission
was updating its strategic plan to reflect key elements that emerged from discussions
with the United Nations country team as part of the ongoing strategic review,
including the root causes and drivers of the conflict and scenarios for political and
other developments in Mali within a two-year period. The strategic review aims to
reassess United Nations engagement in the post-election environment in Mali on the
basis of current trends in the political, security and operatio nal environment and the
effectiveness of the Mission in implementing its present mandate. The review is
intended to inform the preparation of my next report to the Security Council and its
deliberations on the renewal of the Mission’s mandate in June.

18-04383

11/20

S/2018/273

VIII. Capacities of the Mission
A.

Military
66. The authorized force level of up to 13,289 military personnel comprised
40 military observers, 421 staff officers and 12,828 contingent personnel. As at
March, 11,795 personnel had been deployed, or 88.8 per cent of the authorized
strength. Women accounted for 2.64 per cent of military personnel.
67. The implementation of the recommendations of the technical review conducted
in July 2017 continued, including with progress on camp consolidation measures, th e
appointment of force protection officers and the finalization of plans to establish
permanent medical treatment capabilities in the central region as part of the budget
for year 2018/19. The Mission has also proposed that mobile training teams be set up
to improve contingent performance.
68. The lack of contingent-owned armoured personnel carriers, including mineprotected vehicles, remained the most critical equipment shortfall. This g ap has
prevented the Mission from implementing fully a number of its operational tasks,
such as patrolling and providing escorts for United Nations logistics convoys. Eight
personnel carriers were damaged beyond repair during the reporting period and the
number of available troop carriers is decreasing steadily owing to the limited ability
of troop-contributing countries to maintain vehicles or replace destroyed vehicles. To
address these challenges, two United Nations-owned mine-protected vehicles were
loaned to the Bangladeshi infantry battalion to augment the unit ’s protective posture
during operations, and training was provided to troop -contributing countries on the
claims process to replace destroyed carriers.
69. The Mission considers the deployment of the quick-reaction force’s remaining
vehicles and aviation assets to be an immediate operational necessity. Failure to
address the current shortfall in medium-utility helicopters in the centre, west, north
and east (from June 2018) of the country will prevent the Mission from fully
executing intelligence-driven, force-directed operations to locate and disrupt terrorist
groups that are threatening civilians and United Nations and associated personnel and
from contributing effectively to stabilization in the centre and north of Mali.
70. Combat convoy capabilities were strengthened towards the end of 2017 and, at
time of writing the present report, the new arrivals were proceeding towards full
operational capability. The first company and headquarters elemen ts of the Egyptian
convoy battalion arrived in late October 2017. Despite the initial challenges faced in
carrying out autonomous convoys and escorts, the first convoy was conducted on
7 February with a reduced number of vehicles. The deployment of the Sri Lankan
convoy company was completed on 12 January, and it reached full operational
capability on 18 February. With two operational combat convoy companies, it is
expected that MINUSMA will be able to free two infantry companies within one
month.

B.

Police
71. On 15 March, 1,737 personnel, or 90.5 per cent of the authorized strength, were
deployed, with 306 (88.7 per cent) individual police officers, of whom 16.5 per cent
were women, and 1,431 (90.9 per cent) formed police unit personnel, of whom 4 .7 per
cent were women. MINUSMA police continued to require 12 armoured personnel
carriers for formed police units and 6 additional armoured vehicles for individual
police officers. The Mission also requires individual police officers with specialized
expertise, including in the fields of forensics, investigations, riverine police capacity,

12/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

security sector reform, counter-terrorism, serious organized crime, illicit trafficking,
strategic planning and project management.

C.

Civilian personnel
72. As of 12 March, 81 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been deployed,
including 82 per cent of international staff, 83 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 81 per cent of national staff. Women held 25 per cent of the international posts,
30 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 19 per cent of national staff
posts.
73. On 3 January, MINUSMA finalized an action plan on gender parity with a view
to improving performance in recruiting and retaining women at the Mission, including
through the establishment of a mentoring system.

D.

Camp construction and securing supply routes
74. In Gao, 110 civilian staff and a Chinese force protection unit co mprising
170 military personnel were relocated from Camp Elevage to the super camp, as per
a recommendation of the board of inquiry following three separate attacks perpetrated
against MINUSMA in Gao city on 31 May 2016.
75. As part of the consolidation of MINUSMA premises in Bamako, 314 personnel
moved from the logistics base to the Mission operations base in late December 2017.
The Mission saved approximately $81,000 per month in rent as a result of the move.
76. The rehabilitation of the Gao runway is 31 per cent completed and on track for
the scheduled completion on 30 June 2018. Due to increased security threats in
Diabali, Ségou Region, the Mission is improving its defence infrastructure for the
MINUSMA camp.

E.

Environment
77. As part of the implementation of its environmental action plan, MINUSMA
ensured the proper collection and treatment of solid and biomedical waste in all
deployment sites. It also continued efforts to improve wastewater management,
including by commissioning wastewater treatment plants in Kidal, and conducted
inspections in Gao, Bamako, Kidal and Aguelhok to monitor the Mission’s
environmental footprint.

IX. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
78. In response to the report issued in December 2017 by Lieutenant General
(Retired) dos Santos Cruz, whom I appointed to lead a review on improving the
security of United Nations peacekeepers, MINUSMA identified nine measures to
improve the training and equipment of its troops and conveyed clear guidance on the
need to adopt a more robust posture at all levels. Examples of those measures include
ensuring that escort convoys are equipped with counter-improvised explosive device
capabilities and that troops are provided with predeployment and in -mission training.
In addition, MINUSMA has deployed early warning capabilities to the Gao, Kidal
and Timbuktu camps and plans to also deploy these capabilities to the Mopti and
Ménaka camps.

18-04383

13/20

S/2018/273

79. As the security situation remains a significant challenge for all United Nations
personnel involved in programme delivery, the Mission continued to adjust its
defensive plans to the elevated threat level, including through the reinforcement of
camp perimeters and the construction of bunkers, observation posts and blast
protection walls. Safe havens and bunkers were completed in the Gao camp, while
the construction of overhead protection for sleeping units for camps in Gao, Kidal,
Ménaka, Mopti and Tessalit is still in progress. The Mission initiated the construction
of base defence operations centres to coordinate integrated defence procedures among
the different components responsible for the camps’ protection and is in the process
of installing closed-circuit television systems throughout MINUSMA camps. In
addition, MINUSMA provided training on improvised explosive device threat
mitigation for 83 logistic convoy commanders.
80. Medical evacuation procedures were improved through the delegation of
authority to the sectors to activate medical evacuation flights for pre -planned tactical
and combat operations. However, aeromedical evacuation teams from Member States
were still required for Ménaka and Tessalit, which were supported by teams from
other locations. Improvements to airfield infrastructure to enhance medical
evacuation capabilities at night continued to progress in Gao, Timbuktu, Kidal and
Tessalit.
81. MINUSMA established a secure communication network to support the
Mission’s intelligence-related capacities in three locations with a planned expansion
to two additional sector headquarters. Medium-altitude long-endurance unmanned
aerial vehicles were in operation in Timbuktu, providing information and analysis
capability. As a complement to the camp surveillance system in Kidal, one tactical
unmanned aerial vehicle was deployed to provide extended surveillance beyond the
camp perimeter, complementing the closed-circuit television surveillance system
currently being established in the main United Nations premises. The Mission ’s
intelligence and information infrastructure is designed to increase awareness of and
the early detection of threats to civilians and to ensure the pro tection of MINUSMA
camps and associated personnel.

X. Conduct and discipline
82. During the reporting period, one allegation of sexual abuse was reported.
MINUSMA referred the matter to the Office of Internal Oversight Services for
investigation. Administrative measures were taken pending the outcome of the
investigation. Two allegations received in 2017 are pending investigation by the
relevant troop-contributing country and the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
MINUSMA continued to combat sexual exploitation and abuse through enforcement
measures, assistance to victims, training and outreach activities to inform personnel
and the local population about the United Nations zero -tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.

XI. Observations
83. Months before the holding of the presidential election on 29 July, I remain
deeply concerned at the slow pace of implementation of the timeline adopted by the
Agreement Monitoring Committee on 16 January, the deterioration in the extant
security situation and its adverse impact on the elections, as well as on the operational
environment of the Mission. Despite the importance of the elections scheduled thus
far, the parties must not lose sight of their responsibilities vis -à-vis the
implementation of the Agreement.
14/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

84. The appointment by President Keita of Soumeviou Boubève Maiga as Prime
Minister on 30 December has provided an opportunity to reinvigorate the peace
process. I note the Prime Minister’s initiative in adopting a road map to operationalize
the timeline adopted on 16 January. The United Nations, including MINUSMA, and
the international community will continue to support the parties in the implementation
of key outstanding provisions of the Agreement. Progress in priority areas of the
Agreement, including decentralization, security sector reform and cantonment, as
well as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, will be crucial to
advance the peace process. Short-term gains in these areas must be consolidated in
support of the broader objectives of national reconciliation, economic development,
good governance and the building of a resilient and inclusive society to pave way for
sustainable peace in Mali. I call for the inclusion of women and young people in all
the mechanisms supporting the implementation of the Agreement, as well as in the
interim authorities.
85. The restoration and extension of State authority remain a priority for the
effective protection of civilians and the delivery of long -awaited peace dividends to
conflict-affected communities. I welcome the recent appointments of government
officials, particularly prefects and sub-prefects for the northern and central regions. I
exhort the Government to provide the newly appointed officials with appropriate
resources to ensure their effective and rapid deployment to and establishment in their
respective duty stations. The Government is also encouraged to fill the remaining
vacant positions in the territorial administration, including by considering more
women and candidates from various regions. MINUSMA will continue to support the
redeployment and extension of the State, including through technical assistance and
capacity-building. I appeal to the technical and financial partners of Mali to support
this process.
86. I call on the Government, opposition political parties and the signatory armed
groups to ensure that peaceful elections are held throughout Mali, including in the
north. The Government’s engagement with the signatory armed groups and efforts to
strengthen dialogue with majority and opposition political parties will contribute to
achieving this objective.
87. The United Nations will continue to support the reconciliation and justice
measures of the Agreement, including the International Commission of Inquiry to
investigate serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law
committed in Mali since January 2012. On 23 January, I appointed the three members
of this Commission, established at the request of the parties, and look forward to its
report.
88. The assumption of duty of the Carter Center as independent observer and its
establishment of a presence office in Mali are welcome developments. I hope the
forthcoming first report of the observer will help to reinvigorate the peace process
and underline the parties’ responsibilities.
89. The security situation, in particular acts of terrorism against innocent civilians,
and its adverse impact on livelihoods, access to basic services and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and development programming, remains a source of deep
concern. The deteriorating security situation in Mali continues to threaten regional
stability in the Sahel. It is urgent to step up efforts to counter asymmetric threats,
particularly improvised explosives devices or mines, which are killing an increased
number of civilians. I strongly condemn the terrorist attack near the border with
Burkina Faso on 26 January, which killed at least 26 persons, including women and
children. I call on the Government to seek and bring to justice the perpetrators of such
acts and express my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families of the victims as
well as the Governments and peoples of the countries concerned. I note the visit of
18-04383

15/20

S/2018/273

the Panel of Experts of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali; the Council will consider the Panel’s report
in due course.
90. I equally remain deeply concerned about the situation in the central regions,
where attacks and human rights violations persist. The increased presence of Malian
defence and security forces in central Mali is essential to protecting the population,
as well as promoting reconciliation among communities. In this regard, I welcome
the visit of the Prime Minister to Mopti on 11 February and all the initiatives taken
thus far to better coordinate activities and interventions in support of the
Government’s multidimensional and integrated strategy for the centre. The United
Nations system in Mali and donors will continue to support this strategy, while
MINUSMA pursues it efforts towards the full deployment of the Senegalese quick reaction force.
91. I remain committed to supporting the G-5 Sahel joint force and urge Member
States and international organizations to continue to contri bute to the force’s full
operationalization. I commend the Member States who pledged to support the force
at the International High-Level Conference on the Sahel, held in Brussels on
23 February, and invite them to release the funds pledged without delay. I welcome
the conclusion of the technical agreement requested by the Security Council in
resolution 2391 (2017). I look forward to presenting an update on the United Nations
support for the G-5 Sahel joint force in my report that will be issued in May.
92. I welcome the growing ownership of security- and development-related
initiatives taken by the G-5 Sahel. While I recognize the importance of conducting
military operations against terrorist networks and organized criminals, including drug
traffickers and people smugglers, the situation in the Sahel region merits a
multidimensional approach that includes creating job opportunities for young people
and ensuring accountability for serious crimes, such as terrorist acts, that destabilize
the peace process.
93. MINUSMA peacekeepers continue to be targeted by attacks that are increasing
in complexity and lethality. In this context, I note the importance of the
comprehensive recommendations put forward in the report on improving the security
of United Nations peacekeepers to reduce fatalities and injuries. The Secretariat has
developed an action plan and stands ready to support MINUSMA, including by
providing additional equipment and predeployment training. I am pleased to note that
the Mission has started to implement the recommendations, including those of its
military technical review. I urge Member States to also suppo rt the implementation
of the report’s recommendations.
94. I strongly encourage the Government to intensify its efforts to expand the
delivery of basic social services in northern and central Mali and to advance gender
equality. I commend the humanitarian actors who operate in a very challenging
environment to assist people in need in Mali. I urge all the relevant parties to respect
international humanitarian law, human rights law and the humanitarian principles,
allow the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need and protect
humanitarian workers and other civilians, especially children. I also urge international
partners to fund the Humanitarian Response Plan 2018 to avoid a further deterioration
of the situation.
95. The Mission’s capability gaps continue to affect its operations and the safety
and security of the personnel. Given the growing asymmetric threats in the
operational environment, I call on troop- and police-contributing countries to provide
their contingents with adequate predeployment training and equipment, including
mine-protected vehicles, to mitigate the risks that they take to protect civilians, as
well as to limit caveats with regard to their engagement and posture, in order to
16/20

18-04383

S/2018/273

strengthen integration and mutual protection. I call on Member States to continue to
support United Nations peacekeeping, including through bilateral support to
MINUSMA troop- and police-contributing countries.
96. Ahead of the renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA, I look forward to the
outcome of the Mission’s ongoing strategic review, which will help to redefine
strategies to respond to the multiple challenges outlined herein.
97. Finally, I pay tribute to the men and women of MINUSMA, under the leadership
of the Special Representative, Annadif Mahamat Saleh. The relentless efforts of the
staff to support the peace process under extremely difficult conditions will bear fruit.
I wish to express my gratitude to the international mediation team, including the lead
mediator Algeria, agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations, including the African Union, the European Union, the
G-5 Sahel and the Economic Community of West African States, non -governmental
organizations and all other partners for their continued support towards the restoration
of peace and stability in Mali.

18-04383

17/20

S/2018/273

Annex I
Military and police strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali as at
15 March 2018
Military

Police

Staff officers and units
Country

Men

Armenia

1

Austria
Bangladesh

Women

Total

2

Belgium

18

1

19

Benin

258

2

260

Bhutan

4

4

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

2

2

Burkina Faso

1 655

68
1

1

277

25

302

Cameroon

Men

Men

Women

Total

Women

Total police

Total

Men

Women

Total

279

279

279

140

161

2

163

139

155

12

167

2
14

Cambodia

Formed police units

1

1 381

Burundi

Individual police officers

1 395

1 723

21

2

23

140

22

6

28

133

6

279

2

1

3

13

4

17

13

4

17

Chad

1 446

2

1 448

14

5

19

14

5

19

China

389

14

403

Côte d’Ivoire

13

4

17

13

4

17

154

4

158

Czechia

3

1

4

Denmark

1

1

Egypt

337

El Salvador

93

Estonia

9

9

Ethiopia

1

1

Finland

5

5

5

1

6

5

1

6

France

25

25

6

1

7

6

1

7

Gambia

4

4

Germany

544

9

2

11

9

2

11

Ghana

164

164

2

2
13

12

12

25

Guatemala
Guinea

852

337
11

15

11

559

863

Hungary
Indonesia

9

Italy

1

Jordan

9

Kenya

8

Latvia

3

Liberia

73

Lithuania

5

Madagascar

18/20

3

3

139

139

142

142

104

25

13

1

1

1

1

9

9

9

9

1

1

1

1

9
1

2
9

3

11

7

80

3
5

18-04383

S/2018/273
Military

Police

Staff officers and units
Country

Mauritania

Men

Women

Total

6

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Total police
Men

Women

Total

4

2

6

6

Nepal

147

4

151

Netherlands

197

14

211

4

2

6

Niger

855

8

863

18

11

29

Nigeria

70

16

86

2

5

7

Norway

14

1

15

Pakistan

2

2

Portugal

2

2

1

125

14

139

1

18

11

29

127

19

146

1

1

Romania

1

1

6

6

Senegal

1 042

14

1 056

28

28

8

2

10
2

2

2

2

288

2

2

2

2

4

3

3

3

3

939

13

13

Sierra Leone
Spain

1

1

Sri Lanka

207

207

Sweden

257

Switzerland
Togo

31

4
900

39

262

29

18

315

280

314

6
29

343

275

18

293

2

38

Tunisia

36

38

36

Turkey

1

1

1

1

2

3

3

3

3

11 791

249

United Kingdom
of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland

2

United States of
America

23

Yemen

2

Total

18-04383

11 477

2

6
286

2
4

314

27

57

306

1364

67

1 431

1 613

124

1 737

19/20

S/2018/273

Annex II
Map

20/20

18-04383
