D, Resolutlo• adopted without nfereace to a Main Committee

ment, without outside interference, subversion or coercion;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
situation closely and to exercise his good offices in order
to contribute to a peaceful solution of the problem;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to explore
the possibility of holding an international conference on
Kampuchea as one of the means for implementing the
present resolution;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to Member States a report on the situation at the
earliest appropriate opportunity;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "The situation in
Kampuchea".
67th plenary meeting
14 November 1979

34/30.

Question of Cyprus18

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November
1974 and its subsequent resolutions on the question,
Mindful of the principle of the inadmissibility of acquisition of territories by force,
Recalling the idea of holding an international conference on Cyprus,
Greatly concerned at the prolongation of the Cyprus
crisis, which poses a serious threat to international peace
and security,
Deeply regretting that the resolutions of the United
Nations on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
Welcoming the ten-point agreement of 19 May
1979,19
Expressing deep concern at the lack of progress in
the intercommunal talks,
Deploring the continued presence of foreign armed
forces and foreign military personnel on the territory
of the Republic of Cyprus and the fact that part of its
territory is still occupied by foreign forces,
Deploring also all unilateral actions that change the
demographic structure of Cyprus,
Mindful of the need to settle the question of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
1. Reiterates its full support for the sovereignty,· independence, territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus and calls once again for
the cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
2. Expresses its support for the ten-point agreement
of 19 May 1979, concluded under the auspices of the
Secretary-General;
3. Affirms the right of the Republic of Cyprus and
its people to full and effective sovereignty and control
over the entire territory of Cyprus and its natural and
other resources and c. Ils upon all States to support and
help the Government of Cyprus to exercise the abovementioned rights;
4. Demands. the immediate and effective implementation of resoluti-: 1 3212 (XXIX), unanimously adopted
1 • See also sect. I, foot-note S, and sect. X.B.3, decision
34/408.
1t A/34/620 and Corr.I, annex V.

17

by the General Assembly and endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December
1974, and of the subsequent resolutions of the Assembly
and the Council on Cyprus, which provide the valid basis
for the solution of the problem of Cyprus;
5. Demands the immediate withdrawal of all foreign
armed forces and foreign military presence from the
Republic of Cyprus;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between the
representatives of the two communities;
7. Calls for respect of the human rights of all Cypriots and the instituting of urgent measures for the
voluntary return of the refugees to their homes in
safety;
8. Calls for the urgent resumption in a meaningful,
result-oriented and constructive manner of the negotiations under the auspices of the Secretary-General between the representatives of the two communities, to be
conducted freely on an equal footing on the basis of the
agreement of 19 May 1979, with a view to reaching,
as early as possible, a mutually acceptable agreement
based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
9. Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from
any unilateral action which might adversely affect the
prospects of a just and lasting solution of the problem of
Cyprus by peaceful means and to co-operate fully with
the Secretary-General in the performance of his task
under the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council as well as with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus;
10. Welcomes the proposal for the total demilitarization of Cyprus;
11. Reiterates its recommendation that the Security
Council should examine the question of the implementation, within a specified time-frame, of its relevant resolutions and consider and adopt thereafter, if necessary, all
appropriate and practical measures under the Charter of
the United Nations for ensuring the speedy and effective
implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
on Cyprus;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly by 31 March 1980 on the progress
achieved in the negotiations between the two communities on the basis of the agreement of 19 May 1979;
13. Authorizes the President of the thirty-fourth
session of the General Assembly, in the event of the
Secretary-General reporting lack of progress in the
above-mentioned negotiations, to appoint an ad hoe
committee composed of no more than seven Member
States;
14. Requests the ad hoe committee to maintain
contact with the Secretary-General in his task of facilitating the successful conclusion of the negotiations between the two communities;
15. Further requests the ad hoe committee, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to recommend
steps for and promote the implementation of all the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on Cyprus;
16. Decides to include the item entitled "Question of
Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fifth
session and requests the Secretary-General to follow up
the implementation of the present resolution and to report on all its aspects to the General Assembly at that
session.
74th plenary meeting
20 November 1979
