General Assembly-Forty-first Session

140

3. Notes the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people held at Geneva on 2 July 1986 in response to General Assembly resolution 40/170;
4. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
convening the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people;
5. Regards such a meeting as a valuable opportunity to
assess progress in economic and social assistance to the
Palestinian people and to explore ways and means of enhancing such assistance;
6. Urges the international community, the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to disburse their aid or any
other forro of assistance to the occupied Palestinian territories only for the benefit of the Palestinian people and in
a manner that will not serve to prolong the Israeli occupation;
1. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To convene in 1987 a meeting ofthe relevant programmes, organizations, agencies, funds and bodies of the
United Nations system to consider economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people;
(b) To invite the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the Arab host countries and relevant intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to participate in the
meeting;
8. Requests the international community, the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to sustain and increase their
assistance to the Palestinian people in co-operation with
the Palestine Liberation Organization;
9. A/so requests that United Nations assistance to the
Palestinians in the Arab host countries should be rendered
in co-operation with the Palestine Liberation Organization and with the consent of the Arab host Government
concerned;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th p/enary meeting
8 December 1986
41/182.

lndigenous entrepreneurs in economic development

The General Assemb/y,
Reaffirming the right of each country, in accordance
with its chosen economic and social system and priorities,
to determine its objectives, to endeavour to fulfil its development plans, to strengthen the public and prívate sectors
of its economy and to promote the development of its human resources,
Recognizing the responsibility of the international community, in particular of the developed countries, to promote and endeavour to provide an equitable international
economic environment, supportive of the development of
developing countries, in the light of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 34
Recognizing a/so the role and responsibility of each Government to promote development and provide an environment conducive to it.

Reaffirming its resolution 34/137 of 14 December 1979
on the role of the public sector in promoting the economic
development of developing countries, as well as Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1985/10 of28 May l 985 on
public administration and finance for development and
1986/73 of 23 July 1986 on the development of human resources,
Noting that indigenous entrepreneurs can play a crucial
and positive role in mobilizing resources and promoting
economic growth and socio-economic development,
Aware that many countries are actively seeking to encourage, strengthen and improve the effectiveness of indigenous entrepreneurs in expanding and modernizing
productive capacities, particularly by increasing productivity and technological capabilities, and in contributing
generally to the development process,
Bearing in mind that the promotion and development of
indigenous entrepreneurs requires a dynamic capital formation process in developing countries, which is also related to financia) and technical resources and to broader
market opportunities available to these countries,
Recognizing that people are the mainspring and inspiration of social and economic progress,
l. Invites the Secretary-General and relevant organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system,
such as the regional commissions, the United Nations Development Programme, the lnternational Labour Organisation, the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/
GATT, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization and the World Bank, as well as regional development banks, within their existing mandates, programmes and priorities:
(a) To continue to support, through, inter afia, technical co-operation projects, the efforts ofStates in encouraging indigenous entrepreneurs in the prívate, public and/or
other sectors in accordance with national laws, priorities
and regulations;
(b) To facilitate the practica) exchange of information
and experience among all countries on the role of indigenous entrepreneurs in economic development;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to study measures
at the national and international levels to promote the
contribution of indigenous entrepreneurs in both prívate
and public sectors to the economic development of developing countries, drawing upon the work already in progress in the United Nations system and bearing in mind
the need to avoid duplication of effort and cost, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session through the Economic and Social Council.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/183.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/218 of 19 December 1979 on
the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development,
Affirming resolution 6 (VIII) of 6 June 1986 of the lntergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for
Development 3'\ and decision 86/38 of 27 June 1986 of the
JS Official

34 Resolution

35/56. annt'\.

United Nations Financing System for Science
and Technology for Development

Records of" thl! General A.,semblv. Forty-Jir.st Ses.,ion,
•

Supp/em('I/( No. 3' (A/41 /37), sed. 11.A

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, 36
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General on the
termination of the United Nations Financing System for
Science and Technology for Development and the transfer
of its resources and responsibilities, 37
1. Decides to terminate the United Nations Financing
System for Science and Technology for Development as at
31 December 1986 and to transfer its responsibilities and
resources to an identifiable facility entitled "United Nations Fund for Science and Technology for Development", to be established as a trust fund within the United
Nations Development Programme;
2. Requests the Intergovemmental Committee on
Science and Technology for Development to provide
policy guidance and priorities for activities of the Fund
within the framework ofthe Vienna Programme of Action
on Science and Technology for Development;3 8
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, when identifying projects to be
financed from the Fund, to take into account the policy
guidance and priorities recommended by the Committee
and to report to the Committee on their application;
4. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to establish close working relationships between
the Fund and the Centre for Science and Technology for
Development on programmatic and substantive matters,
and requests the Secretary-General to inform the Committee at its ninth session about the arrangements made;
5. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to inform the Committee at its
ninth session on the arrangements made for the Fund;
6. Invites Governments and the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme to give
greater emphasis to science and technology for development;
7. Urges all Governments and the international community as a whole to provide the Fund with adequate financia! resources to enable it to carry out its functions.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/184.

Report of the Secretary-General in implementation of General Assembly resolution 40/173

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/173 of 17 December 1985, as
adopted, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
prepare a comprehensive analytical report on a concept of
international economic security for submission to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council,
Recognizing, in this regard, that an integrated and coordinated approach to economic development and cooperation, with a view to the creation of conditions of stability and well-being, has been a primary accomplishment

36 See Official Records of 1he Economic and Social Council, /986.
Supp/eme111 No. 9 (E/1986/29), annex l.
31 A/C.2/41/3.
38 Report ofthe United Nalions Conference on Science and Techno/ogy
for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.

141

of the United Nations since its founding and is enshrined
in Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Requests the Secretary-General, keeping in mind the already existing consensus on economic development a~d
international co-operation, in preparing his report on mternational economic security, ínter afia:
(a) To analyse approaches and contributions to economic development and international economic cooperation, and identify common elements in those approaches with emphasis on those that can further contribute to promoting international economic co-operation and
development, particularly that of developing countries;
(b) To take into account the views expressed at the
forty-first session of the General Assembly regarding possible ways and means of strengthening the dialogue on development and international economic co-operation for
the benefit of ali;
(e) To keep in mind the role and responsibilities of existing international and regional organizations, institutions and forums.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/185.

Fight against locust and grasshopper infestation
in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution S-13/2 of 1 June 1986 on the
United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, in which it
noted the importance of, ínter alia, increased food production to meet the needs of Africa, and its resolution 41/29
of 31 October 1986 on the emergency situation in Africa,
Recalling a/so the disaster in Africa resulting from the
drought of 1984 and 1985, and conscious of the ongoing
etforts to combat the adverse etfects of the resulting famine,
Noting resolution CM/Res. l 072 (XLIV) adopted by the
Council ofMinisters ofthe Organization of African Unity
at its forty-fourth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa
from 21 to 26 July 1986, 3"9
Alarmed by the unrelenting destructive etfects of the
current locust and grasshopper invasion of many African
countries and the potential spread ofthe infestation within
Africa and beyond, and concerned at the economic and social consequences, including the reduction in agricultura!
production, which could continue for severa! years, the
consequent displacement of atfected populations, and, in
particular, the etfects on longer-term economic and social
development,
Recognizing the potential problem created by billions of
insects capable of devouring as much as 80,000 metric
tons of cereal crops per swarm daily, of migrating great
distances from points of origin and thus of denying
agricultura! production to millions of producers and ultimately consumers,
Noting that the resources of Africa are insufficient to
control the locust infestation, which will need to be countered by concerted etforts at the national, regional and international levels,
Recognizing the etforts ofthe African countries, national
and international organizations and the international donor community in support of the control of locusts and
