A /70/PV.80

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

80th plenary meeting

Thursday, 17 December 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Abdrakhmanov
(Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(d) Election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180, of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee shall comprise the following: seven
members of the Security Council, including five
permanent members; seven members of the Economic
and Social Council, elected from regional groups; five
top providers of assessed contributions to the United
Nations budgets and of voluntary contributions to
United Nations funds, programmes and agencies,
including a standing peacebuilding fund; five top
providers of military personnel and civilian police
to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that at the 69th plenary
meeting of its sixty-eighth session, the Assembly elected
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Guatemala as members
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning on

1 January 2014; and that at the 81st plenary meeting of
its sixty-ninth session, the Assembly elected Colombia,
Egypt, Kenya, Malaysia and Morocco as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2015.
The General Assembly will now proceed to
the election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission. By its
resolution 60/261, of 8 May 2006, the Assembly decided
that the members of the Organizational Committee shall
serve for renewable terms of two years, as applicable.
Accordingly, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Guatemala
are eligible for immediate re-election.
Regarding candidatures for the two seats, I should
like to inform members that for the Eastern European
States, the Group has endorsed Montenegro; and for the
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Group has
endorsed El Salvador.
Members will recall that by its resolution 60/261,
the General Assembly decided that the rules of
procedure and established practice of the Assembly for
the election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee.
For this election, rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph
16 of General Assembly decision 34/401, whereby the
practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections
to subsidiary organs when the number of candidates

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-43461 (E)

*1543461*

A/70/PV.80

corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard, unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Since the number of
candidates endorsed by the Group of Eastern European
States and the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States corresponds to the number of seats to be filled,
may I take it that the General Assembly decides to
elect El Salvador and Montenegro as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2016?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate El Salvador
and Montenegro on their election as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d)
of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Third Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 28, 29, 65, 67 to 72, 106, 107,120 and 135.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Ms. Adele Li Wei of Singapore, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Committee.
Ms. Li (Singapore), Rapporteur of the Third
Committee: It is a great privilege for me to introduce
to the General Assembly the reports of the Third
Committee, submitted under agenda items allocated to
it by the General Assembly, namely, items 28, 29, 65, 67
to 72, 106, 107, 120 and 135.
The reports, contained in documents A/70/481
to A/70/491 and documents A/70/522 and A/70/523,
include the texts of draft resolutions and decisions
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption.
For the convenience of delegations, the Secretariat
has issued document A/C.3/70/INF/1, which contains
2/39

17/12/2015

a checklist of actions taken on the draft proposals
contained in the reports before this Assembly.
Under agenda item 28, including sub-items (a) to
(c), entitled “Social development”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 40 of document A/70/481,
the adoption of five draft resolutions, and, in paragraph
41, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 29, including sub-items (a)
and (b), entitled “Advancement of women”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 26 of document
A/70/482, the adoption of four draft resolutions, and, in
paragraph 27, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 65, entitled “Report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions
relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
and humanitarian questions”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 12 of document A/70/483,
the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 67, entitled “Report of the
Human Rights Council”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 10 of document A/70/484,
the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 68, entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 30 of document
A/70/485, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 69, entitled “Rights of indigenous
peoples”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 13 of document A/70/486, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 70, entitled “Elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 18 of document A/70/487, the adoption of
two draft resolutions and, in paragraph 19, the adoption
of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 71, entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 22 of document A/70/488, the adoption of
three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 72, entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 5 of document A/70/489, the
adoption of one draft decision.
15-43461

17/12/2015

Under agenda item 72 (a), entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights: Implementation of human
rights instruments”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 22 of document A/70/489/Add.1, the
adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 72 (b), entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights: Human rights questions,
including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 155 of document A/70/489/Add.2, the
adoption of 25 draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 72 (c), entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights: human rights situations
and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives”,
the Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 30 of
document A/70/489/Add.3, the adoption of four draft
resolutions.
Under agenda item 72 (d), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: Comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action”, the Third
Committee wishes to advise the Assembly that no
action was required under the item.
Under agenda item 106, entitled “Crime prevention
and criminal justice”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 35 of document A/70/490, the adoption
of seven draft resolutions, and, in paragraph 36, the
adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 107, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 15 of document A/70/491, the adoption of two
draft resolutions, and, in paragraph 16, the adoption of
one draft decision.
Under agenda item 120, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 5 of document
A/70/522, the adoption of one draft decision.
Finally, under agenda item 135, entitled “Programme
planning”, the Third Committee wishes to advise the
Assembly, in document A/70/523, that no action was
required under the item.
I would like to thank my fellow Bureau members:
the Chair of the Committee, Ambassador Omar
Hilale, Permanent Representative of Morocco; and
the Vice-Chairs Ms. Tamta Kupradze of Georgia;

A/70/PV.80

Mr. Shiraz Arif Mohamed of Guyana and Mr. Gregory
Dempsey of Canada, as well as the Secretary of the
Committee, Mr. Moncef Khane, and his able team
for their unwavering support and sound advice in
the efficient management of the proceedings of the
Third Committee. Finally, I am grateful to all Third
Committee experts for their support to the Bureau and
for their friendship.
In conclusion, I should like to respectfully commend
the reports of the Third Committee before the plenary
of the General Assembly for its consideration.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Third Committee.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Third Committee
which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Third
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified to the contrary in advance. This
means that where recorded votes were taken, we will
do the same. I should also hope that we will proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Committee.

15-434613/39

A/70/PV.80

Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat,
entitled “List of proposals contained in the reports
of the Third Committee”, which has been circulated,
in English only, as document A/C.3/70/INF/1. This
note has been distributed desk-to-desk as a reference
guide for action on draft resolutions and decisions
recommended by the Committee in its reports.
In this connection, members will find, in the fourth
column of the note, the symbols of the draft resolutions
or decisions of the Committee, with the corresponding
symbols of the reports for action in the plenary in the
second column of the same note. For reports containing
multiple recommendations, the draft resolution or
decision number is contained in the third column of the
note.
Furthermore, members are reminded that additional
sponsors are no longer accepted now that draft
resolutions and decisions have been adopted by the
Committee. Any clarification about sponsorship should
be addressed to the Secretary of the Committee.
Agenda item 28 (continued)
Social development

17/12/2015

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Policies and programmes involving youth”.
The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/127).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Cooperatives in social development”. The
Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 70/128).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Integrating volunteering into peace and
development: the plan of action for the next decade and
beyond”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 70/129).
The Acting President: We shall now turn to
paragraph 41 of the report to take action on the draft
decision entitled “Documents considered by the General
Assembly in connection with the question of social
development”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to adopt the draft decision as recommended
by the Third Committee?

Report of the Third Committee (A/70/481)

The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/530).

The Acting President: The Assembly now has
before it five draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 40 of its report and a
draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 41 of the same report. Before proceeding
further, I should like to inform members that action on
draft resolution IV, entitled “Persons with albinism”,
is postponed to a later date to allow time for the
review of its programme budget implications by the
Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on
draft resolution IV as soon as the report of the Fifth
Committee on its programme budget implications is
available.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 28.

We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to III and V and on the draft decision, one by one.

We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to IV and on the draft decision, one by one.

Draft resolution I is entitled “Promoting social
integration through social inclusion”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Violence against women migrant workers”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/126).

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/130).

4/39

Agenda item 29
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/482)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 26 of its report and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
27 of the same report.

15-43461

17/12/2015

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/131).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Improvement of the situation of women and
girls in rural areas”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 70/132).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference
on Women and full implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome
of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 70/133).
The Acting President: We shall now turn to
paragraph 27 of the report to take action on the draft
decision entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the advancement
of women”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to adopt the draft decision as recommended
by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/531).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 29?
It was so decided.

A/70/PV.80

persons in Africa”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/134).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/135).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 65?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/484)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan
in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Madut (South Sudan): I have the honour,
on behalf of the Group of African States, to make a
statement concerning the draft resolution on this item,
as it has been the traditional practice of the African
Group to do in the Third Committee. I would like to
reiterate the importance the African Group attaches
to this draft resolution and to framework resolution
60/251, including its subsequent institution-building
package, which marked the foundation of the Human
Rights Council and its mandate.

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.

The Group is mindful that the Human Rights
Council was created as a subsidiary body of the
General Assembly; hence the imperative need for the
Council to report on an annual basis to the universal
membership of the Assembly. In this context, the
Group remains firmly committed to ensuring that the
provisions of sub-paragraphs (c), (i) and (j) of paragraph
5 of resolution 60/251 are adhered to. The African
Group subscribes to the principles of constructive and
genuine dialogue and cooperation, as contained in the
framework of resolution 60/251.

The Acting President: Draft resolution I is entitled
“Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced

The Group considers the establishment of the Human
Rights Council to be a milestone in the global efforts

Agenda item 65
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons and humanitarian questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/483)

15-434615/39

A/70/PV.80

aimed at the promotion and protection of all human
rights for all, based on a constructive and cooperative
approach that avoids selectivity and double standards
and promotes human rights and fundamental freedoms
through a better understanding of traditional values
of all humankind. Since its establishment, the Human
Rights Council has witnessed serious developments that
have contributed to furnishing a suitable foundation
for overcoming the obstacles that have shackled past
international efforts aimed at consolidating universal
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
This has become possible as a result of the adoption
of a constructive and cooperative approach in dealing
with human rights question that rests on the provision
of advice and necessary technical and financial support
at the request of national Governments, given their
primary responsibility to promote and protect the
human rights of all their citizens.
The reports of the Human Rights Council address
issues and recommendations that are of the utmost
importance to the members of the African Group, as
well as to many other Member States, including, inter
alia, the right to development, the protection of the
family, the elimination of female genital mutilation,
the impact of toxic waste on human rights, the effects
of the non-repatriation of funds of illicit origin on the
enjoyment of human rights, fighting racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of related
intolerance, and migrants.
However, the African Group believes that the
principles of non-discrimination and equality are two
faces of the same coin. They are indeed cross-cutting
principles in the vast areas related to the full realization
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
Such principles are well entrenched in the Charter
of the United Nations and the internationally agreed
human rights instruments, as they all reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights, the dignity and the worth
of the human person, and the equal rights of men and
women, without distinction. They also reaffirm article
29 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the right of Member States to enact laws that meet the
just requirements of morality, public order and general
welfare in a democratic society.
The African Group is strongly concerned about
attempts to introduce and impose new notions and
concepts, such as sexual orientation and gender identity,
that are not referenced in international human rights
laws. It strongly rejects any attempt to undermine the
6/39

17/12/2015

international human rights system by seeking to impose
concepts and notions pertaining to social matters,
including private individual conduct that falls outside
internationally agreed human rights legal framework,
taking into account that such attempts constitute an
expression of disregard for the universality of human
rights.
Our alarm does not arise merely from concerns
about the lack of legal grounds or that the said
statement delves into matters that fall essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of States, counter
to their commitment under the Charter of the United
Nations to respecting the sovereignty of States and the
principle of non-intervention. We believe that people
are not inherently vulnerable, but that some individuals
and groups find themselves in vulnerable situations due
to a number of factors, including the socioeconomic
setting in which they live. The Group is therefore
concerned that non-internationally-agreed notions are
given attention to the detriment of issues of paramount
importance, such as the right to development and the
racism agenda.
In conclusion, the African Group presents this
draft resolution to express its continued support for the
important work of the Council, and it looks forward
to the adoption of the draft resolution by consensus, a
matter that will provide a message of strong support to
the Council. We invite all Member States to sponsor the
draft resolution.
The Acting President: We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
15-43461

17/12/2015

Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Israel
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America

A/70/PV.80

Agenda item 68
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/485)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 30 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Rights of the child”.
We shall first consider two draft amendments to draft
resolution I, contained in documents A/70/L.35 and
A/70/L.36.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan to introduce the draft amendment contained in
document A/70/L.35.
Mr. Madut (South Sudan): The Group of African
States takes the floor before the adoption of draft
resolution I, contained in document A/70/485 and
entitled “Rights of the Child” to present a draft
amendment to replace paragraph 49 (u) by the following
paragraph:
“To develop, where appropriate with the
support of international organizations, civil society
and non-governmental organizations, policies and
programmes, giving priority to formal, informal
and non-formal education programmes, including
age-appropriate sex education, with appropriate
direction and guidance from parents and legal
guardians, that support adolescents and enable
them to acquire relevant and adequate knowledge
and information in a manner consistent with their
evolving capacities, develop self-esteem and take
responsibility for their own lives, and to place
special focus on programmes to educate women
and men, especially parents, about the importance
of children’s physical and mental health and
well-being and the need to develop and maintain
respectful relationships between girls and boys.”

[Subsequently, the delegation of Spain informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]

This paragraph has the same language as paragraph
6 of draft resolution A/C.3/70/L.29/Rev.1, entitled “The
girl child”, previously adopted by the Third Committee.
This language was carefully crafted and negotiated
among Member States until consensus was reached on
it.

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
67.

The elements in paragraph 49 (u) go against the
spirit and the letter of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child (CRC), which is the most universally

The draft resolution was adopted by 121 votes to 2,
with 60 abstentions (resolution 70/136).

15-434617/39

A/70/PV.80

agreed international human rights instrument and the
basis of the draft resolution on the rights of the child.
The language in paragraph 49 (u) calls upon States
to develop educational programmes and teaching
materials, including on comprehensive evidence-based
human sexuality, in order to, inter alia, modify the social
and cultural patterns of conduct of men and women of
all ages. The purposes of education programmes being
called upon by this paragraph are not in line with the
obligations of Member States set forth in articles 28 and
29 of the CRC on children’s education.
The adoption of the language in paragraph 49 (u)
sets a very negative precedent for the work of the United
Nations, as certain Member States seek, for the second
time, to impose their cultural and social preferences on
others. This imposition goes against the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, which
include respect for the sovereign right of all States and
the need for international cooperation in addressing all
issues.
The African Group has made it clear that the draft
resolution on the rights of the child should never be
voted on, but when such a resolution does not uphold the
very Convention it seeks to implement, then the Group
cannot take a backseat position and thereby undermine
the well-being of all our children. The Group therefore
reiterates its commitment to upholding the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, which is also in line with
the African Union Charter on the Rights and Welfare
of the Child.
In conclusion, the Group urges Member States
to vote in favour of the draft amendment on the draft
resolution on the rights of the child. The General
Assembly’s unequivocal support will send a strong
message to the international community that the issues
contained in paragraph 49 (u) of draft resolution I are
neither universally acceptable nor reflected in any
international human right instrument that has been
negotiated and adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
the representative of Luxembourg, who wishes to speak
in explanation of vote on the two draft amendments
contained in documents A/70/L.35 and A/70/L.36.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg): I am speaking on behalf
of the European Union and the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States on the draft amendment that has
just been introduced to alter the language in paragraph
49 (u) of draft resolution I, recommended in the report
8/39

17/12/2015

of the Third Committee (A/70/485) and entitled “Rights
of the child”. We are surprised to learn that the same
draft amendment has been proposed again after it was
previously rejected in the Third Committee. The result
of the voting in the Third Committee demonstrated the
support of a clear majority of Member States for the
original text.
I would like to reiterate that the European Union
and the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
carried out an inclusive, transparent and open dialogue
with all interested delegations throughout several
rounds of informal negotiations over several weeks.
The language in the text reflects a delicate balance of
the various concerns. It is regrettable to the sponsors
of the draft resolution that issues regarding the rights
of the child, which should be at the core of the work of
the Organization, are proving challenging to be agreed
by consensus.
I would also recall that this year’s theme is the right
to education and that, in this context, the importance
of paragraph 49 (u) is clear. It is important to address
the issue of comprehensive evidence-based education
on human sexuality in this draft resolution. The
provision in the draft resolution on comprehensive,
evidence-based education on human sexuality based
on full and accurate information for all adolescents
and youth in a manner consistent with their evolving
capacities and with appropriate direction and guidance
from parents and legal guardians will positively impact
their life-long well-being. It will help them to make
informed decisions, avoid unwanted pregnancies and
improve their health, including by increasing protection
against sexually transmitted infections, such as HIV/
AIDS. In summary, it will have a positive impact on the
realization of their rights.
As the draft amendment would delete several
important elements, the members of the European
Union and the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States will vote against it, and we strongly encourage
everyone else to do the same.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft amendment to sub-paragraph (u)
of paragraph 49 of draft resolution I, as contained in
document A/70/L.35.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
15-43461

17/12/2015

In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Botswana, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Abstaining:
Bhutan,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar,

A/70/PV.80

Nepal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Viet Nam
The amendment to draft resolution I contained in
document A/70/L.35 was rejected by 86 votes to 73,
with 18 abstentions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will next take
action on the second draft amendment to sub-paragraph
(u) of paragraph 49 of draft resolution I.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft amendment to
draft resolution I contained in document A/70/L.36,
in addition to those countries listed in the document,
Oman has become a sponsor.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft amendment to draft resolution I,
as contained in document A/70/L.36. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, India, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Libya, Malawi,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,

15-434619/39

A/70/PV.80

Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Bhutan,
Cambodia,
Kazakhstan,
Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Maldives, Mali,
Myanmar, Nepal, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Viet Nam, Zambia
The amendment to draft resolution II contained in
document A/70/L.36 was rejected by 92 votes to 61,
with 16 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kenya informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to the representative of Burkina Faso, who wishes to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting on draft
resolutions I, contained in document A/70/485.
Ms. Soulama (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
am speaking in explanation of vote before the voting on
draft resolution I. Burkina Faso regrets the fact that we
are voting on a draft resolution on such an important
issue relating to one of the most vulnerable sectors of
our population. This draft resolution is being submitted
to a vote in the General Assembly for the first time in its
history. As it happens, on the day following its adoption
in the Third Committee — in which there were no votes
against it — there was visible uneasiness in the room.
Burkina Faso was hopeful that, based on that precedent,
various efforts would be made to ensure that the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
However, once we knew we were going to have to
go through this exercise once again, an alternative was
offered that replaced the controversial language in one
paragraph of the draft resolution. For that reason, while
10/39

17/12/2015

Burkina Faso has resolved to vote in favour of the draft
resolution, we would like to express reservations about
the controversial paragraph.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
take a decision on draft resolution I, entitled “Rights of
the child”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam
Against:
Botswana
15-43461

17/12/2015

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Cameroon, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea, Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait, Libya, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

A/70/PV.80

Agenda item 69
Rights of indigenous peoples
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/486)
The Acting President: Before proceeding further,
I should like to inform members that action on the draft
resolution, entitled “Rights of indigenous peoples”, is
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.

Draft resolution I was adopted by 141 votes to 1,
with 42 abstentions (resolution 70/137).

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 69.

[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
the United Republic of Tanzania informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to abstain.]

Agenda item 70

The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “The girl child”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/138).
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
the representative of Saudi Arabia, who wishes to speak
in explanation of vote on the resolutions just adopted.
Ms. Al Shubaili (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I am speaking in explanation of vote on behalf of the
countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council. We would
first like to thank the delegations that introduced the
resolution in the Third Committee on the promotion
and protection of the rights of children under agenda
item 68. In that regard, we would like to express our
regret that the sponsors of the resolution did not respect
the terms used internationally, particularly concerning
human sexuality, in particular in paragraph 49, which is
incompatible with articles 28 and 29 of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Our countries therefore
abstained in the voting on the resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/487)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 18 of its report, and one draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
19 of the same report. We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I and II and on the draft decision, one
by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and
other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,

15-4346111/39

A/70/PV.80

Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Palau, Ukraine, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 133 votes to 4,
with 49 abstentions (resolution 70/139).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “A global call for concrete
action for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
12/39

17/12/2015

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Israel, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
15-43461

17/12/2015

of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine
Draft resolution II was adopted by 133 votes to 11,
with 44 abstentions (resolution 70/140).
The Acting President: We shall now turn to
paragraph 19 of the report (A/70/487) to take action on
the draft decision entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance”. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to adopt the draft decision as
recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/532).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 70?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 71
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/488)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 22 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “The
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,

A/70/PV.80

Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Honduras, South Sudan, Tonga
Draft resolution I was adopted by 177 votes to 7,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 70/141).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “Use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

15-4346113/39

A/70/PV.80

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
14/39

17/12/2015

Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Colombia, Kenya, Liberia, Mexico, Switzerland,
Tonga
Draft resolution II was adopted by 130 votes to 53,
with 6 abstentions (resolution 70/142).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 70/143).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 71?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 72
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/489)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report (A/70/489). We will now
take action on the draft decision, entitled “Documents
considered by the General Assembly in connection
with the question of the promotion and protection of
human rights”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft decision as recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/533).
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 22 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “International
Covenants on human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
15-43461

17/12/2015

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/144).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto”. The
Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/145).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 70/146).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it 25 draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 155 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to XXV, one by one.
After all the decisions have been taken, representatives
will have the opportunity to explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Protection of migrants”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/147).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “Protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism”.
The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/148).
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution III, entitled “Promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order”. A recorded vote has
been requested.

A/70/PV.80

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United

15-4346115/39

A/70/PV.80

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, Samoa
Draft resolution III was adopted by 130 votes to 53,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 70/149).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Strengthening United Nations action in
the field of human rights through the promotion
of international cooperation and the importance of
non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 70/150).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution V, entitled “Human rights and unilateral
coercive measures”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
16/39

17/12/2015

Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Draft resolution V was adopted by 135 votes to 54
(resolution 70/151).
The Acting President: We turn to draft resolution
VI, entitled “Promotion of equitable geographical
distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
15-43461

17/12/2015

Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

A/70/PV.80

Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution 70/154).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IX is
entitled “The right to development”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 70/153).

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

The Acting President: Draft resolution VIII is
entitled “The right to food”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

Against:
Canada, Israel, Japan, Palau, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 134 votes to 54
(resolution 70/152).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation
in the field of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

15-4346117/39

A/70/PV.80

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine
Draft resolution IX was adopted by 148 votes to 6,
with 33 abstentions (resolution 70/155).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Japan informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution X is
entitled “Human rights and cultural diversity”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
18/39

17/12/2015

Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Draft resolution X was adopted by 133 votes to 54
(resolution 70/156).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Madagascar
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XI is
entitled “Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or
belief”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution 70/157).
The Acting President: We turn to draft resolution
XII, entitled “Freedom of religion or belief”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XII was adopted (resolution 70/158).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIII
is entitled “Globalization and its impact on the full
enjoyment of all human rights”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
15-43461

17/12/2015

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United

A/70/PV.80

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Greece
Draft resolution XIII was adopted by 135 votes to
53, with 1 abstention (resolution 70/159).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIV is
entitled “International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution XIV. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution 70/160).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XV is
entitled “Human rights defenders in the context of
the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon

15-4346119/39

A/70/PV.80

Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Zambia
Against:
Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belarus,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, Iraq, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia,
Niger, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution XV was adopted by 127 votes to
14, with 41 abstentions (resolution 70/161).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Mauritania
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVI is
entitled “The safety of journalists and the issue of
impunity”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution 70/162).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVII is
entitled “National institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XVII was adopted (resolution
70/163).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVIII
is entitled “Measures to enhance the promotion and
protection of the human rights and dignity of older
20/39

17/12/2015

persons”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVIII was adopted (resolution 70/164).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIX is
entitled “Protection of and assistance to internally
displaced persons”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIX was adopted (resolution 70/165).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XX is
entitled “Effective promotion of the Declaration on
the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XX was adopted (resolution 70/166).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXI is
entitled “Subregional Centre for Human Rights and
Democracy in Central Africa”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XXI was adopted (resolution 70/167).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXII is
entitled “Strengthening the role of the United Nations
in enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the
promotion of democratization”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
15-43461

17/12/2015

A/70/PV.80

Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Angola, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Zimbabwe
Draft resolution XXII was adopted by 168 to none,
with 15 abstentions (resolution 70/168).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania informed the Secretariat that
it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXIII is
entitled “The human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 70/169).

XXIII

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution XXIV is
entitled “Towards the full realization of an inclusive and

accessible United Nations for persons with disabilities”.
The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XXIV was adopted (resolution 70/170).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXV is
entitled “United Nations Human Rights Training and
Documentation Centre for South-west Asia and the
Arab Region”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,

15-4346121/39

A/70/PV.80

Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Angola
Draft resolution XXV was adopted by 184 votes to
1, with 1 abstention (resolution 70/171)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Rivas (El Salvador): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the 21 members of
the Group of Friends of Older Persons. We express
our appreciation for the adoption by consensus of
resolution 70/164, entitled “Measures to enhance the
promotion and protection of the human rights and
dignity of older persons”. We acknowledge the effort
of Argentina, and particularly the leadership of the
facilitator. We highlight the constructive consultations
and the flexibility shown by all delegations during the
negotiation process.
We are aware of the different views on the measures
to enhance the promotion and protection of the human
rights and dignity of older persons, but we recognize
the importance of strengthening the implementation of
current provisions, as well as of a specific international
legal instrument fundamentally necessary to guarantee
the rights and dignity of older persons. Full guarantee
includes monitoring for the realization and fostering
of national laws and policies to better define the
responsibility of States in the crucial areas of rights
that we should all enjoy as we age.
As stated in the resolution, we encourage Member
States to continue contributing to the work of the
Open-ended Working Group on Ageing, in particular
by presenting at its next session measures to enhance
the promotion and protection of the human rights
and dignity of older persons, such as best practices,
lessons learned and possible content for a mutual legal
instrument. We undertook a similar exercise during
22/39

17/12/2015

the last session of the Open-ended Working Group on
Ageing.
Action will be required at the 2016 session. It
is not enough to just visualize the existing gaps and
challenges that affect the rights of the older persons.
We are repeating and presenting the same identification
of gaps at each session of the Open-ended Working
Group. Once these gaps have been identified — and
they have been over six working sessions — it is the
responsibility of Member States to provide a path to
change. We emphasize the need for a constructive
proposal for international action, and we hope that the
outcome of those discussions will be more fruitful.
The Group of Friends of Older Persons will engage
constructively on all those activities, and we will
continue advocating for better and universal protection
and promotion of the rights of older persons through an
international legal instrument.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragaph 30 of its report. Action on
draft resolution II, entitled “Situation of human
rights in Myanmar”, and on draft resolution IV,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic”, is postponed to a later date to allow time for
the review of the programme budget implications by
the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on
draft resolutions II and IV as soon as the report of the
Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications
is available.
I now give the floor to those delegations that wish
to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Ri (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea):
The delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea categorically rejects draft resolution I, on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, submitted by the European Union
and Japan, as contained in document A/70/489/Add.3.
15-43461

17/12/2015

The draft resolution has no relevance to the genuine
promotion and protection of human rights, as it is the
product of hostile policies, political plots and sinister
conspiracies against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea on the part of the United States, Japan and
other forces in their attempt to break down the State and
social system of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The draft resolution pursues political objectives
to eliminate the socialist system that is the cradle of
life of a people, while denying their sovereign equality.
It is based on all sorts of distortions and fabrications,
including the sheer lies of so-called defectors and
criminals who abandoned and fled the motherland that
gave birth to them and raised them.
Despite the continuing sanctions and pressure
imposed by the United States and other hostile forces,
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea takes responsibility for the promotion and
protection of human rights of the popular masses, and
concentrates all its efforts on providing them with
enhanced livelihoods and ensuring a better future.
Our people take immense pride and confidence in the
socialist system and the mechanisms for the protection
and promotion of their human rights established in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, while enjoying
a full range of human rights in all fields of social life.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea advocates
for genuine dialogue and cooperation in the field of
international human rights, but it will strongly respond
to the end to the confrontation and pressure aimed at
stifling its system.
My delegation requests a recorded vote on the draft
resolution, and expects that all Member States will
vote against it, in conformity with the true spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
non-politicization, non-selectivity and impartiality that
are enshrined in the final document of the Non-Aligned
Movement Summit.
In conclusion, my delegation strongly rejects
the country-specific draft resolutions on the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Myanmar, proceeding from its principled position on
the discussion of human rights issues.
Mrs. Vadiati (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
biased and non-constructive draft resolution III, on
which the General Assembly is about to take action, is
an insincere and indefensible political move. It marks
selective and politicized distortion of the facts in the

A/70/PV.80

consideration of issues relating to Iran and only reminds
the Iranian people of the deliberate hostile policy of
incitement to Iranophobia. Iran clearly has rejected this
draft resolution since it was first introduced, like other
country-specific resolutions under this agenda item. On
repeated occasions, it has called upon its initiator to
engage in a respectful and equitable dialogue, instead
of trying to exert pressure and adopt coercive measures.
The majority of Member States have repeatedly
rejected the manipulation of human rights for political
objectives, and have insisted on the imperative of
the promotion and protection of human rights in all
countries through constructive dialogue, engagement
and cooperation. Unfortunately, in many cases
these principles are not upheld, and these important
mechanisms have not been successful or effective in
fulfilling their duties. One example is the way that they
have ignored the context of inaction in some countries
for years and even decades, and the rise of the extreme
barbaric takfiri ideology, which has led in turn to the
creation of violent extremist groups such as Daesh,
which are now wreaking havoc in our region and
threatening the peace and security of the whole world.
The disastrous outcome of these ideologies for the
Middle East and beyond should serve as a clarion call
for those self-proclaimed advocates of human rights
to avoid working only on the basis of their narrowly
defined political interests.
The introduction of draft resolution III is taking
place at a time in which Iran is pursuing a policy of
constructive engagement with the world. In addition,
the Iranian Government has endeavoured to create a
new environment by adopting meaningful, substantive
confidence-building measures that cover all areas,
including human rights. Furthermore, with a focus
on human rights, my Government is also fulfilling
its obligations within the framework of the Universal
Periodic Review mechanism. It is pushing through
a citizen-rights charter through its legislature and
has declared its readiness to engage in a serious and
a genuine human rights dialogue with interested
countries.
Looking at the future, we can commence a process
of constructive engagement on human rights, instead
of insisting on the outdated policy of politicizing
human rights, using dialogue instead of confrontation,
so as to depart from the path travelled during the last
years, give diplomacy a chance and end the resort to
counterproductive and coercive approaches that sap the

15-4346123/39

A/70/PV.80

energy we need to stand up to the challenges of our
time and our world.
In the light of the foregoing, I would like to ask for
a recorded vote on draft resolution III, in the sincere
hope that representatives here today will choose the
right path by saying no to it.
The Acting President: We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I and III, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar,
24/39

17/12/2015

Oman, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola,
Bangladesh,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic
of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution I was adopted by 119 votes to 19,
with 48 abstentions (resolution 70/172).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Vanuatu
15-43461

17/12/2015

Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam,
Burundi,
Cambodia,
China,
Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Benin,
Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland,
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution III was adopted by 81 votes to 37,
with 67 abstentions (resolution 70/173).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 72.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.4)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Third
Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 72?

A/70/PV.80

It was so decided.
Agenda item 106
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/490)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it seven draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 35 of its report, as well as
a draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 36 of the same report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to VII and on the draft decision, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Thirteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/174).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “United Nations Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules)”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/175).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Taking action against gender-related killing
of women and girls”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 70/176).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Technical assistance for implementing the
international conventions and protocols related to
counter-terrorism”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 70/177).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention
and criminal justice programme, in particular its
technical cooperation capacity”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 70/178).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “Improving the coordination of efforts against

15-4346125/39

A/70/PV.80

trafficking in persons”. The Third Committee adopted
it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 70/179).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders”.
The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 70/180).
The Acting President: We shall now turn to
paragraph 36 of the report to take action on the draft
decision entitled “Reports considered by the General
Assembly in connection with the question of crime
prevention and criminal justice”. May I take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to adopt the draft decision as
recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/535).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 106?
Agenda item 107
International drug control Report of the Third
Committee (A/70/491)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 15 of its report, as well as
a draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 16 of the same report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
and II and on the draft decision, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Special session of the
General Assembly on the world drug problem to be held
in 2016”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/181).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “International cooperation against the world
drug problem”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/182).
The Acting President: We now turn to paragraph
16 of the report to take action on the draft decision
26/39

17/12/2015

entitled “Report considered by the General Assembly
in connection with the question of international drug
control”. May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft decision, as recommended by the
Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/536).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 107.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/522)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision
entitled “Programme of work of the Third Committee
for the seventy-first session of the General Assembly”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision, as recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/537).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 120.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/523)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
135.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
and Chair of the Third Committee, the members
of the Bureau, the Secretary of the Committee and
representatives for a job well done.
15-43461

17/12/2015

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Third Committee
before it today, with the exception of document
A/70/481, concerning draft resolution IV; document
A/70/486, concerning draft resolution I; and document
A/70/489/Add.3, concerning draft resolutions II and IV.
As noted earlier, the Assembly will take action on those
draft resolutions as soon as the reports of the Fifth
Committee on their programme budget implications
are available.
Agenda item 125
Global health and foreign policy
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/389)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.32)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal to introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.32.
Mr. Faye (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the core members of the Foreign Policy and Global
Health Initiative — Brazil, France, Indonesia, Norway,
Thailand, South Africa and my own delegation,
Senegal — I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.32, entitled “Global health and foreign policy:
strengthening the management of international health
crises”.
In 2014, the world experienced the Ebola epidemic
that assailed West Africa, which was considered
by the World Health Organization (WHO) to be an
international public health emergency and by the
Security Council to be a threat to international peace
and security. Accordingly, the Oslo group, in renewing
its commitment to the integration of health challenges
in defining the foreign policy of States, in accordance
with the Oslo Ministerial Declaration adopted in 2007,
decided to focus this year on the urgent need to strengthen
the management of international health crises through
synergy and collaboration among Member States, the
World Health Organization, international organizations
and all stakeholders in area of health.
In doing so, this year’s draft resolution calls for the
creation and strengthening by Member States of flexible
and sustainable health systems in order to effectively
respond to outbreaks and other health emergencies. For
that reason, the World Health Organization is invited to
provide technical support to Member States, upon their
request, so as to enhance their capacity to deal with such

A/70/PV.80

emergencies and implement the International Health
Regulations, with a particular focus on developing
countries, in order to improve the resilience of their
health systems and strengthen surveillance measures
and preparation, especially with regard to infectious
diseases.
The text also urges Member States to strengthen,
where appropriate, the capacity of countries and regions
in the field of disaster risk reduction in accordance with
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, bearing in mind the importance of having
adequate and available financial resources to respond
to outbreaks and other health emergencies. The draft
resolution invites Member States in a position to do so
to support the World Bank initiative aimed at setting
up a financing mechanism for fighting pandemics so
as to ensure that the world has the financial resources
to deploy quickly trained health workers with the
equipment, drugs and other necessities to meet health
emergencies as a supplement to the World Health
Organization reserve fund.
Welcoming the decisions taken by the special
session of the WHO Executive Board on the Ebola
virus and by the one hundred and eighth World Health
Assembly to strengthen the international response to
health emergencies, the text welcomes regional efforts
to implement an action plan to contain disease, and it
commends the current process of creating the African
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention and other
similar initiatives around the world pursuant to the
International Health Regulations. The resolution also
welcomes the establishment by the Secretary-General
of a high-level panel focused on global response to
health crises, whose report is before the Assembly.
In order to make accessible, affordable and available
medication, vaccines and diagnostics for the Ebola virus
and other emerging and neglected tropical diseases, the
draft resolution reiterates its call on Member States
to continue to collaborate, as appropriate, on models
and approaches that support the delinkage of the cost
of research and development from the prices of such
health services. Building on the recent adoption of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), the draft resolution calls on the international
community, particularly Member States, to duly take
into account the importance of the management of
international health crises in defining policies aimed at
the implementation of such progammes.

15-4346127/39

A/70/PV.80

Moreover, in the interest of bolstering awareness,
engagement and political leadership regarding
antimicrobial resistance, the draft resolution decides
to hold in 2016, at the request of the World Health
Assembly, a high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on antimicrobial resistance. The options and
modalities for the holding of such a meeting are to be
determined by the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Director-General of WHO and in consultation
with Member States.
The text also requests the Secretary-General to
submit a report on the lessons learned from actions
conducted to contain public-health emergencies and
on the management of previous international crises
that have had health consequences, and to transmit in
2016 and 2017 reports provided by WHO on the state of
health security.
Finally, the draft resolution submitted for the
consideration of the General Assembly, in addition to
drawing the attention of the international community
to the socioeconomic, political and security impact
of international health crises, calls for the bolstering
of international cooperation for the improvement of
public health-care services and the coordination of
interventions leading to national health-care systems
becoming more resilient. Those are the goals of this
draft resolution.
Against that backdrop, it is a pleasure for me to invite
Member States that have not yet done so to co-sponsor
the draft resolution, which I hope will adopted by
consensus, as was the case in previous years, as it is
the fruit of the collective efforts of Member States,
but also the proof of the unswerving commitment of
the international community to provide an appropriate
response to the challenges that the management of
international health crises continue to pose.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): It gives me great
honour to speak on behalf of the member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my
own country, Malaysia.
We express our sincere appreciation to the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO) for her report on the protection of health
workers (see A/70/389), which encompasses aspects
ranging from violence experienced in armed conflict
28/39

17/12/2015

to violence experienced in the workplace. Ensuring the
capability of health systems to be able to respond to
health emergencies, and even to meet routine healthcare needs, is an imperative.
The increasing number of attacks on medical
personnel, health-care facilities, vehicles and patients
is particularly alarming. The international community
must act decisively to address that issue. In that regard,
we are pleased to note that WHO is currently developing
methodology and tools to systematically collect data
on attacks against health facilities, health workers,
health transport and patients in complex humanitarian
emergencies in the field. We hope that the data collected
will serve to further promote the safety and protection
of health facility personnel and patients. ASEAN
recognizes that instituting a resilient health system and
advancing the attainment of universal health coverage
hinges on the need for strong health workforces.
We commend the efforts of the delegation of
Senegal to facilitate negotiations — on behalf of the
Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative — as well as
the draft resolution team, on the draft on strengthening
the management of international health crisis. In
the aftermath of the Ebola pandemic, such a draft
resolution is timely and relevant. ASEAN reaffirms its
commitment to strengthening cooperation on emerging
infectious diseases, on prevention and on control and
pandemic preparedness by improving civilian health
capacity and outbreak investigation. We furthermore
commit to promote collaboration in the control of
transboundary emerging infectious diseases by sharing
and exchanging information among ASEAN member
States, including efficient referral mechanisms.
ASEAN welcomes the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1),
which will continue to ensure a holistic, integrated,
transformative and people-centred approach to
addressing global health issues. As Chair of the tenth
East Asia Summit, held on 22 November, Malaysia
issued a statement that addressed the issue of global
health, including by, first, extending the plan of action
to implement the Phnom Penh Declaration on the East
Asia Summit Development Initiative until the end of
2017, with global health, including pandemics, as one of
its priority areas; secondly, reaffirming its commitment
to the goal of an Asia-Pacific free of malaria by
2030 and endorsing the Asia-Pacific leaders malaria
elimination road map as a framework for shared action,
which includes the call for rapid and sustained scaled15-43461

17/12/2015

up efforts in the Mekong region to prevent the spread of
drug-resistant malaria; thirdly, emphasizing the need to
strengthen regional mechanisms and national capacities
to contain and prevent the spread of pandemics, such as
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, through increased
surveillance, coordination of outbreak investigations,
timely sharing of information and ensuring adequate
infection prevention meaures; and, fourthly, calling for
greater collaboration and cooperation to develop new
technologies and tools to address the spread of dengue.
ASEAN would also like to express its concern
about the safety of hospitals and health facilities due
to natural disasters. In that regard, we recognize the
need to achieve a rapid, effective and efficient disaster
response through the East Asia Summit Rapid Disaster
Response Toolkit.
In conclusion, ASEAN reiterates its firm commitment
to continue strengthening its efforts on global health.
This year’s ASEAN theme — “Our people, our
community, our vision” — and the establishment of the
ASEAN Economic Community marks the consolidation
of all community-building efforts over the past five
decades. ASEAN is indeed ushering in a new era
towards realizing opportunities and benefits for all our
people in years to come.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Remond (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
We welcome this year’s draft resolution
(A/70/L.32) entitled “Global health and foreign policy:
strengthening the management of international health
crises”, a topic that has significantly gained importance
since the Ebola epidemic in West Africa.
The Ebola outbreak is a tragic reminder of why we
need to take action and accelerate progress. We need to
ensure not only that all actors meet the core capacities
to implement the International Health Regulations,
but also that future international responses to health
humanitarian crises will be timely and coordinated. We
agree that, considering the cost of responses such as
the one to Ebola, the need to invest now in capacities
to better prevent, detect and respond rapidly to publichealth emergencies has never been more evident.
The International Health Regulations are the
cornerstone of global health security, and their

A/70/PV.80

implementation and review must be a continuous
process as part of a long-term approach. We need to
work together to improve their functioning, and we
therefore urge all Member States to fully implement
the International Health Regulations, accelerate their
implementation in the short term and to enhance
a longer-term commitment. Such a commitment
requires better assessment tools in order to have a real
perception of the implementation in countries. That
is why the EU and its member States have called for
more solid, transparent and reliable instruments to
assess countries’ core capacities, such as objective
external assessment and certification processes. In
order to do so, a change of perspective is needed. We
need to emphasize the integral relationship between
the International Health Regulations and health-system
strengthening, including the important role played by
both international and domestic health workers.
The EU and its member States have worked
closely with the World Health Organization (WHO)
at the technical level to ensure that the European
Medical Corps, which is currently being developed at
EU level, will be able to operate as part of the future
global health emergency workforce. In that context, we
look to WHO as the leading player in outbreaks and
emergencies — one whose role must be enhanced — to
provide further expertise and guidance to its member
States. Nonetheless, that leading role needs to be
improved and strengthened, including through the
building of administrative structures to deliver on
humanitarian responsibilities in line with those of
other United Nations humanitarian agencies. In that
regard, the EU and its member States look forward to
the conclusions of the Secretary-General’s High-level
Panel on the Global Response to Health Crises and its
recommendations.
Finally, we consider antimicrobial resistance as a
pressing challenge of our time on which coordinated
international action is essential. As with climate
change, the consequences for future generations can be
catastrophic, and the future will judge us on the legacy
we leave behind. We fully support the initiative to hold
a high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance at the
General Assembly in 2016, including addressing this
issue with a “one-health” approach.
Mr. Devahastin (Thailand): Thailand aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

15-4346129/39

A/70/PV.80

First of all, Thailand commends the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization for her
comprehensive report on the protection of health
workers (see A/70/389), which underlines the
importance of the safety of the health workforce in
armed conflicts and emergencies. Let me also commend
Senegal for facilitating, both here and in Geneva, the
negotiations on the draft resolution on strengthening the
management of international health crises (A/70/L.32),
which underscores the need to develop and strengthen
the health system at all levels in order to effectively
cope with international health crises.
The Ebola virus pandemic and the Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
outbreak have prompted more effective measures,
as well as decisive and coordinated responses by the
international community. It is therefore necessary to
address capacity gaps among countries to prevent,
control and provide public-health responses to
international health emergencies, as outlined in the 2005
International Health Regulations, by strengthening
national health systems and enhancing international
collaboration among all the relevant stakeholders.
Thailand attaches importance to preparedness
for potential public-health emergencies. Our actions
undertaken in that regard are therefore based on the
Declaration of the eighth meeting of ASEAN health
ministers, held on the theme “ASEAN unity in health
emergencies”, as well as the ASEAN+3 emerging
infectious diseases programme. Moreover, we need
to strengthen regional and global cooperation on
emerging infectious diseases prevention, control and
preparedness by improving surveillance and outbreak
investigation, as well as by promoting collaboration in
transboundary emerging infectious diseases control
though information-sharing.
In that regard, in December 2014, Thailand hosted
the ASEAN+3 special meeting of health ministers
on Ebola preparedness and response, with a view to
strengthening our cooperation in preparing for and
responding to the Ebola virus pandemic by promoting
public awareness, enhancing surveillance, prevention
and containment capacity, as well as strengthening the
capability of health personnel and medical sciences in
the region.
Furthermore, the Kuala Lumpur Declaration
on ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead Together, adopted
by ASEAN leaders on 22 November, emphasizes
30/39

17/12/2015

inclusiveness as one of the main characteristics of the
ASEAN Sociocultural Blueprint 2025. By strategizing
equitable access for all, a healthy, caring, sustainable
and productive community can be sustained, and a
healthy lifestyle that is resilient to health threats can
be promoted. That is in line with Thailand’s Universal
Health Scheme, which aims to provide quality health
care for all without incurring a large public financial
burden.
Sustainable development is not possible without
a healthy population. in Goal 3 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), the
international community has already committed to
ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being
for all at all ages. Priority must be given to ensuring
good health for the population and the development
of resilient health systems, as well as attaining
universal health coverage through existing initiatives
and multi-stakeholder partnerships. However, many
challenges lie ahead of us.
The Ebola pandemic, the MERS-CoV outbreak,
other humanitarian crises and natural disasters have
placed millions of people from all regions of the world
in urgent need of health care. Major pandemics such as
AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria still persist worldwide.
Thailand is therefore pleased that eradicating such
pandemics continues to be embedded in the new
sustainable development agenda. In addition, Thailand
also welcomes the decision to hold a high-level meeting
on antimicrobial resistance at the General Assembly
in 2016. In that regard, we stand ready to engage
constructively in the preparation for, and the discussion
during, the high-level meeting.
Thailand shares with the international community
the common goal and commitment of achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, including ensuring
the good health of the population. We therefore stand
ready to share our experiences and good practices with
the international community, in particular with fellow
developing countries under the South-South framework
through the capacity-building programme on universal
health coverage established in 2010.
Lastly, this year’s draft resolution is yet another
reminder to us all that international political commitment
is extremely crucial. It will ensure equitable and
universal health care that allows our people to enjoy
the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health without leaving anyone behind. The Kingdom
15-43461

17/12/2015

of Thailand hereby co-sponsors this draft resolution
to reaffirm our commitment to strengthening and
enhancing cooperation at all levels.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to express our gratitude to the
Director-General of the World Health Organization for
comprehensively addressing the issue of the protection
of medical personnel.
The recent outbreak of the Ebola epidemic in West
Africa clearly confirmed the need for a comprehensive
approach from the international community to tackle
such issues as bolstering medical staff capacities and
ensuring the safety of health-care workers. It is they
who are on the front line when it comes to crises and
outbreaks of particularly dangerous diseases. Guided
by that understanding, the Russian Federation has tried
to plan its assistance to West Africa to combat Ebola
in the following way, with a view to facilitating the
eradication of weak points and guaranteeing safety for
medical personnel.
The majority of the $60 million that our country
has earmarked for combating Ebola was geared towards
providing West African medical workers individual
means for protection, medical supplies and follow-up
activities on bolstering and developing the capacities of
public health-care systems in the countries affected by
Ebola. At the Pasteur Institute in Kindia, Guinea, and the
Pasteur Scientific Research Institute of Epidemiology
and Microbiology in Saint Petersburg, regular training
courses are held for Guinean specialists. In 2014 and
2015, leading Russian specialists repeatedly travelled
to Africa to hold training seminars.
Russian assistance in this area is not confined
just to the African region. It also covers the region of
Central Asia and the Caucasus, and active cooperation
has been established with the Eastern European
countries. We believe that the main forum for
consolidating international efforts to respond to threats
to public health should continue to be the World Health
Organization, since it has been given the mandate
to assist with the introduction and mainstreaming
of the international medical health-care rules. We
actively support that aspect of the work of the World
Health Organization and, to that end, we have made a
contribution to the Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund in the amount of $2.5 million. We expect the
report by the High-level Panel on the Global Response
to Health Crises will identify gaps in the international

A/70/PV.80

health-care system and reinvigorate practical activities
by the international community to address them.
Mr. Roet (Israel): We live in times of great
challenges and even greater opportunities. Thanks to
technological and scientific advances, people around
the world live longer, healthier lives. The global under-5
mortality rate decreased by more than half since
1990, and new research and drugs have significantly
improved our ability to fight diseases such as malaria
and tuberculosis.
The link between health and sustainable development
is clear. Promoting global health helps to reduce poverty
and inequality. It advances peace and security, and lays
the foundation for economic growth and prosperity.
Those issues are at the very core of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). Achieving
them will require the enhanced cooperation of all
stakeholders. This year, the international community
made remarkable commitments towards sustainable
development with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030. Those important road maps will
help to guide us as we set the course towards a world
free of poverty, hunger and disease.
In order to achieve our global goals and provide
universal access to quality health care, we must invest in
resilient, robust health systems, strengthen country and
regional capacities and improve the skills and working
conditions of the health workforce. Health workers are
not only essential to the functioning of health systems,
they are the very flesh and bone of every society. They
must be safeguarded. Unfortunately, health workers
find themselves in harm’s way too often and in too many
places around the world. Israel remains concerned by
the deliberate targeting of health workers, as well as
by the cynical exploitation of health-care facilities by
terrorist groups who seek shelter, store weapons or even
perpetrate attacks from within hospitals and medical
clinics. That not only compromises the neutrality of
the facility and its staff members, but also puts at risk
patients and their family members. The international
community must strongly condemn such violations of
international law and ensure that medical facilities and
personnel are protected by all the means at its disposal.
Global health threats can devastate entire
communities and set back years of progress if not
dealt with efficiently and rapidly. This year, the world

15-4346131/39

A/70/PV.80

witnessed the widespread devastation caused by the
Ebola outbreak in West Africa. While the spread of
the disease has been contained, the road to recovery
and rehabilitation is long and full of uncertainty.
Medical staff and health workers are often among
those most affected, placing an additional stress on
already over-burdened health systems. It is up to all
stakeholders to continue their efforts to strengthen the
resilience of health systems and to improve the quality
and conditions of medical facilities and local health
workforces. Just two weeks ago, Israel set up a mobile
field clinic in Liberia to assist medical professionals
treat diseases that require isolation. That is the third
such clinic dispatched by Israel over the past year to
countries affected by the Ebola virus.
Public health has always been a top priority for
the State of Israel. Since its establishment, Israel
has focused on developing innovative and effective
solutions to meet the range of health challenges
facing our population. This year, Israel was ranked by
Bloomberg as the sixth-healthiest country in the world,
with one of the most efficient health systems. Israel’s
universal health-care system extends quality care to all
its citizens, Jewish and Arab alike. In addition, every
year hundreds of thousands of Palestinian patients
from the West Bank and Gaza receive various medical
treatments in Israeli hospitals, ranging from cancer
treatments to surgeries and emergency care. Israel’s
health-care system is not only a model of efficiency,
it is also a model of coexistence. If one steps into an
Israeli hospital, she will find Christian, Muslim and
Jewish doctors working side by side for one common
goal: to save the lives of patients of all religions and
walks of life.
Israel’s National Agency for International
Development Cooperation (MASHAV) serves as
a bridge between Israel’s medical community and
the developing world. Its programmes in the field
of emergency medicine and public health focus on
capacity-building and the preparedness of local medical
staff, especially in rural areas. In the town of Mpika,
Zambia, Israeli medical teams set up an eye camp that
trained local medical personnel and screened over
1,000 patients with various eye diseases and cataracts.
Maternal and reproductive health is another
important area of focus for Israel. Women who are
healthy and have control over their bodies are able
to provide better care for their families and fully
contribute to their communities. Last year, MASHAV
32/39

17/12/2015

and the Millennium Cities Initiative launched two
neonatal special care units in the rural city of Kumasi,
Ghana, with the aim of reducing neonatal and maternal
mortality.
Israel’s commitment to global health also extends
to areas affected by natural disasters. Over the past two
years, Israel dispatched humanitarian aid, medical staff
and supplies, including fully equipped field hospitals,
to disaster-stricken countries around the world,
including Nepal, the Philippines, Serbia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Madagascar and Haiti.
Mahatma Gandhi once said, “It is health that is
the real wealth and not pieces of gold and silver.” Let
us all work together to ensure that our children enjoy
a world that is not only wealthy, but also healthy and
harmonious for all.
Mr. Mwanza (Zambia): I thank you, Sir, for
according me this opportunity to speak on this
important agenda item on global health and foreign
policy. My delegation is also grateful to the General
Assembly for its commitment and focus on health as
one of the major issues on foreign policy and well-being
of the citizens of the world. Zambia acknowledges with
gratitude the note by the Secretary-General (A/70/389)
transmitting the report of the Director-General of the
World Health Organization (WHO) on the protection
of health workers. Zambia joins the rest of the world
in condemning any form of violence against health
workers and humanitarian personnel the world over.
We call for stiffer penalties for perpetrators of violence
against health personnel and urge all Governments to
ensure the protection of health workers.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) by our heads of State and
Government in September demonstrated strong political
leadership and commitment to attain development,
including improving the delivery of health services.
Zambia is delighted that, under Goal 3 of the 2030
Agenda, Member States agreed to implement policies
and programmes at the national and international levels
to ensure healthy lives and promote the well-being of all
at all ages. In line with the Agenda, and building on the
momentum generated by the Millennium Development
Goals, Zambia is committed to continue improving
health-service delivery.
Zambia reaffirms its resolve to reduce maternal
mortality to fewer than 70 per 100,000 live births, as
well as preventable deaths of newborns and children
15-43461

17/12/2015

under 5 years of age from epidemics of AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria, water-borne diseases and other
communicable diseases. So far, the latest statistics
indicate that child and maternal health indicators have
improved significantly. The maternal mortality ratio
declined from 591 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2007
to 398 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2014. Similarly,
the under-5 mortality rate declined from 119 per 1,000
live births in 2007 to 75 in 1,000 live births in 2014.
Infant mortality declined from 70 to 45 per 1,000 live
births over the same period. The neo-natal mortality
rate declined from 37 per 1,000 live births to 24 per
1,000 live births over the same period. The Zambia
Government has put in place policy measures to ensure
that our people have access to sexual and reproductive
health-care services, including family planning.
My Government has undertaken a multisectoral
approach to address health matters through close
collaboration with several partners, including
international donors, local and international civil society
organizations, faith-based organizations, traditional
leaders and other key stakeholders in the health and
development sector. Being one of the countries affected
by HIV and AIDS, Zambia has managed to reduce the
preference rate from 15.6 per cent to 13 per cent, and
continues to advocate for the eradication of the disease.
To that end, Zambia is willing to continue working with
like-minded individuals and partners to ensure that we
reach a zero infection rate, which is the surest way to
achieve the 2030 Agenda target of ending AIDS.
Zambia remains committed to increase financing
to the health sector through recruitment, development,
training and retention of health workforce. The Zambia
Government is recruiting more health personnel to
cushion the shortage of staff in the health sector. In
an effort to bring ease of access to people, including
those in remote areas, the Government is constructing
health centres with modern treatment equipment that
are closer to the people and providing mobile clinics for
the benefit of those in hard-to-reach areas.
In conclusion, Zambia joins other speakers in
calling for partnership across the board and concerted
efforts to achieve universal health coverage.
Ms. Phipps (United States of America): The United
States greatly values the theme of this year’s agenda
item on foreign policy and global health. With the
lessons learned through the Ebola crisis and recovery
on everyone’s radar, there seems to be no better or more

A/70/PV.80

appropriate time to discuss how we respond to health
emergencies. The international community collectively
has been highly focused on those key findings so that
we are better prepared in the future. It is not a question
of if a health emergency will happen, but when and
where one will happen.
The United States has demonstrated resolute
commitment to ending the spread and devastation of
the Ebola virus. To date, the United States Government
has provided over $2 billion to the outbreak response.
We have deployed several thousand civilian responders
on the ground to establish control centres, improve
surveillance, enhance case management, restore
essential health services, train social mobilizers and
ensure that logistics management is in place. But we
know that we must continue to find ways to support
long-term recovery efforts and address chronic
vulnerabilities while maintaining the fight to reach
zero.
The devastating impact of the Ebola crisis is
well known, but we must make the lessons learned
even more far-reaching. The Ebola outbreak and
response has shown us, above all, that the timely
mobilization of appropriate response is critical. We
must strengthen institutions and mechanisms for rapid
deployment of multidisciplinary teams of experts,
enhance transparency and accountability, support the
establishment of an effective coordination platform led
by national authorities of affected countries and the
timely disbursement of funding. It is essential that this
key moment is not lost and that things not simply return
to business as usual.
A critical issue for the United States and the global
community has been a World Health Organization
(WHO) and United Nations system that is ready to
take on such challenges in the future. We applaud the
seriousness with which WHO has taken on emergency
response reform. Internal structural reforms will
help WHO effectively and efficiently respond to
future emergencies. A comprehensive and revised
framework to respond to all hazards should be put in
place, with clearly understood roles for all levels of the
organization. The role of WHO as the lead for the global
health cluster in major humanitarian emergencies must
be strengthened and resourced to function effectively
and to be able to serve as the interface between the
international public health system and the humanitarian
architecture. Timely access to funding for both rapid

15-4346133/39

A/70/PV.80

response and protracted crises with public health
consequences is key to future success.
In addition, the United States will support the
goal of strengthening global health security in West
and Central Africa and other at-risk regions through
its commitment to the Global Health Security Agenda
(GHSA). The GHSA recognizes that the threats posed
by infectious disease cannot be addressed by any
single actor or country, but requires collaboration on
a global scale and across sectors. The GHSA seeks to
mobilize coordinated action around the following three
priority areas: preventing and reducing the likelihood
of outbreaks, whether natural, accidental or intentional;
detecting threats early to save lives; and a rapid,
effective response through multisectoral international
coordination and communication. During the Group
of 20 Summit in Antalya, Turkey, in 2015, President
Obama announced the 30 countries with which the
United States will partner to achieve the targets of the
Global Health Security Agenda.
Draft resolution A/70/L.32, which we are about
to adopt and which the United States is pleased to
co-sponsor, recognizes the need for an improved, more
effective and better coordinated response capacity
for the international community in responding to
humanitarian health emergencies. We thank the core
group and the other sponsors, and in particular this
year’s facilitator, Senegal, for the inclusive process of
negotiations on the draft resolution before us.
With regard to the draft resolution itself, we would
like to make two small, but important, clarifications.
First, we are joining the consensus and co-sponsoring
the draft resolution today with the express understanding
that the draft resolution’s reaffirmation of human
rights instruments, documents, positions or rights are
applicable to the extent countries have affirmed them
initially, and that it does not imply that States must
implement obligations under human rights instruments
to which they are not party, including the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
To the extent that it is implied in the draft resolution,
the United States does not recognize the creation of any
new right that we have not previously recognized, the
expansion of the content or coverage of existing rights
or any other change in the current state of conventional
or customary international law, including international
humanitarian law. The draft resolution also does
not interpret or alter any World Trade Organization
34/39

17/12/2015

agreement or decision, including the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
Countries have a wide array of policies and actions that
may be appropriate for the progressive realization of the
right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard
of physical and mental health, and neither this draft
resolution nor others should try to prescribe or define
how individual countries pursue such progressive
realization.
In conclusion, we note that the term “equitable” is
used in references to access to health services. While
the United States fully endorses the importance of
promoting equal access to health services, we must note
that the term equitable is inherently subjective; may be
defined by each country through their own processes,
although it should not be interpreted in a manner so
as to deny access to health services based upon the
concept that some individuals or groups deserve access
to health care while others may not; and does not
connote any national or international obligations.
Mr. Kaganda (United Republic of Tanzania): We
welcome the continued efforts of the General Assembly
to bring prominence to health as a vital global foreign
policy agenda. It is indeed an important and enduring
agenda. Despite incredible improvements in health
over the past half a century and notable achievements
under the Millennium Development Goals, the reality
is that many challenges persist whose remedy requires
our individual and collective action. Consider the
following. This year alone, nearly 6 million children
under 5 have died, mainly of preventable causes. That is
equivalent to 16,000 deaths every day, or five children
dying every 60 seconds. A large portion of those deaths
took place in developing countries, including Africa. In
2014, there were an estimated 438,000 malaria deaths
worldwide, most of which took place in sub-Saharan
Africa. This year alone the region has had 89 per cent of
global malaria cases and 91 per cent of malaria deaths.
Globally, many people are dying of infectious
diseases that historically have killed more people
than natural or human-made catastrophes, such as
armed conflicts. We therefore thank the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization for her
informative report on global health and foreign policy
(see A/70/389), with a particular focus on the protection
of health workers across the globe. The report reveals
myriad challenges that we must confront as a global
community. They demand all of us to prepare and
navigate a complex system in which domestic, regional
15-43461

17/12/2015

and global issues intertwine with foreign policy, where
specialized skills and resources are required following
outbreaks of diseases, at times in the midst of security
threats against civilians and health workers.
We also pay tribute to her for her continued
advocacy on the need to end attacks against health-care
workers, facilities and transport and patients. We note
that such attacks may seriously undermine the provision
of medical services to patients, diminish the morale of
health workers and subsequently weaken the ability of
health systems to deliver essential life-serving services
to the population. In addition to the very pertinent
recommendations of the report, which my delegation
has fully taken into account, we wish to underline the
following.
First, we note with concern the plight of health
workers resulting from verbal or physical attacks
from patients, family members and the general public
because of what they do, whom they serve, where they
originally come from or even how they look. Addressing
their plight requires more than physical protection.
It must include targeted public-health campaigns to
speak against such attacks; enhanced measures against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance; and generally the promotion of a working
environment that is free from violence and abuse.
Secondly, we note from the report that many health
workers operate in hazardous working environments,
including in situations of calamities, such as
earthquakes, severe flooding, drought and the outbreak
of pandemics, such as the Ebola virus disease, which
recently affected some West African countries. Those
too must be protected from the impact of the disasters
and from contracting and transmitting infections to
other patients, colleagues and visitors. We need to
ensure that they have adequate training and personal
protective equipment and that they operate in safe and
secure health facilities, with basic amenities, such as
clean water and sanitation. Those must go hand in hand
with the strengthening of fragile health systems that
cannot cope with mega-health crises.
Thirdly, we deplore attacks against health workers,
patients and health facilities in the context of armed
conflicts. Those attacks can inhibit access to health
facilities, curtail the enjoyment of the right to health
care and severely weaken health systems. Acts carried
out in blatant violation of the rules and principles of
international humanitarian, human rights law and

A/70/PV.80

customary international law regarding the protection
of medical and humanitarian personnel, their means
of transport, equipment and medical facilities,
including hospitals, are reprehensible, condemnable
and deserving of stringent punishment from competent
courts. Tanzania calls for the full respect of international
humanitarian law, including the provisions of the four
Geneva Conventions and their Protocols. The bottom
line is that we must work concertedly to address the
root causes of conflicts, which are a potential breeding
ground for new deadly infectious diseases.
Fourthly, we could not agree more with the report
that there is a definite mismatch between the demand
for and supply of health- and social-care workers, which
is acute in developing countries, especially in Africa.
We are fully cognizant of the urgency of addressing
those shortfalls with a view to catering to the healthcare needs of our people and build the resilience of our
health systems. We note, however, that success in our
endeavours hinges upon other factors, such as poverty
eradication, the attainment of quality education for all
and the building of peaceful, secure and prosperous
societies that are free from violence, corruption and
conflicts. We believe that until those objectives are
met, African trained doctors, nurses and other skilled
workers will continue to flee the continent in search
of better opportunities elsewhere. Some describe this
phenomenon as a brain drain, but Tanzania perceives
it as something that could potentially yield some
gains, including in terms of knowledge, expertise
and remittances the workers could bring back home.
Aside from that, we see a lot of potential in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which provides
an opportunity for partnerships and innovation for
addressing development challenges, including in the
health domain.
We note that factors such as globalization and
ecological changes are putting health workers and
the general public in both developed and developing
countries at a greater risk of contracting and spreading
infectious diseases. Going forward, we would need
to draw important lessons from the outbreaks of
the recent past and build international, regional and
national resilience and capacity for surveillance,
prevention, diagnostics and response to epidemics. In
that regard, we look forward to the recommendations
of the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on
Global Response to Health Crises, which is led by

15-4346135/39

A/70/PV.80

His Excellency Mr. Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, former
President of the United Republic of Tanzania.
In conclusion, we wish to underscore the importance
of partnerships and cooperation in advancing healthrelated goals and addressing common health challenges.
In that regard, we recall resolution 69/132, in which
the Assembly invited WHO to provide technical
support to interested Member States for strengthening
capacity to deal with public-health emergencies
and the implementation of the International Health
Regulations. Tanzania looks forward to forging greater
partnerships with WHO and other stakeholders, some
of whom have pledged in the Hall today their continued
cooperation with our countries, with a view to realizing
that important undertaking.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes, and is pleased to co-sponsor, draft
resolution A/70/L.32, on strengthening international
health crisis management. We would also like to thank
the delegation of Senegal for its facilitation of the
negotiations that led to the draft resolution.
I would like to align myself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union and its member States,
as well as to add a few comments in my national capacity
on one of the global health challenges highlighted in the
draft resolution — that of antimicrobial resistance.
Antimicrobial resistance poses a catastrophic
global threat, not just to the health and lives of millions
across the world but also to our livelihoods and our
economies. The global loss of life from antimicrobial
resistance is currently estimated at 700,000 deaths
annually worldwide. If the growth of resistance to
modern medicines is left unchecked, it will become
much worse. On current trajectories, it is a question of
when — not if — drug-resistant infections become an
unstoppable problem. Effective antimicrobial agents
are the basis of modern medicine. They are also vital
for productive and sustainable agriculture. The growth
of resistance is a threat to hard-won development gains
and the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals.
The engagement of the United Nations on
antimicrobial resistance has grown this year. The
World Health Assembly adopted a global action plan in
May, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations adopted a resolution on antimicrobial
resistance at its biennial conference in June. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1),
36/39

17/12/2015

which our Heads of State and Government agreed in
October, also recognizes the threat of antimicrobial
resistance. But much more needs to be done. Global
awareness of the issue, including at the highest political
level, an effective international partnership and a United
Nations system-wide response, is critical to success in
tackling antimicrobial resistance. The United Kingdom
therefore welcomes the decision in the draft resolution
to hold a high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance
next year at the General Assembly. We stand ready to
do all we can to help ensure the success of that kind of
a meeting.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Cambodia aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Malaysia
on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
Cambodia welcomes today’s imminent adoption of
draft resolution A/70/L.32.
The report prepared by the Director-General of
the World Health Organization (WHO) (see A/70/389)
has provided us with highlights on the progress made
by international health-related agencies, as well as
on challenges they face, particularly with regard to
protection and security for health workforces. The
report also notes the call for the involvement of many
actors to support countries to save lives in the light of
unexpected outbreaks and to improve responses and
preparedness for future crises. However, my delegation
would like to know more about how health threats have
challenged global peace and security as stated in the
report.
My delegation joins the international community
as a whole in welcoming the recently adopted Paris
Climate Change Agreement. It will afford us an
opportunity to upgrade public health and the health
of the world population, which has been deteriorating
due to environment-related diseases. As we know, the
agreement has been termed by the Secretary-General
“the health insurance policy for the planet”. It is now
time to join hands to put into vigorous action the
commitment set out therein to improve public health.
Health undoubtedly is an indispensable factor for us
all, and therefore it has always been on the agenda of
the United Nations. Most important, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) clearly
includes health among the 17 goals, to ensure universal
health coverage and other significant measures for all
15-43461

17/12/2015

countries to strengthen their response to infectious and
non-communicable diseases.
As we discuss health issues here, millions of people
across the world are unable to gain access to health care,
particularly in developing countries. Poor populations
will experience slow development. We have seen
emerging pandemics in recent years, such as Avian
influenza, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Ebola
virus disease and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome,
which are fatal and transnational in nature. They were
also a test for national and international health sectors
to work in a more collaborative and efficient manner
in order to respond to the rapid spread of disease.
Governments were hesistant to reveal the lessons learned
when their countries were struck by pandemics, fearing
their negative impact on their countries’ economies.
For that reason, understanding and collaboration by
both Governments and international health-related
agencies on agreeable regulations are imperative for
future control of pandemics. Warning systems and
further effective measures to prevent and control those
pandemics are needed.

A/70/PV.80

Cambodian population. My delegation also recognizes
the primary role of WHO in directing and coordinating
international health across the globe within the United
Nations system. At the same time, I would like to express
my sincere thanks to our international health partners
for providing both technical and financial assistance
and cooperation and support for the implementation of
action plans of the health sector over the years.
Finally, I wish to state that the Royal Government
of Cambodia considers the health sector the core of
socioeconomic development, as it is a pillar of the
education sector in enhancing the quality of Cambodia’s
human resources in the context of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations economic integration and
globalization.
Achieving Millennium Development Goal 5 by
2015 is currently the highest health priority for my
Government. The First Lady of Cambodia was named
the champion of, and is the advocate for, a healthy
motherland in Cambodia. Many Royal Government
policies, strategies and delivery systems incorporate a
strong health system.

Aside from preparedness measures, transfer of
modern techonologies remains essential for countries,
which need to work together in coping with new viral
and transnational infectious diseases in a timely manner.
It is understandable that communicable diseases can be
spreading faster than ever, since the world is more like
a global village, with only hours between continents
by plane. Capacity-building for individual countries to
prevent, detect and respond to pandemics is essential to
create a better world health system.

My Government has also endorsed a number of
strategies that are consistent with Global Hunger
Index principles, such as improving women’s health by
strengthening girls’ education and increasing gender
equity, using data gathered through the nationwide
web-based health management information system to
make funding and programme decisions and integrating
internal care services with those that offer HIV testing
through strong coordination of the relevant Government
sectors.

At the national level, Cambodia is on track to
achieve the three-zeros HIV/AIDS target by 2020. The
three zeros, adopted by the General Assembly in New
York in June 2011, include zero new HIV infections,
zero stigma and discrimination and zero AIDS-related
deaths by 2020. According to the National AIDS
Authority, the HIV infection rate among Cambodians
aged 15 to 59 is 0.7 per cent, down from 0.8 per cent in
2011 and 0.7 per cent in 2014. We anticipate that, based
on that result, Cambodia will surely be able to achieve
the three zeros by 2020.

Ms. Skale (Germany): Let me first of all align
myself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
Cambodia’s full support for the programmes and
projects that the World Health Organization and relevant
agencies have been conducting in Cambodia, which
are indeed beneficial to the health conditions for the

Germany welcomes the theme of draft resolution
A/70/L.32, entitled “Global health and foreign policy:
strengthening the management of international health
crises”, which we are pleased to co-sponsor. If we, the
international community, want to prevent the disastrous
impacts of disease outbreaks, as witnessed during
the Ebola epidemic in West Africa, every country’s
contribution is needed. In the spirit of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), all of us
will have to play our part in strengthening health systems,
global health-care structures and crisis management
mechanisms, including the full implementation of the
International Health Regulations.

15-4346137/39

A/70/PV.80

17/12/2015

The German Government attaches great importance
to strengthening health systems and global health
security. In doing so, we build on a long-standing
engagement in that area. Please allow me to highlight a
few areas of our most recent and ongoing work.

cross-border health threats. Consequently, WHO must
be properly resourced and fundamentally reformed if it
wants to re-establish its role as the guardian of global
public health and strengthen its emergency response
capacity.

First, global health is one of the top issues of this
year’s German Group of 7 (G-7) presidency. At the
G-7 Summit in Elmau, our Heads of State committed
themselves to a comprehensive package of measures
all aimed at increasing global health security and
preventing outbreaks such as the Ebola crisis in future.

Germany very much supports the decision to hold a
high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance in 2016.
Given the massive rise in antimicrobial resistance over
the past few years, decisive action is needed. That
issue affects industrialized and developing countries
alike. Conservative estimates suggest that well over
700,000 people already die each year from infections
caused by resistant bacteria, and the death toll will
keep increasing. Apart from human suffering, we are
also faced with far-reaching economic consequences.
We see two major themes the high-level meeting
could address. First and foremost is raising awareness
beyond the health sector — including agriculture, the
environment, research and finance — and, secondly,
fostering the One Health approach.

Secondly, together with the Prime Minister of
Norway and the President of the Republic of Ghana,
Chancellor Merkel initiated the High-level Panel on the
Global Response to Health Crises. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for establishing the Panel and look
forward to receiving its report and recommendations in
the coming weeks.
Thirdly, Germany is the third-largest bilateral
donor in the health sector, with a budget of €800 million
in 2013. As a response to the devastating effects of
the Ebola crisis, we launched a special programme to
promote health in Africa with a budget of €655 million
for the time frame 2015-2019.
Fourthly, together with the Director-General
of the World Health Organization, Ms. Margaret
Chan, Chancellor Merkel launched the joint initiative
Roadmap: Healthy Systems — Healthy Lives as a way
to identify cooperative strategies to improve global
health at a high-level side event on the margins of the
United Nations summit for the adoption of the post2015 development agenda in September. The Roadmap
is meant to provide a framework that ties existing
initiatives together, building on and using the lessons
learned and the recommendations developed by those
initiatives.
The disastrous outbreak of Ebola in West Africa
made us painfully aware of how urgently the international
community needs to act when crises strike. Today, the
world community is still insufficiently prepared to cope
with public health crises of that magnitude. In the past,
we failed to build up the capacities needed for a fast
and fully coordinated crisis response. Therefore, we are
convinced that global health actors and humanitarian
actors must better coordinate, and capacities for health
crisis management need to be strengthened. WHO,
as the United Nations specialized agency for global
health, has the central role to play in the fight against
38/39

In conclusion, we are confident that together we
can make great progress in advancing global health and
thereby contribute significantly to enabling a life of
health and dignity for all people.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda 125.
Before we proceed to consider draft resolution
A/70/L.32, allow me, on behalf of all members,
to express our sincere thanks to our outstanding
interpreters for their patience and excellent service.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/70/L.32. I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Herity (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft resolution A/70/L.32, entitled “Global health
and foreign policy: strengthening the management of
international health crises”, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraph 19 of draft resolution A/70/L.32, the
General Assembly would decide to hold a high-level
meeting on antimicrobial resistance in 2016, and would
call upon the Secretary-General, in collaboration with
the Director-General of the World Health Organization
and in consultation with Member States, as appropriate,
15-43461

17/12/2015

to determine options and modalities for the conduct of
such a meeting, including potential deliverables.
Pursuant to the request set out in paragraph 19, it
is understood that all issues related to the 2016 highlevel plenary meeting, including the date, format,
organization and scope, are yet to be determined.
Accordingly, in the absence of modalities for the
meeting, it is not possible at the present time to estimate
the potential cost implications of the requirements for
meetings and documentation.
Upon the decision on the modalities, format and
organization of the meeting, the Secretary-General
will submit the relevant costs of such requirements,
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure.
Furthermore, the date of the meeting will have to be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/70/L.32 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget.
The Acting President: As there are no requests for
the floor, we will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/70/L.32.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.

A/70/PV.80

Ms. Herity (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/70/L.32: Albania, Andorra,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, the Niger, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, San Marino, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.32?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 70/183).

A/70/L.32

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 125.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

15-4346139/39
