A /75/PV.30

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

30th plenary meeting

Monday, 23 November 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 120
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/579)
The President: In paragraph 8 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2021: Abdallah Bachar Bong,
of Chad; Feliksas Bakanauskas, of Lithuania; Pavel
Chernikov, of the Russian Federation; Donna-Marie
Chiurazzi-Maxfield, of the United States of America;
Nabil Kalkoul, of Algeria; Julia Maciel, of Paraguay;
Vidisha Maitra, of India; Caroline Nalwanga, of
Uganda; and Juliana Gaspar Ruas, of Brazil; and Cihan
Terzi, of Turkey.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint those persons as members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/404).

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/580)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report, the Fifth
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
reappoint the following persons as members of the
Committee on Contributions for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2021: Michael Holtsch,
of Germany; Ji-sun Jun, of the Republic of Korea;
Vadim Laputin, of the Russian Federation; Henrique da
Silveira Sardinha Pinto, of Brazil; Lin Shan, of China;
and Steve Townley, of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
reappoint those persons as members of the Committee
on Contributions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/405).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-32771 (E)

*2032771*

A/75/PV.30

(c) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/581)
The President: The Fifth Committee recommends,
in paragraph 4 (a) of its report, that the General Assembly
confirm the appointment by the Secretary-General
of the following persons as regular members of the
Investments Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2021: Yasir Al-Rumayyan,
of Saudi Arabia; Sarah Omotunde Alade, of Nigeria;
Natalia Khanjenkova, of Russian Federation; and
Patricia Parise, of Argentina.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to confirm the Secretary-General’s appointment of
those persons as regular members of the Investments
Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2021?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 4 (b) of the same
report, the Fifth Committee also recommends that
the General Assembly confirm the selection by the
Secretary-General of Michael Klein, of the United
States of America, as Chair of the Investments
Committee beginning on 1 January 2021.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
confirm the Secretary-General’s selection of Michael
Klein as Chair of the Investments Committee beginning
on 1 January 2021?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 4 (c) of the same
report, the Fifth Committee further recommends that
the General Assembly confirm the reappointment by
the Secretary-General of Macky Tall, of Mali, as an
ad hoc member of the Investments Committee for a
one-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2021.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
confirm the reappointment by the Secretary-General of
Macky Tall as an ad hoc member of the Investments
Committee for a one-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/406).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 120?
2/23

23/11/2020

It was so decided.
(d) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/582)
The President: In paragraph 5 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the International Civil Service Commission for a
four-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2021:
Mr. Larbi Djacta, of Algeria; Mr. Igor Golubovskiy,
of the Russian Federation; Mr. Pan-Suk Kim, of the
Republic of Korea; Mr. Wang Xiaochu, of China; and
Mr. El Hassane Zahid, of Morocco.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint those persons as members of the International
Civil Service Commission for a four-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/407).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
(e) Appointment of members of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/583)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. Thembekile Kimi Makwetu, of
South Africa, and Ms. Janet St. Laurent, of the United
States of America, as members of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2021.
In connection with the recommendation to appoint
Mr. Makwetu, the Chair of the Fifth Committee has
brought to my attention a letter dated 11 November 2020
from the Permanent Representative of South Africa to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
issued as document A/75/599, informing the SecretaryGeneral of Mr. Makwetu’s untimely passing.
The Chair of the Fifth Committee has also
informed me that at its current session the Committee
will proceed to recommend a person to fill the resulting
vacancy remaining in the Committee.
20-32771

23/11/2020

May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to appoint, at this time, Ms. Janet St. Laurent
as a member of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/408).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (e)
of agenda item 120.
(f) Appointment of members and alternate
members of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/584)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members or
alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension
Committee for a four-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2021: Mr. Ahmed Al Kabir, of Bangladesh;
Mr. Dmitry Chumakov, of the Russian Federation;
Mr. Lovemore Mazemo, of Zimbabwe; Mr. Philip
Richard Okanda Owade, of Kenya; Ms. Pía Poroli, of
Argentina; Mr. Jörg Stosberg, of Germany; Mr. David
Traystman, of the United States of America; and
Mr. Tomoya Yamaguchi, of Japan.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint those persons as members or alternate members
of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee for a
four-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/409).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (f) of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.

A/75/PV.30

Agenda item 119
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/248)
The President: Pursuant to General Assembly
decision 42/450, of 17 December 1987, and upon their
nomination by the Economic and Social Council, the
Assembly elects the members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
The Assembly has before it a note by the SecretaryGeneral, circulated in document A/75/248, which
contains the nominations by the Economic and Social
Council to fill the vacancies in the Committee that
will occur on 31 December 2020 upon the expiration
of the terms of office of Belarus, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, Cuba,
Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Japan, Pakistan, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, as well as upon the
expiration of the term of office linked to the existing
vacancy for one member from the Latin American
and Caribbean States. Those States are eligible for
immediate re-election.
I would like to remind members that as of 1 January
2021, the following States will remain members of
the Committee: Angola, Argentina, China, Comoros,
Ethiopia, France, Liberia, Mauritania, Paraguay,
the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and
Uruguay. Those 12 States will therefore not be eligible
in this election.
I would now like to inform Members that the
following 18 States have been nominated by the
Economic and Social Council: Cameroon, Eritrea,
Eswatini and Mali for the four seats for the Group of
African States; India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Japan and Pakistan for the four seats for the Group
of Asia-Pacific States; Armenia, Belarus and Poland
for the three seats for the Group of Eastern European
States; Brazil, Costa Rica and Cuba for three of the four
seats for the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States; and Italy, Malta, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States

20-327713/23

A/75/PV.30

23/11/2020

of America for four of the five seats for the Group of
Western European and other States.

General Assembly for a three-year term beginning on
1 January 2021 and expiring on 31 December 2023.

In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot. However, I
should like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.

Finally, Members are reminded that one vacancy
for a member from the Latin American and Caribbean
States remains to be filled for a term of office
beginning on the date of election and expiring on
31 December 2020.

In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The President: The number of States nominated
from among the African States, the Asia-Pacific States,
the Eastern European States, the Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Western European and other
States is equal to or lower than the number of seats to
be filled in each of those groups.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes
to declare the States nominated by the Economic and
Social Council, namely, Armenia, Belarus, Brazil,
Cameroon, Costa Rica, Cuba, Eritrea, Eswatini, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Mali, Malta,
Pakistan, Poland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Island and the United States of America,
elected members of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/410).
The President: I congratulate the States that
have just been elected members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination. Members are reminded
that two vacancies remain for a term beginning on the
date of election by the General Assembly, to be filled
by one member from the Western European and other
States, for a term expiring on 31 December 2021, and
one member from among the Asia-Pacific States, for a
term expiring on 31 December 2022.
I would also like to remind members that one
member from the Latin American and Caribbean States
and one member from the Western European and other
States remain to be nominated for election by the
4/23

The General Assembly will be in a position to act
on those vacancies upon nomination by the Economic
and Social Council.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 119.
(d) Election of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/338)
The President: Pursuant to its decision 70/410,
of 18 November 2015, the General Assembly, on the
proposal of the Secretary-General, elected Mr. Filippo
Grandi (Italy) as United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for a period of five years, beginning on
1 January 2016 and ending on 31 December 2020.
Members will also recall that pursuant to paragraph
9 of resolution 58/153, of 22 December 2003, the
General Assembly decided to remove the temporal
limitation on the continuation of the Office of the
High Commissioner contained in its resolution 57/186,
and to continue the Office until the refugee problem
was solved.
In his note contained in document A/75/338, the
Secretary-General proposes to the General Assembly
that Mr. Grandi’s term of office be extended for a
period of two and a half years, beginning on 1 January
2021 and ending on 30 June 2023. While the SecretaryGeneral had intended to request that the General
Assembly elect Mr. Grandi as High Commissioner for
Refugees for a further term of five years, Mr. Grandi
is agreeable to a shorter term of two and a half years,
owing to personal reasons.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to re-elect Mr. Filippo Grandi as United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for a period of two and
half years, beginning on 1 January 2021 and ending on
30 June 2023?
It was so decided.
20-32771

23/11/2020

A/75/PV.30

The President: On behalf of the Assembly, I would
like to congratulate Mr. Grandi on his re-election as
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Agenda items 7 and 25 (continued)

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d)
of agenda item 119?

Operational activities for development

It was so decided (decision 75/411).
Agenda item 120 (continued)
(g) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/88)
The President: As indicated in document A/75/88,
since the terms of office of the representatives of
Botswana, Brazil, France, Iraq, Nepal, the Russian
Federation and Sierra Leone will expire on 31 December
2020, it will be necessary for the President of the
General Assembly to appoint seven members to fill the
resulting vacancies. Those members will serve for a
period of three years, beginning on 1 January 2021.
Consequently, after consultations with the Chairs
of the Groups of the African States, the Asia-Pacific
States, the Eastern European States, the Latin American
and Caribbean States, and the Western European and
other States, the President of the General Assembly
has appointed France, Kenya, Malaysia, Nigeria, the
Russian Federation and Sri Lanka for a period of three
years, beginning on 1 January 2021.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of
these appointments?
It was so decided (decision 75/412).
The President: I should also like to remind
members that one vacancy from among the Latin
American and Caribbean States remains to be filled
for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2021 and
expiring on 31 December 2023.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda
item 120.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Draft decision (A/75/L.26)
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 25 to the
Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on draft resolution A/75/L.26,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 25 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504).
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on the draft decision entitled “United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities”, issued as document A/75/L.26.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/75/L.26?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 75/511).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 7 and 25.
Agenda item 130
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/345)
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/75/128
and A/75/153)
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Draft resolution (A/75/L.27)
(c) Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization

20-327715/23

A/75/PV.30

(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/75/L.21)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System
Draft resolution (A/75/L.24)
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Organization
Draft resolution (A/75/L.23)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Community of Central
African States
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
(o) Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/75/L.22)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution (A/75/L.25)
6/23

23/11/2020

(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative
Draft resolution (A/75/L.16)
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Draft resolution (A/75/L.17)
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States
Draft resolution (A/75/L.19)
(x) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization for Migration
(y) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.20)
(z) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
(aa) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.16.
Mrs. Pejanović Đurišić (Montenegro): I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.16,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Central European Initiative”, on behalf of the
Initiative’s 17 members.
The Central European Initiative (CEI) obtained
observer status in the General Assembly in December
2011, pursuant to resolution 66/111. Since then, the
Initiative has had an impressive track record of
cooperation with the United Nations, in particular with
its specialized agencies. We are eager to continue this
dynamic partnership, as was emphasized in the joint
20-32771

23/11/2020

declaration adopted by the Foreign Ministers of the
member States of the Central European Initiative in
June 2019, on the occasion of its thirtieth anniversary.
Regional organizations have the power to serve
as catalysts for advancing global cooperation. Their
cooperation with the United Nations remains critical to
maintaining international peace and security, upholding
human rights and achieving sustainable development.
In that respect, I would like to highlight the continued
efforts of the Initiative to contribute to the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
CEI’s action plan for the period from 2021 to 2023,
currently under preparation, will be defined in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and would contribute to its implementation through
regional processes.
The relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations has assumed even greater
importance in the context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which demands a collective,
coordinated and unified response from all regions.
The commitment to concerted actions and a decisive
and comprehensive approach was emphasized during
the extraordinary virtual meeting of CEI Heads of
Government held under the presidency of Montenegro
in May. In response to COVID-19, the Central European
Initiative established a task force with the World Health
Organization Regional Office for Europe aimed at
stepping up regional coordination in order to better
respond to the effects of the pandemic. Furthermore,
self-sufficient initiatives and actions were introduced
under Montenegro’s presidency for effectively tackling
challenges in the Central European Initiative region.
The CEI is fully committed to fruitful cooperation
with the United Nations, its specialized agencies and
other international organizations and initiatives with the
aim of fostering broad multi-stakeholder partnerships
in the region. In its 30 years of existence, CEI has made
a considerable impact in building democratic capacities
and promoting stronger partnerships among its member
States. And it will certainly continue to be a powerful
initiative that will contribute to the realization of the
goals of the United Nations in the region.
Since Montenegro holds the presidency of the
Central European Initiative for the period from 2020
to 2021, I would like to express our gratitude to all
the member States of the Initiative for their excellent
cooperation throughout our presidency. I would like

A/75/PV.30

to conclude by saying that the CEI member States
express the hope that this biennial draft resolution
will be adopted without a vote, as has been the case on
previous occasions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.17.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): In its capacity as the
current Chair of the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development — GUAM, the Republic
of Azerbaijan has the honour to introduce, on behalf
of its co-sponsors, draft resolution A/75/L.17,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM”.
GUAM is an international regional organization
consisting of four member States — Azerbaijan, Georgia,
the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine. In its resolution
58/85 of 8 January 2004, the General Assembly granted
observer status to GUAM. Since its sixty-seventh
session, the General Assembly has adopted without
a vote four resolutions on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development — GUAM: resolutions
67/109, 69/271, 71/15 and 73/14. Draft resolution
A/75/L.17 acknowledges the efforts of the Organization
for Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM
towards developing partnership relations with the
United Nations and its member States. It also takes
note of GUAM’s activities aimed at promoting regional
cooperation in various areas. The draft resolution
emphasizes the importance of strengthening dialogue,
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations system and GUAM and invites the specialized
agencies, components, organizations, programmes
and funds of the United Nations to cooperate and
develop direct contacts with GUAM for the joint
implementation of projects aimed at the attainment of
common objectives.
The adoption of the draft resolution will further
contribute to developing cooperation between the
United Nations and GUAM, promoting the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The draft resolution has
been developed on a basis of the most recent resolution
(resolution 73/14) with the same title adopted by the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session without

20-327717/23

A/75/PV.30

a vote. Only technical updates have been introduced
to the text this year. No comments have been received
from Member States since the draft resolution was
circulated on 30 October 2020.
I would like to thank delegations for their
understanding and constructive approach and to
request their kind support for the draft resolution. We
look forward to its adoption without a vote.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.19.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): The delegation of the
Republic of Uzbekistan, as Chair of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) in 2020, has the honour
to introduce and submit draft resolution A/75/L.19,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States”.
This year the Commonwealth of Independent States
celebrates its twenty-ninth anniversary. In March of
1994 the General Assembly granted the CIS observer
status, which laid a solid foundation for advancing
close cooperation with the United Nations. Since
then, the organization has become an influential and
effective structure for deepening multifaceted practical
cooperation among its member States, especially
in areas such as developing trade and economic
partnerships, using transport and transit potential
effectively, strengthening security and promoting
cultural and humanitarian exchanges. Today the CIS
is an important partner of the United Nations and a
participant in all the major forums convened by the
United Nations and its specialized agencies.
The current global health crisis has once
again demonstrated that all States and nations are
interconnected and that regular dialogue, trust and
close cooperation among us are extremely important.
Moreover, addressing contemporary global challenges
in today’s ever-changing world requires constantly
renewing partnerships between regional organizations
and the United Nations. Despite the negative
consequences of the current coronavirus pandemic and
the restrictions that the crisis has imposed, the CIS has
continued to serve as an important platform providing
a wide opportunity for developing mutually acceptable
approaches and practical measures in the areas of trade,
investment, transport, tourism, education, science and
sustainable development.
8/23

23/11/2020

In its capacity as Chair of the CIS in 2020,
Uzbekistan has developed a road map to intensify
cooperation among its member States. In addition,
issues related to overcoming the negative economic
and humanitarian consequences of the pandemic,
promoting trade, economic cooperation and developing
transport-communication networks have continued to
feature on the agenda of this year’s meetings of the
Council of Foreign Ministers, the Economic Council
and the Council of the Heads of Government of the
CIS countries.
The draft resolution before us is a technical
update of a biennial resolution. It is based on previous
General Assembly resolutions and reaffirms the
importance of international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character. Welcoming the commitment
of the Commonwealth of Independent States to
intensifying and deepening its cooperation with the
agencies, programmes and funds of the United Nations
system, the draft resolution invites the specialized
agencies and other organizations, programmes and
funds of the United Nations, as well as international
financial institutions, to develop their cooperation
with the CIS. We believe firmly that advancing the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, including the CIS,
will make it possible to address a wide range of issues
completely and effectively and to exchange information
on best practices in various fields and bring them into
practical application.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all members of
the CIS for their unwavering support during Uzbekistan’s
chairmanship, as well as all other delegations for their
support of the draft resolution. We hope that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus, as has been
the case in the past.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.20.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): On behalf of the main
sponsors, Brazil and my own country, Norway, I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.20,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)”.
The General Assembly first adopted this resolution,
by consensus, in 2016. It has since been reviewed
20-32771

23/11/2020

biennially, first in 2018, and again this year. Through
both reviews, the resolution’s fundamental threefold
purpose has remained unchanged: first, acknowledging
and taking stock of the existing cooperation between
the United Nations and INTERPOL; secondly,
strengthening that cooperation within the respective
mandates of both organizations; and thirdly, raising
awareness among Member States about the role of
INTERPOL at the United Nations.
We believe that this year’s review, conducted under
exceptional circumstances, further strengthens the
resolution in line with those objectives. The revisions
reflect the evolving relationship between the United
Nations and INTERPOL, as well as recent shifts in
international criminal-justice priorities and activities.
It is our hope that the review will further solidify the
cooperation between the two organizations for the
benefit of all Member States that are also members
of INTERPOL.
Among other additions, the revisions in the draft
resolution acknowledge the unprecedented public-health
and socioeconomic damage caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including its impact on
the vulnerabilities that drive, enable and perpetuate
criminal activity. Relatedly, it also recognizes the
importance of effective and professional policing to
Member States’ implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, noting the contribution
of INTERPOL’s “Global Policing Goals” to that end, as
well as the joint efforts of INTERPOL and the United
Nations Department of Peace Operations to develop
host States’ police capacity in mission settings.
Further, the revised resolution urges the United
Nations and INTERPOL to deepen their cooperation to
promote gender equality in law enforcement, including
through equal opportunities for employment, leadership
positions and decision-making at all levels of lawenforcement agencies, with a view to strengthening the
empowerment of all women and their full enjoyment of
human rights.
Moreover, the draft resolution expresses
increased concern about growing cybercrime and the
criminal misuse of information and communications
technologies. It encourages further cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL to assist
Member States in addressing such threats, including by
providing technical assistance and capacity-building
activities, upon request and within existing mandates.

A/75/PV.30

Other additions include new text on cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL in
combating crimes against cultural property, as well as
on INTERPOL’s role as a global exchange platform for
law-enforcement knowledge.
In our view, it is a great achievement to have
reached consensus on such important and complex
issues, particularly since delegations were confined
to unfamiliar and challenging working methods,
negotiating wholly online. At a time when the United
Nations is struggling to adapt to the unprecedented
global disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic,
we believe the successful completion of a substantive
and consensus review in this manner is an indication
that the Organization can rise to the challenge. As
a result, in this case, the institutional relationship
between the United Nations and INTERPOL has been
deepened, ultimately strengthening international police
cooperation and law-enforcement efforts worldwide.
On behalf of the main sponsors, Norway and
Brazil, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the representatives of all the Member States who took
an active part in the consultation process for their
constructive contributions. Our thanks also go to the
members of the Office of the Special Representative
of INTERPOL to the United Nations for the excellent
technical advice that they provided throughout the
negotiations. Their valuable guidance and support were
greatly appreciated by all delegations.
Finally, we sincerely appreciate the presence today
of Ms. Elisabeth Neugebauer, the Deputy Special
Representative of INTERPOL to the United Nations,
who will address the Assembly later today in support
of the draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritania to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.21.
Mr. Mohamed Laghdaf (Mauritania) (spoke in
Arabic): As Chair of the Group of Arab States in New
York for this month, which is full of important events
and meetings, it is my honour to present to the General
Assembly on behalf of the States members of the
League of Arab States — Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros,
Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates
and Yemen — draft resolution A/75/L.21, entitled

20-327719/23

A/75/PV.30

23/11/2020

“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States”, under agenda item 130.
The draft resolution before us today coincides with
the seventy-fifth anniversary of two well-established
organizations, namely, the United Nations and the
League of Arab States. It reflects one of the highest
and greatest principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations — cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in areas of common
interest, particularly in the area of international peace
and security, as stipulated in Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The draft resolution genuinely reflects the updated,
continued, sustained and fruitful cooperation between
the League of Arab States with its various sectors and
the United Nations with its various bodies, especially
as reflected in the presidential statement of the Security
Council adopted during its presidency by our sisterly the
State of Kuwait (S/PRST/2019/5). Both Organizations
seek to develop and strengthen that cooperation, which
has been well established for over 50 years.
In its preambular and operative paragraphs, the
draft resolution underscores the desired cooperation
between the two secretariats of the two organizations at
the technical and operational levels, so as to continue our
efforts towards improving interaction and consultation
by the respective secretariats. In that regard, the
opening of the United Nations Liaison Office to the
League of Arab States in Cairo is among the clearest
evidence of their determination to enhance and develop
this desired cooperation for more than 75 years.
Ms. Raz (Afghanistan),
the Chair.

Vice-President,

took

Given that effective cooperation, the Arab Group
looks forward to receiving the support of all States
Members for draft resolution A/75/L.21 and calls on the
General Assembly to adopt it without a vote as one of
its resolutions at the seventy-fifth session under agenda
item 130.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Romania to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.22.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): In my capacity as
Chairman-in-Office of the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization (BSEC), Romania has the
honour of introducing, on behalf of its sponsors, draft
resolution A/75/L.22, submitted under agenda item 130,
sub-item (o), “Cooperation between the United Nations
10/23

and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”.
The draft resolution, which is based on resolution
73/13, adopted by consensus by the General Assembly
on 26 November 2018, was transparently discussed in
informal consultations with the member States of the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization, as well
as with the wider United Nations membership.
As a full-fledged international and regional
organization focused on multilateral, political and
economic initiatives aimed at fostering cooperation,
peace, stability and prosperity in the Black Sea region,
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
deeply values cooperation with the United Nations
and encourages regional activities in the spirit of the
purposes and principles of the Organization. The
BSEC itself has a particularly important role to play
in developing a culture of dialogue, given its status as
one of the first regional-cooperation initiatives in the
region. As Chairman-in-Office, Romania has focused
on boosting intergovernmental economic cooperation
in the Black Sea region by stimulating cohesion and
synergies, contributing to strengthening mutual trust
and understanding and the cultivation of an authentic
dialogue among BSEC member States.
The draft resolution that is being introduced today
includes references to activities and concrete initiatives
undertaken by the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization in the past two years in the spirit of
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations. It contains substantive and technical
updates, including language on the coronavirus disease
pandemic, reaffirming that this crisis requires a global
response based on unity, solidarity and renewed
multilateral cooperation.
The draft resolution salutes the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations and reiterates its
pledge to international cooperation and multilateralism.
It also reaffirms the conviction that strengthening the
cooperation between the United Nations and other
organizations contributes to the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the Organization. Mutual
activities between the United Nations and the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation Organization are also
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations” (A/75/345).
In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to all delegations for their active and constructive
20-32771

23/11/2020

engagement in the drafting process. We very much look
forward to receiving the support of Member States for
the draft resolution and its adoption by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the representative of Algeria to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.23.
Mr. Khaldi (Algeria): I am pleased and honoured
to formally introduce before the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session the biennial draft
resolution contained in document A/75/L.23, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”. I am doing
so in Algeria’s capacity as Chair of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO) in Vienna for the year
2020, following the established practice by previous
Chairs of the CTBTO Preparatory Commission and
consistent with the cooperation agreement concluded
by the United Nations and the CTBTO Preparatory
Commission in 2000.
Algeria’s tenure as Chair of the Preparatory
Commission of the CTBTO is a reflection of its
unwavering support for the Commission and a
testimony to the importance Algeria affords to the total
elimination of nuclear weapons all over the globe, as
well as to the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty at the earliest possible date.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations (A/75/345), and the
report of the Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
Commission for the CTBTO (see A/75/153), and noting
with appreciation the New York liaison mechanism
established in June 2017 between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission of the CTBTO,
the draft resolution decides, as in previous years,
to include in the provisional agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-seventh session, under the item
“Cooperation between United Nations and regional and
other organizations”, a sub-item specifically devoted to
discussing the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission of the CTBTO.
This draft resolution, which has been submitted
biannually for several years, performs a procedural
function, but above all it has political value. The activities
that the Preparatory Commission and the Provisional
Technical Secretariat are performing pursuant to the

A/75/PV.30

Treaty and the CTBTO resolution establishing the
Preparatory Commission to foster non-proliferation
and security contribute to the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Close cooperation between the United Nations and the
CTBTO Preparatory Commission therefore serves the
interests of the international community. Synergies
are in fact mutually beneficial and need to be pursued
with determination.
While we thank all delegations for their continued
sponsorship and support, we remain confident that
the General Assembly will be willing to adopt by
consensus the draft resolution we have submitted as a
means of continuing to keep nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation at the top of our agenda.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Viet Nam to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.25.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): On behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam, the Kingdom of
Cambodia, the Republic of Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar, the Republic of the Philippines, the
Republic of Singapore, the Kingdom of Thailand and my
own country, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, I have
the honour to introduce the draft resolution contained
in document A/75/L.25, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations”, under sub-item (q) of agenda item 130.
Over the past more than five decades, ASEAN has
played a significant role in strengthening solidarity
and promoting dialogue and cooperation for peace,
stability and development in the Asia-Pacific region.
During this period, the United Nations has been a
long-standing partner with ASEAN, having established
a comprehensive partnership in 2011. Cooperation
between the two sides has been implemented in a wide
range of political, economic and sociocultural areas.
We therefore welcome the statement of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres at the eleventh United
Nations-ASEAN Summit that the United NationsASEAN comprehensive partnership has grown stronger
than ever. ASEAN warmly welcomes initiatives to
coordinate, cooperate and collaborate with the United
Nations in building trust for the sake of shared efforts
aimed at achieving lasting peace and stability in the
region, while upholding ASEAN’s centrality in the

20-3277111/23

A/75/PV.30

context of the regional security architecture and
allied with the ASEAN principles of non-interference,
non-intervention, consensus-based decision-making
and respect for national sovereignty.
The draft resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, which has been a biannual item on the
agenda of the General Assembly since the fifty-seventh
session, in 2002, aims to reaffirm and strengthen
cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations.
It has been adopted by consensus ever since. The
current draft resolution has been updated to reflect key
developments since 2018, notably the recent adoption of
the plan of action to implement the Joint Declaration on
Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the
United Nations (2021-2025), new ASEAN strategies
and plans and the implementation of important United
Nations milestones. Throughout the negotiating
process, we engaged constructively and openly with
all States Members of the United Nations and received
their valuable support.
Taking this opportunity, we would like to extend
our sincerest appreciation to all delegations for their
participation in the negotiations. It is their spirit of
compromise and willingness to engage in constructive
dialogue that has led to the balanced and substantive
draft resolution before the Assembly today. I would
also like to thank those delegations that have joined the
draft resolution as sponsors. We hope all Member States
will continue to kindly support the draft resolution by
adopting it by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.27.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): In my
capacity as Chair of the group of members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in New
York, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.27, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Permanent
and Observer Missions of the United Nations for
accepting a technical rollover of resolution 73/135,
adopted in 2018, in the light of the modalities of work
following the outbreak of the coronavirus disease. We
appreciate their support and the flexibility they have
shown to the OIC and its members.
12/23

23/11/2020

The draft resolution is consistent with the spirit
of resolution 3369 (XXX), which, in 1975, invited the
OIC to participate in the General Assembly and its
subsidiary bodies as an observer. The resolution also
reaffirmed the shared objectives of both the United
Nations and the OIC in conflict prevention and conflict
resolution, peacebuilding, mediation and the promotion
of a culture of peace.
The draft resolution highlights the desire of the
two organizations to work together on shared concerns,
including global security, self-determination, respect
for territorial integrity, decolonization and combating
terrorism. It reaffirms the shared goals of the United
Nations and the OIC in promoting progress in the
Middle East peace process, combating religious
intolerance and preventing violent extremism.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
recognizes the continuing cooperation between the OIC
and United Nations entities, including UN-Women, the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We underscore that strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC has never been more
important than in these challenging times.
In addition, the draft resolution calls for exploring
innovative means of enhancing cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC. In this vein, we would
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his constant engagement with the OIC and its members.
The OIC group appreciates his informal discussions
with the group and his periodic high-level meetings with
the OIC Secretary-General. We also warmly recognize
Mr. Guterres’ annual tradition of visiting Muslim
communities around the world during Ramadan to
demonstrate solidarity and exchange views on pressing
issues. Such initiatives support the provisions of the
draft resolution.
The OIC group believes that addressing complex
challenges requires a coordinated and comprehensive
multilateral response that brings countries and
international organizations together. As such, we invite
all States Members of the United Nations to adopt the
draft resolution A/75/L.27 by consensus.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly decision 75/506, of 13 October 2020, I now
introduce the pre-recorded statement of Mr. Lassina
Zerbo, Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
20-32771

23/11/2020

Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban
Treaty Organization.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see A/75/610).
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassador Odd-Inge Kvalheim for his
presentation in the name of the co-facilitators and main
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.20, on cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL. I would
like to say a few words with regard to the draft, given its
importance to Brazil and the challenging circumstances
in which it was drafted and negotiated.
This is the second time that Brazil is co-facilitating
this resolution, which illustrates the relevance of the
cooperation with INTERPOL to our country. Since
joining INTERPOL in 1986, Brazil has enjoyed an
excellent relationship with the organization, not only
through our respective representations here in New
York since 2004, when the Office of the Special
Representative was established, but also worldwide.
We would like to thank INTERPOL for its crucial
collaboration in these negotiations. The Special
Representative to the United Nations, Emmanuel Roux,
and the Deputy Special Representative to the United
Nations, Elisabeth Neugebauer, both of whom are here
with us today, along with their team, were present
during all negotiating rounds, and their support, inputs
and clarifications were fundamental to helping move
the process forward.
Thanks to their kind assistance and to the
constructive engagement of Member States, it was
possible to agree on a substantive and balanced text that
outlines priorities and respects sensitivities.
This draft resolution is not a technical rollover.
With a biennial resolution, a rollover now would mean
a four-year hiatus between full reviews of the text,
a gap that simply would be too long for the dynamic
relations between INTERPOL and the United Nations.
Additionally, owing to the current coronavirus disease
pandemic, the transnational crime landscape has
undergone some critical changes that needed to be
reflected in an updated text.
We would also like to extend a special word of
thanks to our colleagues from Norway. Our cooperation
as co-facilitators was driven by a lot of hard work,
mutual trust and seamless coordination.

A/75/PV.30

Above all, we would like to thank all Member States
for their active participation, constructive proposals
and flexibility during the negotiations, which enabled
us to reach the final draft that had its silence procedure
successfully concluded last Monday.
In recent months, we have seen some negotiations
strain under the accrued difficulties of the virtual
format. It is noteworthy that we managed to overcome
such a scenario in this case, with the collaboration
of all. That positive outcome was the result of an
innovative work methodology and a lot of outreach and
informal discussions, beyond the negotiating room,
to bridge gaps. We believe that the successful result
demonstrates the cohesion and resilience of the General
Assembly and its ability to adapt its working methods
to deliver on its mandate.
Ms. Mathew (Singapore): My delegation thanks
the Secretary-General for his report on the cooperation
and activities undertaken by the United Nations and
regional and other organizations in the past year,
particularly in response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic (A/75/345).
The year 2020 has shown all too clearly that many
of the challenges we face today are multifaceted,
interconnected and transnational in nature. Many
countries continue to struggle with conflict and
violence, which have in many cases been exacerbated
by the emergence of contemporary threats such as
the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change. It is
increasingly clear that countries cannot tackle those
challenges alone. Regional and other organizations
are important actors in building sustainable peace
and development. Strengthening regional and other
frameworks to support greater cooperation, economic
integration and conflict prevention will reinforce
national efforts to build resilience and enable countries
to be better prepared to respond to common challenges.
In that regard, Singapore would like to make
three points.
First, as set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, regional cooperation is an
important aspect of the work of the United Nations.
Singapore believes that the international community
stands to benefit from the increased interaction and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations in the implementation of
their respective mandates. Due to proximity and
history, these organizations have distinct approaches

20-3277113/23

A/75/PV.30

that provide unique insights into what works. We are
heartened that the United Nations has taken proactive
steps to enhance that collaboration. The number of
resolutions being adopted today attests to the broad
network of partnerships that the United Nations has
forged. Singapore supports the further strengthening of
the United Nations network of partnerships.
Secondly, as a member of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), Singapore looks forward to the
adoption of the draft resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and ASEAN (A/75/L.25). Since its
formalization in 2011, the comprehensive partnership
between ASEAN and the United Nations has expanded
into many areas and contributed meaningfully to the
realization of the common goals of peace, stability and
sustainable development.
In the face of the coronavirus pandemic, the United
Nations and ASEAN have played a critical role in
increasing South-East Asia’s collective resilience and
maintaining supply-chain connectivity.
Singapore welcomes the continued high-level
engagement between the United Nations and ASEAN,
most recently at the 11th ASEAN-United Nations
Summit, which took place via video-teleconference
earlier this month. The adoption of a second ASEANUnited Nations Plan of Action for 2021 to 2025 will
pave the way for new areas of cooperation. Among other
priorities, it will advance complementarities between
the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development; further ASEAN’s
sustainable urbanization efforts via the ASEAN Smart
Cities Network; and enhance ASEAN-United Nations
cybersecurity cooperation. As ASEAN continues to
press ahead with regional integration, we will continue
to deepen our partnership with the United Nations to
create a better and safer world for our peoples.
Thirdly, Singapore is pleased to have co-sponsored
the draft resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and INTERPOL (A/75/L.20). Since its
establishment, INTERPOL has played a critical role in
international law enforcement. Singapore is proud to
contribute to that endeavour. We have been a member of
INTERPOL since 1968 and have hosted the INTERPOL
Global Complex for Innovation since 2015. Singapore
will continue to work closely with INTERPOL and the
United Nations to enhance cooperation through the
Global Complex.
14/23

23/11/2020

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the
importance of continued United Nations cooperation
with regional and other organizations to not only
respond to the impact of the pandemic but also to
continue with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
and the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, in a coordinated, action-oriented and forwardlooking manner. Singapore will remain a committed
partner in those efforts.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It is
my honour to take the floor on agenda item 130, in
particular on cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL).
Organized crime is a phenomenon that undermines
borders and jurisdictions by unscrupulously targeting
vulnerabilities, be it those of peoples, markets,
cyberspace, technologies, States or organizations.
That is why today it is more necessary than ever
to strengthen and coordinate international police
cooperation through INTERPOL, in coordination with
international legal cooperation. That is vital if we are to
prevent and combat all manifestations of transnational
organized crime, within the framework of due respect
for human rights and international law. Those tools
strengthen and facilitate the various aspects of access
to justice, which ultimately aim to effectively protect
the rights of the victims of the scourges caused by such
criminal groups.
We thank the facilitators, Brazil and Norway, for
their efforts to bring to a successful conclusion the
negotiations on draft resolution A/75/L.20, which we
are considering today and are pleased to co-sponsor. The
document to be adopted today recognizes the need for
and calls for cooperation to be strengthened on a broad
range of issues, such as combating counter-terrorism
and international organized crime, including migrant
smuggling; human trafficking; drug trafficking; the
destruction of cultural heritage; trafficking in cultural
property; piracy; the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons; the illicit trafficking of nuclear, biological,
chemical and radiological material; cybercrime;
corruption and money laundering, as well as crimes that
affect the environment, and the use of information and
communication technologies, including the Internet
and social media, with the goal of committing crimes.
We also welcome the fact that the draft resolution
urges States to strengthen cooperation so as to promote
20-32771

23/11/2020

gender equality in the domain of law enforcement,
including through capacity-building programmes and
ensuring equal opportunities in the labour market,
in leadership positions and in decision-making at all
levels of law-enforcement agencies, with a view to
ensuring the empowerment of all women and their full
enjoyment of all their human rights. In that regard, we
would like to underline the importance of overcoming
the obstacles that women face to overcome the gender
stereotypes that exist in those professions.
Argentina intends to continue cooperating with
INTERPOL, both within the framework of the United
Nations and as a member of the Group of Friends of
INTERPOL, as well as bilaterally, using the tools that
INTERPOL provides to Member States. In that regard,
we reaffirm our full support for the Buenos Aires
regional office, which is a hub for police coordination
among the countries of South America and between them
and all of the 188 countries that make up INTERPOL.
My delegation hopes that this draft resolution will
be adopted by consensus by the General Assembly.
Ms. Md Akim (Malaysia): Malaysia welcomes the
draft resolutions presented before the General Assembly
on cooperation between the United Nations and various
regional and other organizations. The drafts are a
testament to the importance of engagements between
the United Nations and those organizations.
Malaysia welcomes in particular the continued
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO). The
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is a
key instrument of the global nuclear-disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture. Malaysia believes that
the CTBT will complement the existing international
legal instruments relating to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation, such as the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The CTBT
will also complement the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, which will enter into force in January
2021, in achieving the goal of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons.
The expeditious entry into force of the CTBT is
enormously important, yet it is long overdue. Malaysia
will continue to advocate for the urgency of the entry
into force of the CTBT and urges the Annex 2 States to
sign and ratify the Treaty without further delay.

A/75/PV.30

Malaysia expresses its support for the efforts made
by the Provisional Technical Secretariat of the CTBTO
to ensure business continuity in the midst of the current
coronavirus disease pandemic. On the election of the
Executive Secretary of the CTBTO, Malaysia stands
ready to support the ongoing efforts that have been
made to reach a conclusion on this matter.
Malaysia is pleased to once again co-sponsor the
draft resolution on the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
CTBTO (A/75/L.23).
Malaysia reaffirms its readiness to work closely
with other Member States, the CTBTO and all
stakeholders in exploring concrete steps and activities
to achieve the entry into force and universalization of
the Treaty.
Malaysia would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Member States for their co-sponsorship and
support on the draft resolution entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and ASEAN” (A/75/L.25).
Both ASEAN and the United Nations have had a long
history of engagement based on their common desire
to promote cooperation with respect to the political,
security, economic and sociocultural pillars. Malaysia,
for its part, will continue to work closely to strengthen
dialogue and cooperation with the relevant stakeholders
in responding to regional and global challenges.
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the observer of the International Criminal
Police Organization.
Ms. Neugebauer (International Criminal Police
Organization): It has now been four years since
the General Assembly adopted the first resolution
on cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) (resolution 71/19). I was very fortunate
to follow that resolution from its inception, with the
first informal outreaches to Member States to today’s
debate and the adoption of its second review. Thanks to
the highly skilful work of the co-facilitators, Brazil and
Norway, and the constructive and valuable input of all
States Members of the United Nations, the submission
of this second review (A/75/L.20) became possible and
was achieved despite the complicated circumstances
due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).

20-3277115/23

A/75/PV.30

Since the adoption of the resolution in 2016, the
transnational threat landscape has evolved to pose new
and increasingly complex challenges.
This past year has been particularly trying, the
pandemic having exacerbated cyberrelated crime
around the globe. The number of malicious domains,
malware and ransomware has skyrocketed, and the
need to work together has become stronger than ever. In
May 2020, INTERPOL launched an awareness-raising
campaign — #WashYourCyberHands — to curb the
rise in cyberthreats.
Strengthening
international
law-enforcement
cooperation is the only way for the international
community to stay ahead of the curve. The United
Nations has just celebrated 75 years of world
diplomacy, and INTERPOL will celebrate 100 years
of police cooperation in 2023, a landmark success for
both of our organizations and a reminder of the longstanding cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL, which goes back to 1949, when Interpol
received consultative status at the United Nations.
INTERPOL’s mission is to work towards making
that cooperation as effective as possible by connecting
law enforcement in our 194 member countries, most of
them shared with United Nations, and working together
towards a safer world. This cooperation framework rests
on INTERPOL’s apolitical and neutral character and the
respect of human rights enshrined in our Constitution.
Trust is key in any cooperation. INTERPOL always
ensures full respect for the national sovereignty of our
member countries and practices strict coherence in
connection with our rules on the processing of data.
Our three global programmes focusing on
counter-terrorism, organized and emerging crimes,
and cybercrime, support law-enforcement officers,
including front-line officers, on a daily basis and
deliver tangible operational support. The relationship
between the United Nations and INTERPOL in tackling
such crimes keeps getting stronger. This year, the
co-facilitators have been able to negotiate a substantive
amount of new language.
On the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
the close cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL’s respective visions is exemplified by the
INTERPOL global policing goals, with the objective of
serving as a link to the Sustainable Development Goals.
16/23

23/11/2020

INTERPOL’s work here is designed to complement
and promote the Sustainable Development Goals.
The COVID-19 pandemic poses a severe challenge to
security and safety worldwide. The United Nations and
INTERPOL strive to work more closely together to
effectively curb the rise in COVID-19-related crimes.
In particular, regarding cybercrime, we are pleased to
see recognition in this draft resolution of INTERPOL’s
work against cybercrime. INTERPOL provides insights
from the global law-enforcement perspective to United
Nations dialogues on issues such as the rapidly evolving
cyberthreat landscape and large-scale cyberattacks.
Finally, in the midst of the women and peace and
security agenda, and in order to strengthen the role of
women in law enforcement, INTERPOL and the United
Nations are increasingly working together to promote
gender mainstreaming in law enforcement. Our two
organizations will continue to jointly work to increase
the number of female police officers worldwide
and to promote equal opportunities for employment
and leadership.
With the second review of this resolution, we
are looking to forward to marking a new milestone
in our common journey towards making this world a
safer place.
In closing, please allow me to recognize the
outstanding efforts made by the Permanent Missions
of Brazil and Norway, following Australia, Rwanda
and Switzerland, in co-facilitating this draft resolution
and in very skilfully bringing together the precious
viewpoints and contributions of all States Members of
the United Nations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): As we discuss this important item in the
General Assembly, we are facing radical international
and regional changes that are affecting cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. Both of our organizations are celebrating
75 years of existence, and the League of Arab States has
had observer status at the United Nations since 1950.
However, both of our organizations and their member
States are still suffering from the repercussions of the
second wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
and are fighting together to overcome its consequences
in the health, economic and social fields and to address
its developmental ramifications for Arab communities,
20-32771

23/11/2020

A/75/PV.30

including its negative effects on our Arab countries
in their implementation of the United Nations 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.

the latest of which was held today. The aim is to
work together and achieve common goals regionally
and globally.

The League of Arab States aligns itself with
the statement made earlier by His Excellency the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of
Mauritania on behalf of the Group of Arab States in
New York. We thank him for his efforts in preparing,
coordinating and introducing draft resolution A/75/L.21,
on the cooperation between our two Organizations.

Thirdly, the League of Arab States believes in
the importance of promoting the biennial general
cooperation meetings between both organizations We
stress the importance of holding the meetings that have
been deferred owing to the pandemic at a high level of
decision-making in order to expedite the implementation
of ambitious mutual projects, especially during this
pandemic. That requires us to make further efforts to
implement the two ceasefire initiatives launched by the
Secretary-General and the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, which will enable the relevant
countries to address the health, economic and social
challenges imposed by the pandemic, particularly in
conflict- and tension-affected areas. We look forward to
the implementation of those initiatives so as to achieve
the desired goals. We believe also that there is a need
to implement the ceasefire and put an end to hostilities
and foreign interference in the internal affairs of Arab
States by international and regional Powers that are
fighting on Arab territories in order to realize goals
that are totally unrelated to the Arab world.

We would like to highlight a number of pivotal
issues in the promotion of cooperation.
First, we stress the importance of the General
Assembly allowing regional organizations, especially
regional Governmental organizations such as the
League of Arab States, to carry out their role as
observers at the United Nations. We appreciate the
emergency measures taken by Member States within
the framework resolution to organize participation in
the work of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session amid the COVID-19 pandemic. We were very
upset at the exclusion of all observers but three, who
were physically present in the General Assembly and its
various committees. That limited our capacity to convey
the message of supporting the General Assembly and its
committees and other thematic activities. Consequently,
we look forward to your cooperation, Madam, with
the President to address this issue at your earliest
convenience in order to suggest specific proposals
that would enable us to support the General Assembly
and to physically participate in its work, committees,
meetings and various activities led by facilitators,
Ambassadors and Permanent Representatives.
Secondly, the League of Arab States reaffirms its
position of welcoming the opening of a United Nations
liaison office in Cairo in mid-2019 and continues to take
all measures necessary to allow the office to promote
cooperation between the two organizations. We look
forward to the appointment of the new President
of that office as soon as possible in a post that is of
an appropriately high level similar to those in other
regional organizations. We also commend the active
role of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs in establishing and entrenching cooperation in
all areas. In addition, we commend the key role of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who consults
closely with heads of governmental organizations at
the highest level during biennial high-level meetings,

Fourthly, the League of Arab States highly values
the tireless efforts made to promote the relationship
with the Security Council in dealing with the Arab
issues before it. We commend the efforts of the Council
in addressing the Palestinian question and the situations
in Syria, Libya, Yemen, Iraq, Somalia, the Sudan and
other Arab countries. We look forward to further
coordination with the General Assembly to ensure
that it carries out its desired role in case the Security
Council is not able to carry out its task in maintaining
international peace and security.
We value the outcome of the fourteenth sectoral
meeting of the two 0rganizations, which was held at
the League of Arab States headquarters in Cairo, on
cooperation to end multidimensional poverty in the
Arab region. We strongly call for its outcome to be
implemented. The fifteenth sectoral meeting between
the two Organizations will focus on cooperation to
address the repercussions of pandemics and crises
in order to support Arab countries in continuing to
work towards the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030.
Fifthly, and finally, it is important for the United
Nations to continue supporting and building the

20-3277117/23

A/75/PV.30

capacities of countries that work within the framework
of the League of Arab States, in particular on
sustainable peace, dispute prevention, early warning
and mediation, in addition to peacemaking and
peacebuilding, including by assessing and building
national capacities in post-conflict stages. At the same
time, it is important to promote coordination among
the League of Arab States and United Nations Special
Envoys and other regional entities entrusted with
addressing current crises in the Arab world in order
to enhance opportunities to achieve fast, effective and
sustainable solutions.
The League of Arab States aligns itself with the
position of its member States as expressed by the
Permanent Representative of Mauritania, who called
on the General Assembly to adopt the draft resolution
by consensus.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 130 and its
sub-items (a) to (aa).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/75/L.16, A/75/L.17, A/75/L.19, A/75/L.20, A/75/L.21,
A/75/L.22, A/75/L.23, A/75/L.24, A/75/L.25 and
A/75/L.27. Delegations wishing to make a statement in
explanation of vote before the voting on any of the draft
resolutions are invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Before the General
Assembly proceeds with the adoption of draft resolution
A/75/L.19, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States”,
I would like to make the following statement.
Ukraine considers cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, as stipulated in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to
be a vital tool for the effective settlement of conflicts
and for promoting peace and security. The engagement
of regional organizations in peace-related tasks has
intensified and such organizations have become
increasingly recognized as a vital component of
conflict-prevention and -management initiatives.
18/23

23/11/2020

At the same time, we cannot support the idea of using
the United Nations to promote the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). Unfortunately, that formation
continues to discredit itself and cannot be considered a
constructive regional player. Recent events in the region
have further proved that the Russia-led Commonwealth
is not going to contribute to the peaceful settlement
of local disputes as stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Charter of the Commonwealth
of Independent States. On the contrary, it encourages
its member States to further violate international law.
Take, for example, Russian aggression against
Ukraine. Russia blatantly violated one of the
main principles of the CIS Charter, in particular
the “inviolability of [S]tate frontiers, recognition
of existing frontiers and renouncement of illegal
acquisition of territories”. We have not heard any word
of condemnation or concern by the CIS with respect to
that aggressive behaviour by one of its member States.
Or take the most recent example — events in
Belarus. Only CIS monitors consider the elections in
that country to have been conducted in full compliance
with generally recognized international standards. We
all see what those standards cost the Belarusian people,
their dignity and freedom.
Finally, I would like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to the fact that in 1991 the Verkhovna Rada
of Ukraine specified that Ukraine, as one of the CIS
founding members, denied granting the Commonwealth
of Independent States the status of a subject of
international law. That is because the Agreement
establishing the Commonwealth of Independent States,
the Alma Ata Declaration and the CIS Charter do not
endow the Commonwealth with such a status.
Under those circumstances, Ukraine dissociates
itself from the consensus on the adoption of draft
resolution A/75/L.19. The adoption of the draft resolution
should not be interpreted as de jure recognition of
the Commonwealth as a regional organization or
arrangement as defined in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Turning to draft resolution A/75/L.22, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”,
Ukraine attaches great importance to the development
of cooperation within the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization, and I would like to thank
20-32771

23/11/2020

A/75/PV.30

Romania for the preparation and introduction of this
year’s draft resolution.
Interaction in the field of energy enjoys a special
place in the context of sectoral economic partnership.
Therefore, Ukraine welcomes constructive initiatives
aimed at developing such cooperation within that sector.
At the same time, we oppose any attempts to
manipulate that organization in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations or the resolutions of the General
Assembly with respect to the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine. In that
respect, we urge the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization secretariat to remove from the official
website of the organization a link to the information
resource of the Russian Federation in which information
about its third international conference, on the theme
“Risk management in energy — 2021”, contains a
map that improperly displays Crimea as part of the
Russian Federation.
During the discussion on draft resolution A/75/L.22,
Ukraine, in the spirit of compromise, demonstrated
maximum flexibility regarding constructive proposals,
including those made by the delegation of the Russian
Federation. At the same time, we will continue to
oppose in every possible way attempts to push through
a Russian narrative that contradicts the norms of
international law.
In view of that, my delegation is not in a position
to support paragraph 9 of the draft resolution, which
includes an indirect reference to the status of Crimea
that is in contradiction to the resolutions of the General
Assembly, and it disassociates itself from the consensus
on that particular paragraph.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/75/L.16, A/75/L.17, A/75/L.19, A/75/L.20,
A/75/L.21, A/75/L.22, A/75/L.23, A/75/L.24, A/75/L.25
and A/75/L.27.
Draft resolution A/75/L.16 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central
European Initiative”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce

that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.16: Belarus, Georgia, Palau, Poland,
Romania, Serbia, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.16?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/7).

A/75/L.16

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.17
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following country has also become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/75/L.17: Palau.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.17?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/8).

A/75/L.17

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.19
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Commonwealth of Independent States”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following country has also become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/75/L.19: Palau.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.19?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/9).

A/75/L.19

was

adopted

The
Acting
President:
Draft
resolution
A/75/L.20 is entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL)”.

20-3277119/23

A/75/PV.30

23/11/2020

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.20: Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Djibouti, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Palau,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Sweden, Thailand and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.20?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/10).

A/75/L.20

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.21
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.21: the Comoros, Djibouti, Libya,
Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan and the
United Arab Emirates.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.21?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/11).

A/75/L.21

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.22
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
20/23

in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.22: Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Czechia, Palau, the Russian Federation
and Turkmenistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.22?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/12).

A/75/L.22

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.23
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.23: Albania, Andorra,
Armenia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Greece, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Palau, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Tunisia, Turkmenistan
and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.23?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/13).

A/75/L.23

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.24
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American and Caribbean Economic System”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.24: Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados,
Cuba, Guatemala, Guyana, Nicaragua, Palau, Saint
20-32771

23/11/2020

A/75/PV.30

Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and Grenadines, and
Trinidad and Tobago.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.24?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/14).

A/75/L.24

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.25
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.25: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belarus,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia,
Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, the Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, the Marshall Islands, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia,
Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, the
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.25?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/15).

A/75/L.25

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/75/L.27
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.27: Afghanistan, Djibouti, Iraq, the
Philippines, Senegal and the State of Palestine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.27?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/16).

A/75/L.27

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 130 and its sub-items (a) to (aa). As announced in
the letter from the President of the General Assembly,
dated 17 November 2020, we shall continue with the
consideration of the items this afternoon at 4.30 p.m. in
this Hall and hear the speakers in explanation of vote
position following the adoption of the resolutions.
Agenda item 120
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/603)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/75/603, the General Assembly is required, during the
current session, to appoint members to fill the vacancies
on the Joint Inspection Unit that will arise from the
expiration of the terms of office, on 31 December 2021,
of Jorge Flores Callejas of Honduras and Eileen Cronin
of the United States of America.
As also indicated in document A/75/603, in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of
the Joint Inspection Unit, the President of the General
Assembly shall consult with Member States to draw up
a list of countries, in this case two countries, that would
be requested to propose candidates for appointment to
the Joint Inspection Unit.

20-3277121/23

A/75/PV.30

As further indicated in the document, the General
Assembly, by its resolution 61/238, of 22 December
2006, decided that, beginning on 1 January 2008, the
President of the General Assembly, when drawing up
the list of countries that would be requested to propose
candidates, in accordance with article 3, paragraph 1,
of the statute of the Unit, will invite Member States to
submit the names of the countries and their respective
candidates simultaneously, on the understanding that
the candidates submitted are the candidates that the
respective Member States intended to propose, to the
extent possible, for appointment by the Assembly, in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute.
Having held the necessary consultations with the
regional groups, I should like to communicate to the
Assembly the following information received from
the Chairs of the regional groups: for the one vacancy
from among the Latin American and Caribbean States,
there are two candidates — Mexico and Peru; and for
the one vacancy from among the Western European
and other States, the United States of America is the
endorsed candidate.
As the Western European and other States has
one endorsed country for one vacancy, namely, the
United States of America, it will therefore be requested
to propose a candidate for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit.
However, since among the Latin American and
Caribbean States there are two candidates for one
vacancy, I should like, in accordance with past practice,
to consult with Member States through the procedure of
holding an advisory vote by secret ballot, to select one
country from among the Latin American and Caribbean
States to be requested to propose a candidate for
appointment for to the Joint Inspection Unit. Although
the advisory vote will not be an election, we will follow
the rules of procedure of the Assembly governing
elections. If there is no objection, may I take it that the
General Assembly agrees to that procedure?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In accordance with existing
practice, the country receiving the greatest number
of votes and not less than a majority of the votes of
those present and voting shall be the country selected
to propose a candidate for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit. May I take it that the General Assembly
also agrees to that procedure?
22/23

23/11/2020

It was so decided.
The Acting President: As indicated in the letter
from the President of the Assembly dated 17 November
2020, all delegations are requested to pick up their
ballot papers from the east document counter, located
towards the back of the General Assembly Hall, before
being seated. I request that representatives use only that
ballot paper.
I should like to remind members that the Assembly
is not appointing members to the Joint Inspection Unit
at this time. It is only selecting one country that will be
requested to propose a candidate, and therefore only the
names of the countries, not the name of individuals, are
on the ballot papers. Representatives will indicate the
country for which they wish to vote by placing crosses
to the left of the country name on the ballot paper. A
vote may only be cast for one of the countries whose
names appear on the ballot paper.
I should now like to repeat that for the one vacancy
from among the Latin American and Caribbean
States there are two candidates: Mexico and Peru. If
a ballot paper contains any notation other than a vote
in favour of specific candidates, those notations will
be disregarded. If a mistake is made in filling out the
ballot paper, the delegation should request a new ballot
paper from the Secretariat at the east document counter.
At the invitation of the Acting President, the
representatives of Cuba, Germany, Myanmar,
Namibia and Slovakia acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and
resumed at 1.30 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Latin American and Caribbean States
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required simple majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Mexico:
Peru:

180
0
180
1
179
90
131
48

Having obtained the required majority and the
greatest number of votes, Mexico was selected to
20-32771

23/11/2020

A/75/PV.30

propose a candidate for appointments to the Joint
Inspection Unit.

by Mexico and the United States of America to the
Assembly for appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.

The Acting President: I thank the members for
their advice and the tellers for their assistance.

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda
item 120.

In accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the
statute of the Joint Inspection Unit and with resolution
61/238, Mexico and the United States of America will
be requested to submit the names and the curricula
vitae of the candidates, highlighting their relevant
qualifications for the tasks ahead.
I would like to remind members that, in
accordance with resolution 59/267, of 23 December
2004, the candidate should have experience in at
least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and/or programme performance, as well as
knowledge of the United Nations system and its role in
international relations.
After holding the appropriate consultations
described in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of
the Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations with
the President of the Economic and Social Council and
with the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, the President of the General Assembly
will submit the names of the candidates proposed

Programme of work
The Acting President: I should now like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the
Second Committee.
Members will recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 18 September 2020, the General Assembly approved
the recommendation of the General Committee that
the Second Committee would complete its work by
Wednesday, 25 November.
However, I have been informed by the Chair of
the Second Committee that the Committee requests
an extension of its work to Thursday, 10 December,
in the belief that such an extension would facilitate
concluding negotiations on the pending draft resolution
on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for the development of the United
Nations system.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Second Committee
until Thursday, 10 December 2020?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

20-3277123/23
