A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/207
6 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.3)]
49/207.

Situation of human rights in Afghanistan

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1/ the International Covenants on
Human Rights 2/ and accepted humanitarian rules, as set out in the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949 3/ and the Additional Protocols thereto, of
1977, 4/
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all and resolved to remain vigilant with
regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the obligations
they have freely undertaken under the various international instruments,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/37 of 24 May 1984,
in which the Council requested the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights
to appoint a special rapporteur to examine the situation of human rights in
Afghanistan, with a view to formulating proposals that could contribute to

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

4/

Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.

95-77131

/...

A/RES/49/207
Page 2

ensuring full protection of the human rights of the inhabitants of the country
before, during and after the withdrawal of all foreign forces,
Recalling also all its resolutions adopted on the question, as well as
the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and the decisions of the
Economic and Social Council,
Taking note, in particular, of Commission on Human Rights resolution
1994/84 of 9 March 1994, 5/ in which the Commission decided to extend the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Afghanistan for one year and to request him to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session, and of Economic and Social Council decision
1994/268 of 25 July 1994, in which the Council approved the Commission’s
decision,
Recalling further its resolution 48/152 of 20 December 1993, and noting
with concern that in 1994 the situation of human rights in Afghanistan has
further deteriorated owing to the outbreak of large-scale fighting,
Recalling the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted
on 14 November 1970, 6/
Noting that, following the demise of the former Afghan Government, a
transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan was established,
Noting with deep concern that in spite of the various efforts and
initiatives taken towards ensuring complete peace and stability, including
those taken by the Afghan Government, a situation of armed confrontation,
affecting mainly the civilian population, which is still the target of
indiscriminate military attacks by rival groups and of food blockades,
continues to exist in parts of the territory of Afghanistan, and in particular
in Kabul, and has also caused a dramatic rise in the number of persons
displaced inside the country,
Concerned that the prevailing situation in the country is affecting the
security of members of all ethnic and religious groups, including minorities,
Concerned in particular that armed confrontation in Afghanistan has
brought about a situation where a unified judicial system cannot be
established throughout the country,
Noting with concern reports of violations of rights enshrined in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2/ such as the right to
life, liberty and security of person and to freedom of opinion, expression and
association,
Deeply concerned about the recurring violations of human rights specific
to or primarily directed against women by some members of warring factions in
Afghanistan, and about the lack of respect towards them and their physical
integrity and dignity, as reported by the Special Rapporteur,

5/ Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement
No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
6/ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session, vol. 1, Resolutions,
p. 135.
/...

A/RES/49/207
Page 3

Concerned at reports of detainees who are being held for political
reasons by rival groups, in particular in prisons run by political parties,
Noting with concern that weapons and other military material are
acquired by some factions through the production and sale of illicit drugs,
Noting that much remains to be done for the treatment of prisoners to be
in conformity with the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949
and the Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977,
Deeply concerned at the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons, which has worsened in 1994 owing to the prevailing situation in
Afghanistan, and expressing the hope that conditions in the country will allow
an early resumption of the repatriation of those still in exile,
Noting with appreciation the efforts undertaken by some neighbouring
countries to provide assistance to Afghan refugees pending their repatriation,
despite diminishing financial and other resources,
Aware that peace and security in Afghanistan are prerequisites for the
successful repatriation of about three million refugees and, in particular,
for the achievement of a comprehensive political solution and the
establishment of a freely and democratically elected government, the end of
armed confrontation in Kabul and in some provinces, the clearance of
minefields that have been laid in many parts of the country, the restoration
of an effective authority in the whole country and the reconstruction of the
economy,
Affirming that the 1992 declaration of general amnesty issued by the
Islamic State of Afghanistan should be applied in a strictly
non-discriminatory manner and that prisoners detained by rival parties without
trial on Afghan territory should be released unconditionally,
Commending the activity carried out by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Committee of the Red
Cross in cooperation with the Afghan authorities, as well as non-governmental
organizations, in favour of the people of Afghanistan,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Special
Rapporteur 7/ and of the conclusions and recommendations contained therein,
Commending the efforts by the Special Rapporteur to implement Commission
on Human Rights resolution 1994/45 of 4 March 1994 5/ and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action, 8/ adopted by the World Conference on
Human Rights on 25 June 1993, by including in his report information on human
rights violations affecting women,
Noting that the Special Rapporteur visited four provinces in
Afghanistan, while regretting that he was unable to visit Kabul owing to the
continuous shooting of rockets and artillery on the capital,
1.
Welcomes the cooperation that authorities in Afghanistan have
extended to the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the

7/

A/49/650, annex.

8/ Report of the World Conference on Human Rights, Vienna,
14-25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I)), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/49/207
Page 4

situation of human rights in Afghanistan, in view of the circumstances
prevailing in the country;
2.
Also welcomes the cooperation that the authorities in Afghanistan
have extended, in particular to the Coordinator for Humanitarian and Economic
Assistance Programmes Relating to Afghanistan and to international
organizations, such as the specialized agencies, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Committee of the
Red Cross;
3.
Urges all the Afghan parties to undertake, where appropriate under
the auspices of the United Nations, all possible efforts in order to achieve a
comprehensive political solution, which is the only way to bring about peace
and the full restoration of human rights in Afghanistan, based on the free
exercise of the right to self-determination by the people, including free and
genuine elections, the cessation of armed confrontation and the creation of
conditions that will permit the free return, as soon as possible, of about
three million refugees to their homeland in safety and dignity, whenever they
wish, and the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
Afghans;
4.
Welcomes all the efforts towards reaching a comprehensive,
peaceful political solution to the conflict in Afghanistan, in particular the
efforts of the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan established in
pursuance of General Assembly resolution 48/208 of 21 December 1993, with the
mandate to canvass a broad spectrum of the leaders of Afghanistan, soliciting
their views on how the United Nations can best assist Afghanistan in
facilitating national rapprochement and reconstruction, and to submit its
findings, conclusions and recommendations to the Secretary-General for
appropriate action;
5.
Notes with appreciation the cooperation the Afghan people and
leaders have provided to the Special Mission and urges all the Afghan parties
to continue to work with it with a view to achieving a comprehensive solution
to the crisis in Afghanistan;
6.
Urges both the Special Mission and the Special Rapporteur to
exchange relevant information and to consult and cooperate with each other;
7.
Invites the United Nations to offer, upon the request of the
Afghan Government and with due regard to the Afghan tradition, advisory
services and technical assistance concerning the drafting of a constitution,
which should embody internationally accepted human rights principles, and the
holding of direct elections;
8.
Recognizes that the promotion and protection of human rights
should be an essential element in the achievement of a comprehensive solution
to the crisis in Afghanistan, and calls upon all the Afghan parties to respect
human rights;
9.
Urges all the Afghan parties to respect accepted humanitarian
rules, as set out in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and the
Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977, to halt the use of weapons against the
civilian population, to protect all civilians from acts of reprisal and
violence, including ill-treatment, torture and summary executions, and to
expedite the simultaneous release of prisoners wherever they may be held;
10.
Urges the Afghan authorities to provide sufficient and effective
remedies to the victims of grave human rights violations and to bring their
perpetrators to trial in accordance with internationally accepted standards;
/...

A/RES/49/207
Page 5

11.
Strongly urges all the Afghan parties to ensure respect for the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of women, so that their honour and
dignity may be ensured in accordance with the provisions of international
human rights instruments and humanitarian law;
12.
Calls upon all States and parties concerned to make all efforts
for the realization of its decision 47/428 of 16 December 1992, entitled
"Prisoners of war and persons missing as a result of war in Afghanistan", and
calls upon them to make all efforts for the immediate release of all prisoners
of war, in particular of former Soviet prisoners of war, as provided for under
article 118 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of
War, of 12 August 1949, 9/ considering that the hostilities in which the
former Soviet Union was involved have legally and effectively ended, as well
as for the tracing of the many Afghans still missing as a result of the war;
13.
Urges the unconditional release of all prisoners detained without
trial on Afghan territory by rival groups, and calls for the abolition of
prisons run by political parties;
14.
Calls upon the authorities in Afghanistan to investigate
thoroughly the fate of those persons who have disappeared during the conflict,
to apply amnesty decrees equally to all detainees, to reduce the period during
which prisoners await trial, to treat all prisoners, especially those awaiting
trial or those in custody in juvenile rehabilitation centres, in accordance
with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, 10/ adopted
by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, and to apply to all suspected or convicted persons
article 14, paragraphs 3 (d) and 5 to 7, of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights;
15.
Stresses the need for humanitarian aid deliveries to be effected
through unhindered access to all main routes to Kabul;
16.
Appeals to all Member States to provide adequate humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan in order to contribute to the alleviation of the
suffering of refugees and especially to the improvement of the living
conditions of women and children, widows and orphans, and calls upon
neighbouring countries to continue providing assistance to Afghan refugees;
17.
Urges the international community to sustain the increasing
financial efforts undertaken by humanitarian organizations, such as the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other organizations
of the United Nations, and non-governmental organizations, to assist the
Afghan refugees;
18.
Urges the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
continue to assist the Afghan refugees in the neighbouring countries until
their voluntary repatriation can be effected, without prejudice to their
security and to the enjoyment of their basic economic and social rights;
19.
Urgently appeals to all Member States and humanitarian
organizations to continue to promote the implementation of the projects
envisaged by the Coordinator for Humanitarian and Economic Assistance

9/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 972.

10/ See Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.88.XIV.1).
/...

A/RES/49/207
Page 6

Programmes Relating to Afghanistan and the programmes of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, especially the pilot projects for the
repatriation of refugees;
20.
Reiterates its appeals to all Member States, humanitarian
organizations and all parties concerned to cooperate fully on the subject of
mine detection and clearance, in order to facilitate the return of refugees
and displaced persons to their homes in safety and dignity;
21.
Strongly urges all the parties to the conflict to undertake all
necessary measures to ensure the safety of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations involved in the implementation of the United Nations
humanitarian and economic assistance programmes relating to Afghanistan and
programmes of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in order to
avoid further deplorable incidents such as those which have caused loss of
life among that personnel;
22.
Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to entrust the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to Its Countries of Origin or Its Restitution in
Case of Illicit Appropriation with the mandate, upon the invitation and with
the cooperation of the Afghan authorities, of examining ways and means to
restore the Kabul Museum, including through the tracing of the country’s
stolen articles, to propose measures aimed at preventing the illicit import,
export and transfer of ownership of artefacts belonging to the Kabul Museum
and to report thereon to the Executive Board of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
23.
Recommends the translation of the report of the Special Rapporteur
into the Dari and Pashtu languages;
24.
Urges the authorities in Afghanistan to continue to extend their
full cooperation to the Commission on Human Rights and its Special Rapporteur;
25.
Calls upon the Special Rapporteur to continue to gather
information about specific instances of grave human rights violations and to
broaden and intensify efforts in addressing human rights violations that are
specific to or primarily directed against women, in order to assure the
effective protection of their human rights;
26.
Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to
the Special Rapporteur;
27.
Decides to keep under consideration at its fiftieth session the
situation of human rights in Afghanistan, in the light of additional elements
provided by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social
Council.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
