A /71/PV.57

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

57th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 8 December 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Bhattarai
(Nepal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/395)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.34)
Draft amendments (A/71/L.36 and A/71/L.37)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/71/82,
A/71/329, A/71/336 and A/71/353)
Draft resolutions (A/71/L.32 and A/71/L.33)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/87)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.31)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/620)
(d) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and

minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/411)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.28)
Mr. Uğurluoğlu (Turkey): At the outset, let me
thank the Secretary-General for his reports on the
humanitarian activities of the United Nations system.
We would also like to commend the efforts
of the United Nations humanitarian agencies in
their life-saving work, as well as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, whose role
in ensuring effective coordination in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance remains essential. As we mark
the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 46/182, the
framework and the instruments that that resolution has
set continue to be relevant in shaping the international
humanitarian response system.
Last week in Geneva, Under-Secretary-General
Stephen O’Brien stated that we face a time of immense
global suffering and fear, and that 80 per cent of the
humanitarian needs stem from man-made conflicts,
many of which are now protracted. Despite all our
collective efforts, it is undeniable that the gap between
humanitarian needs and the resources available
to address them continues to widen. Beyond the
devastating effects of man-made disasters, such as
the crisis ravaging in Syria, particularly in Aleppo,
we are also faced with other challenges. Public health
emergencies, climate change and the effects of El Niño
have long-lasting impacts. The number of forcibly

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-42551 (E)

*1642551*

A/71/PV.57

displaced persons continues to grow. Millions of
children are at risk of starting their lives without shelter
or education.
As an effect of globalization, today’s humanitarian
challenges easily transcend borders. They therefore
demand better and collective solutions. Our humanity
entails a responsibility that we should all shoulder so as
to help those in need, whether they are on our doorstep
or in faraway lands. At the opening of the first-ever
World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul in May,
President Erdoğan stated that we should never forget
our responsibilities vis-à-vis the people who have set
their hopes on the messages and commitments that
arose in Istanbul. Indeed, that is why Turkey strongly
supported the organization of that Summit from its
very inception. It was needed in order to sow the seeds
of transformative change in the humanitarian system.
In Istanbul, we announced our support for the
commitments contained in the five core responsibilities
set out in the Agenda for Humanity and made national
commitments to that end. We are pleased to note that
the Summit was a success. It brought together all the
stakeholders of the world humanitarian community, with
a record 9,000 participants. Member States and other
participants shared valuable experiences and expressed
their commitments to the future of the humanitarian
system. However, as has been the case with various
United Nations-led achievements in the past few years,
such as the Sustainable Development Goals or the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (resolution
71/1), we are cognizant of the fact that we need to move
ahead with the implementation. The aftermath of the
Istanbul Summit is crucially important for the future
of the humanitarian system. We need to build on the
global momentum that the Summit has generated and
assume our responsibilities for the follow-up in order to
improve our collective response.
Bearing that in mind, we should continue our
efforts to ensure strong political leadership aimed
at addressing the root causes of conflicts and crises;
address the need for fair burden-sharing, because it
is our common responsibility to help people in need;
always recall that no humanitarian problem is local,
as all crises can become global; exert great efforts to
support the humanitarian-development nexus through
human-centered policies and, finally, increase our
financial resources and use existing ones in a more
efficient manner. While doing all of that, we should
work in close partnership with all stakeholders.
2/19

08/12/2016

As the world’s largest refugee-hosting country and
the second-largest individual humanitarian donor in the
world in 2015, Turkey’s humanitarian assistance efforts,
be it in Somalia, Haiti, Myanmar, Iraq or Syria, will
continue in that spirit. Our common objective remains
simple — to better respond to humanitarian crises in
order to save lives and thereby, save humankind. We
are confident that the Istanbul Summit was a point of
departure for us all in reaching that common objective.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Every year, we meet to reiterate our
humanitarian and ethical commitments to extending
humanitarian assistance to all those in need without
discrimination, politicization or blackmail, in
accordance with the humanitarian principles in which
we all believe.
We emphasize our concern that some States,
organizations and other actors have been using
humanitarian action to serve inhumane political and
economic agendas and achieve other goals and interests
in order to defame and malign the Governments of
Member States. That negatively affects humanitarian
action itself, as well as the stability of States and the
welfare of peoples.
In my statement, I should like to clarify the
position of my country, Syria, vis-à-vis the draft
resolutions on humanitarian assistance in their various
manifestations. I wish to reiterate the commitment of
my Government to its firm and principled position
in favour of extending humanitarian assistance to all
those who are disadvantaged without discrimination, in
accordance with our constitutional duties.
We also emphasize our continued cooperation
with the United Nations and its agencies in order to
ensure the delivery of such assistance on the basis of
respect for the United Nations guiding principles and
to extend humanitarian assistance in emergencies,
as specified in resolution 46/182. At the forefront of
those principles are respect for national sovereignty
and the role of the States concerned in overseeing the
distribution of humanitarian assistance within their
territories and the principles of impartiality, integrity
and non-politicization.
Regrettably, the actions of some sponsors of the
draft resolutions and some of those responsible for
the coordination of humanitarian assistance — the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
being at the forefront of the latter — demonstrate a
16-42551

08/12/2016

preoccupation with politicizing humanitarian crises and
seek disgracefully to cover up the cardinal reasons for
those crises. We have to state that the optimal solution
for such humanitarian crises lies in addressing their
root causes and consequences without politicizing or
twisting facts. I wish to make the following observations
on the draft resolutions:
First, with regard to combating terrorism, my
delegation is of the view that the fact that draft resolution
A/71/L.34 contains, for the first time, a reference to
terrorism as one of the main causes of humanitarian
crises, after that issue having been ignored for years,
constitutes an important step in the right direction. Some
States have recently stated — albeit reservedly — that
violence, poverty and disasters are not the only reasons
leading to evacuation, displacement and humanitarian
crises, and that another basic cause of such phenomena
is terrorism.
Despite the importance of that step, it is too
little, too late. We must use stronger language that
unambiguously and decisively condemns tourist acts,
as was done last year in resolution 70/104, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”. It seems that
some tend to forget that terrorism is the main scourge
of humanitarian crises, be it in my country of Syria or
in Iraq, Libya and other States.
A case in point is the terrorist madness that is
killing innocent civilians throughout the world. We have
warned about that problem for a long time. Terrorism
is the cardinal reason for the suffering of the Syrian
people, particularly women and children. Combating
it requires cooperation with the Syrian Government,
which is struggling to combat terrorism on behalf of the
world. We have called for pressure to be brought to bear
on States that support terrorist armed groups to stop
arming, financing, training and sheltering such groups,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions
on combating terrorism.
Not only have our recurrent calls fallen on deaf
ears, but our very stance has been distorted and called
into question. I insist that efforts to address the main
cause of the humanitarian crisis in Syria should focus
on international coordination and cooperation with
the Government of Syria and its efforts to combat
terrorism in all its aspects and forms, as well as on
the implementation of the pertinent Security Council

A/71/PV.57

resolutions and returning to the goals and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, I turn to the grave consequences of
unilateral economic coercive measures. The United
Nations has rejected and condemned the imposition
of unilateral economic coercive measures, given
their illegitimate nature and disastrous impact on
the economies of States and the welfare of peoples.
However, some sponsors of the draft resolution still
seek to avoid any reference to such measures.
Those measures continue to date, despite repeated
international calls and demands to terminate them
forthright, given their disastrous impact on the
Syrian economy and the living conditions of Syrians.
They have caused thousands of Syrians to flee their
homeland and prevented the implementation of health
and humanitarian response plans in Syria, as described
in the Humanitarian Response Plan Monitoring Report
issued in September by the United Nations Resident
Representative Office, in cooperation with the International
Society for Quality in Health Care.
The report emphasizes that the unilateral economic
measures imposed by the United States and the European
Union against Syria adversely affect all categories of Syrian
citizens. It is paradoxical that the draft resolution contains
a reference to resolution 70/1, on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, but no reference to the adverse
effects of those measures. How can States be expected to
implement the Agenda while sanctions are being imposed
on them?
We wish to reiterate our reservations on the inclusion in
the draft resolution of a reference to the World Humanitarian
Summit and its conclusions, because the host country,
Turkey, did not allow my delegation to participate. We are
therefore not party to that conference or to its resolutions.
We wish also to enter our reservations with regard to the
reference to the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants (resolution 71/1). As a United Nations document,
the draft resolution ought to address general situations in all
States and not specific States. We had hoped to hear the voice
of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, not those of influential financing States.
Meetings should not be exploited to politicize the guiding
humanitarian principles of the United Nations, which are of
great significance in terms of humanitarian action among
Member States.
In conclusion, I would like to comment on the
statement by the representative of Israel. The General

16-425513/19

A/71/PV.57

Assembly knows that Zionism is the Israeli ideology
on the basis of which it established itself in occupied
Palestine. Zionism is a form of racial discrimination. It
is equivalent to Da’esh, as Zionist ideology maintains
the desire to take over the entire area of Palestine in
order to establish a Jewish State, excluding all others,
including Muslims and Christians. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) claims something very
similar. It claims that it wants to set up a State only for
those who believe in Da’esh, and not for all Muslims.
That simple comparison reveals that the cause for
the disasters and crises in our area is Israel, which
has introduced racial and religious radicalism and
intolerance into our region and introduced the concept
of occupying the lands of others.
For 60 or 70 years, hundreds of resolutions have
been adopted by the Organization condemning Israel
and its aggressive policies. It is not only today that we are
discovering Israel’s aggressive policies; we discovered
them a long time ago, and we are all too familiar with
them. There is therefore no need to respond to the
illusions and falsifications that are put forward by the
Israeli delegation to mislead the audience in this Hall.
I would like to remind the Assembly that Israel’s
authorities have links with the terrorists of Jabhat
Al-Nusra and ISIL in the occupied Golan. Israel
protects ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusrah. It helped them to
evict the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force contingent stationed at the separation line on the
occupied Golan. Just yesterday, Israel launched rockets
into the heart of Damascus, into the area of Al-Miza.
Nobody should therefore blame us when we respond to
those brazen Israeli actions at the appropriate time.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Humanitarian needs continue to grow year after year.
The fundamental rules of international humanitarian
law are being violated as never before. The number of
people forcibly displaced, to escape violence or natural
disaster, has reached a record high. Humanitarian
workers are regularly the target of attacks, and their
access to people in need is increasingly denied.
Against that backdrop, the international community
must provide a strong and united response. The draft
resolutions that we are discussing today should be an
expression of that response. I would like to emphasize
three points.
First,
Switzerland
considers
international
humanitarian law to be the principal universal legal
4/19

08/12/2016

framework for the protection of all victims in armed
conflicts and the provision of humanitarian assistance.
That legal framework must be respected by all parties to
an armed conflict. In that regard, there are considerable
challenges: access to those in need must be improved,
the safety of those who risk their lives to care for the
sick and wounded must be strengthened, and violations
of international law are unacceptable and must be
effectively prosecuted. In the light of the ongoing
conflicts in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and Iraq, it is
our duty to strengthen protection for all war victims
and humanitarian health workers in accordance with
the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
Secondly, the phenomenon of forced displacement
caused by natural disasters, climate change or armed
conflict requires the close coordination of humanitarian
and development activities, as well as of those in the
areas of peacebuilding and human rights. We need
an approach that encompasses prevention, protection
and resilience.
Thirdly, the commitments made at the World
Humanitarian Summit in May provide a unique
opportunity to transform and strengthen the global
humanitarian system in the long term. Those
commitments, particularly within the framework of
the grand bargain on humanitarian financing, must
materialize, in order to be able to provide a more
effective humanitarian response to the needs of an everincreasing number of victims.
Given the enormous humanitarian challenges that
we currently face, the draft resolutions that we are
adopting today should represent a strong and united
response from the international community. However,
although some progress was made in the negotiations
on the drafts, we see that they in no way go far enough
to meet the requirements of the global humanitarian
situation. We regret in particular that genuine, concrete
progress could not be made in terms of international
humanitarian law, owing to the inflexible positions of
some delegations.
However, my delegation wishes to express its deep
gratitude to the representatives who facilitated the
various draft resolutions. The facilitators have been
fully engaged in their efforts to arrive at decisions by
consensus. That consensus, which is a testament to the
unity of States in the face of humanitarian needs, has
been consistently respected in the past. We regret that
such a consensus could not be respected within the
16-42551

08/12/2016

framework of the draft resolution entitled “Safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel” (A/71/L.34). Concerning
draft resolution A/71/L.32, entitled “Strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations”, my delegation regrets that the
consensus reached during the negotiations was not
respected during the silence procedure.
My delegation believes that draft resolutions must
be negotiated in good faith and full transparency, and
calls on Member States to engage constructively during
negotiations and to respect the consensus once it has
been reached. We, the Member States, owe that much
to the victims of armed conflicts and disasters, who
depend on humanitarian aid, as well as to the workers
who provide that aid, often risking their lives to do so.
Mrs. Kanchaveli (Georgia): Georgia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union (see A/71/PV.56), and I would like to
make a few additional remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge the
work of the delegation of Sweden in successfully
negotiating the text of the humanitarian omnibus draft
resolution, entitled “Strengthening of the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations” (A/71/L.32), and in securing consensus on the
document again this year. The draft resolution maintains
its focus on the most pressing issues concerning the
humanitarian situation around the globe, and covers
the issues of forced displacement and the protection
of civilians and medical personnel and facilities,
while stressing the need for strengthening respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as for supporting enhanced humanitarian action
in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in accordance with the commitment to
leave no one behind.
In today’s world, more than 60 million people have
been forced to abandon their homes and flee in search
of safety owing to conflicts and violence or manmade or natural disasters around the world. Today,
they represent the world’s most vulnerable groups,
which are at high risk of being left behind. To echo
the Secretary-General, delivering better for people
in need, inter alia, encompasses strengthening the
respect for humanitarian international law, ensuring
humanitarian access and protecting humanitarian and
health-care personnel.

A/71/PV.57

Over the years, the position of Georgia on
humanitarian issues has been coherent and cohesive
in its substance and modalities. Political impasses or
paralysis should not hinder humanitarian action. In
that regard, we stress the importance of humanitarian
access, which is also a human rights issue, while
recognizing that the humanitarian principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence
play a central role in establishing and maintaining
access to the victims, and should be respected by
all actors.
In the light of the current challenges to the securing
and sustaining of humanitarian access by humanitarian
personnel, including the personnel of United Nations
humanitarian agencies, and bearing in mind the central
role that access plays in contributing to humanitarian
assistance and protection, my delegation raised the
concern regarding the lack of access in various parts
of the world during the negotiations on the text of the
humanitarian omnibus draft resolution in document
A/71/L.32 and, together with other delegations,
was advocating for the strengthening of the call for
better access.
For years, 20 per cent of Georgia’s sovereign
territories have remained inaccessible to international
monitoring missions, including the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) and other human rights mechanisms, owing
to the current illegal military occupation of those
territories by foreign forces. The denial of access raises
the legitimate questions expressed by the OHCHR
regarding the blocking of access to international
observers. Furthermore, hundreds of thousands of
victims of ethnic cleansing — refugees and internally
displaced persons — are unable to return to their
places of habitual residence, while those residing
inside the occupied regions continue to be deprived
of fundamental rights and freedoms, including but not
limited to the right to free movement and to education
in one’s native language.
During humanitarian emergencies, the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and health care to those in
need should be the priority. However, addressing the
immediate, short-term needs, such as providing the
displaced populations with appropriate shelter, food
and health care, may not be enough. The plight of those
forcibly displaced people remains unresolved in many
cases, as it is impossible to provide conditions for the
exercise of their inalienable right to a safe and dignified

16-425515/19

A/71/PV.57

08/12/2016

return to their homes. The voluntary return rate — a
measure of how many internally displaced persons and
refugees can safely go back home — is at its lowest
in over three decades. We must support the right to
safe and voluntary return, if we wish to manage forced
displacements with effectiveness and efficiency.

2017 by at least 10 per cent, as compared with the
total of $684 million from 2015-2016. That will help
our partners in the United Nations, the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations to better support
those affected by crises, including the so-called
forgotten crises.

Against the backdrop of global humanitarian crises
caused by violence and armed conflict, transnational
terrorism and violent extremism, as well as by climate
change and global health threats, Georgia believes that
the international community should focus on more
effectively protecting humankind and humanitarian
principles. The international community ought to
do more to assist the most vulnerable groups of
populations. First and foremost, that includes those
affected by armed conflict and those in post-conflict
situations. The international community must also
reduce the vulnerability of people to natural disasters.

(spoke in English)

Ms. Pritchard (Canada): As a number of
humanitarian draft resolutions have been submitted
today for action, Canada would like to speak to the
humanitarian situation that we see around the world
and how it is reflected in the draft resolutions that are
currently before Member States.
We live in a world in which increasingly complicated
and protracted crises have become the norm. Given the
scale of current needs, we must work together with
all partners to develop innovative programming that
addresses the underlying causes of conflict. Canada is
changing how we work in order to ensure that every
dollar goes as far as possible to reach those in need. For
example, Canada is doing more to provide multi-year
funding in order to allow for better humanitarian
planning and results. That includes enabling host
countries and communities to deliver adequate services
to large numbers of refugees and displaced people.
(spoke in French) Canada remains deeply concerned
about the growing number of people subject to forced
displacement, as well as about the discrimination and
marginalization that characterize the experiences of
many refugees and migrants globally. Canada is grateful
for the generosity of the numerous host countries and
communities around the world, and we will continue
to assume our responsibility in welcoming our most
vulnerable neighbours when they most need it.
Canada remains resolved to respond to the world’s
needs. That is why Prime Minister Trudeau promised
to increase the humanitarian aid doled out in 20166/19

And yet every year, we see more and more people
affected by humanitarian crises. The United Nations
has recently appealed for $22.2 billion to respond to
the needs of over 90 million people in 2017. Those are
shocking figures that demand our attention and real
collaboration. We already know that women and girls are
disproportionately affected and that social inequalities
grow worse during a crisis. As a result, women and
girls face even greater risks of being sexually abused,
trafficked or forced into marriage. They are more likely
to be displaced. The burden of care that they carry for
their families and their communities increases, and
their access to essential sexual and reproductive health
services is reduced. When humanitarian assistance
does not take their needs into account, the inequalities
that exist are reinforced. Put quite simply, that
is unacceptable.
We know that women’s knowledge and leadership
can be critical to preventing and responding to crises.
In the midst of a crisis, women and girls are not just
victims. Rather, they are resilient people, and many
of them have survived tremendous losses. They are
the experts. We need to ask them and ourselves how
we can support their participation, leadership, and
decision-making in their communities.
We are pleased in particular to have made
improvements in the humanitarian draft resolutions
before us today so that they better reflect today’s
realities and our changing mindset. However, we are
concerned at how difficult it has been to address the
critical issue of the protection of civilians in times
of conflict. Indiscriminate attacks on humanitarian
and medical personnel, on the wounded and sick, on
hospitals and civilians, including children, are taking
place on a regular and sometimes daily basis.
As Member States, we must remind ourselves
of our obligations under international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, in particular
the obligation to allow and facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for civilians
in need. The focus of our attention should be on the
16-42551

08/12/2016

life-saving needs of civilians and their protection
in times of humanitarian crises. We reiterate that
compliance with obligations under international
humanitarian law is absolutely essential in that
regard. Not only are those obligations matters of legal
responsibility, the principles that they represent are
the very essence of humanity. Canada will therefore
continue to promote principled humanitarian action
and support concerted efforts to address the challenges
faced by humanitarians in complex environments.
Before closing, I wish to say that we are concerned
by calls for a vote on draft resolution A/71/L.34, on the
safety and security of humanitarian personnel, which
is based on well-established norms of international
law. We believe that calls for a vote send all the wrong
messages, especially given the scale of the humanitarian
crises that we are facing.
In closing, Canada would like to commend the
remarkable dedication of United Nations personnel,
humanitarian workers and medical personnel,
including international, national and local staff, in
delivering life-saving assistance to those most in need
in increasingly complex and volatile environments at
great personal risk. Their work brings hope, dignity
and life to the world’s most vulnerable.
Mr. Kazi (Bangladesh): Bangladesh attaches
great importance to the humanitarian and emergency
relief assistance provided through the United Nations
and remains supportive of international efforts to help
build resilient societies and nations and to respond to
humanitarian challenges. We stress that the constructive
engagement and coordinating role of national
Governments, especially their leaders, are instrumental
in facilitating international humanitarian assistance.
As our delegation underlined at the World
Humanitarian Summit in May, international
humanitarian assistance must be premised on the
basic principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. We underscore the need for better
coherence and coordination among Member States,
United Nations agencies and other relevant stakeholders
with a view to promoting the spirit of working together
for humankind. The unwarranted politicization of
humanitarian issues must be avoided in order to
make sure that humanitarian response is fast, timely,
more effective and targeted to the evolving needs on
the ground.

A/71/PV.57

In recent years, we have witnessed continued high
demand for humanitarian relief and assistance across
the globe, owing mostly to the increased numbers
of natural disasters, armed conflicts and crises of
a protracted nature. Climate change, unplanned
urbanization, irregular human mobility, epidemics,
recurrent food crises, and water and energy insecurity
continue to threaten the preservation of the development
gains already achieved in many developing countries,
especially the least developed countries. The resulting
consequence of underdevelopment, poverty and
inequality increases the vulnerability of the affected
people and reduces their capacity to cope with various
endogenous and exogenous shocks.
We believe that sustainable development is the most
effective preventive prescription for many humanitarian
crises, including those related to forced displacement.
The international community needs to consider and
undertake development activities with a focus on
building resilience and eventually reducing dependency
on humanitarian aid. The underlying root causes that
adversely impact the effectiveness of humanitarian
assistance need to be addressed in a holistic manner.
There is a need for discretion in apportioning financial
support for humanitarian and development work
without compromising their respective priorities.
Bangladesh recognizes the importance of the
transition from emergency response to preparedness
and resilience-building. Many developing countries,
especially the less-developed countries, suffer from
systemic constraints in terms of the finance, technology
and development capacities needed to effectively
withstand and overcome humanitarian challenges.
The international community should, in full respect
for national conditions and actual needs on the ground,
develop mechanisms to provide enhanced, sustainable,
flexible and multi-year-based financing support
and related expertise, technologies and products. In
that context, we reiterate the need for effective and
meaningful implementation of the provisions of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030. We also acknowledge the centrality of the role
of women as first responders and the need to further
strengthen gender-responsive policy development
concerning disaster-risk reduction and mitigation.
Bangladesh remains concerned over the reported
denial of humanitarian access in many conflict
situations, including in a neighbouring context in

16-425517/19

A/71/PV.57

recent times. We condemn the indiscriminate armed
attacks against humanitarian personnel and convoys,
medical and peacekeeping personnel and the civilian
infrastructure essential for humanitarian operations.
We urge all parties to conflicts to refrain from such
egregious attacks, blockades and impediments, in
conformity with international humanitarian law. We
also emphasize the importance of evidence-based
information to ensure probity and accountability in the
event of any such reported violation.
As a climate-vulnerable and disaster-prone
country, Bangladesh continues to make substantive
investments in disaster-risk reduction, prevention,
mitigation and relief, building on lessons learned as
well as on international best practices. In line with
our commitment to share our home-grown expertise
and innovations with others in a comparable situation,
we have made efforts to stand by disaster-affected
people in Nepal, Haiti, Sri Lanka and the Philippines
in recent times.
In Bangladesh, our Government has established
a National Committee on International Humanitarian
Law so as to ensure the further dissemination and
awareness-building of international humanitarian law
among our people, with the support of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. At the international
level, we remain committed to promoting advocacy for
addressing the humanitarian needs of those displaced
as a result of climate change, especially in crossborder contexts.
We look forward to enhanced coordination and
coherence among the relevant United Nations entities
and other stakeholders in further promoting dialogue
on that emerging issue. As hosts to a protracted refugee
situation involving an oft-forgotten people, Bangladesh
reiterates the need to explore avenues to further
strengthen the international burden- and responsibilitysharing framework for the protection and assistance of
refugees and other displaced population groups.
In conclusion, we thank all of the facilitators for
their diligent work on the draft resolutions, which our
delegation is pleased to support.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): In my statement I shall
focus on the draft resolution on Chernobyl (A/71/L.28).
We are honoured to co-sponsor that draft resolution
regarding the continuing grave effects of the Chernobyl
disaster, which will be adopted today by consensus.
We believe that the decision to designate 26 April as
8/19

08/12/2016

International Chernobyl Disaster Remembrance Day
will raise awareness of the long-term consequences
of the Chernobyl and Fukushima disasters and drive
action to prevent such casualties in the future.
Approximately 30,000 technical and nuclear
experts and military servicemen from Kazakhstan were
among the first to arrive in the accident zone in April
1986 to help reduce the consequences of the Chernobyl
explosion. In solidarity, Kazakhstan participated
actively in the reconstruction of the sarcophagus of the
Chernobyl nuclear-power plant, allocating more than
€2 million to that cause.
We fully support the decision to be taken by
the United Nations today, as Kazakhstan itself has
suffered from nuclear-weapons testing. Having
directly experienced those horrors, my country is
today recognized as a passionate campaigner for
peace and nuclear security and disarmament. The
area in Kazakhstan affected by intense nuclear testing
comprises more than 300,000 square kilometres, and
the consequences are tragic. The land has been rendered
useless and unfit for human habitation, agriculture or
economic activity. Nearly 1.5 million people have been
impacted by nuclear and radiological contamination,
resulting in fatalities, cancer and weakened immune
systems. The incidence of disease has increased and
the duration of recovery prolonged, with phenomenally
high costs.
Kazakhstan has struggled with the consequences
of the nuclear tragedy for more than two decades and
calls on the international community to intensify
efforts aimed at nuclear security and disarmament,
as well as at the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We thank the United Nations system and
several countries for helping to fund our recovery
efforts. Much has been done, but the effects of 40 years
of testing will require many more years before that vast
region is rehabilitated. International efforts will have to
be stepped up to return it to normalcy.
Next year, we will introduce a draft resolution
entitled “International cooperation and coordination
for the human and ecological rehabilitation and
economic development of the Semipalatinsk region of
Kazakhstan”. It will be the ninth time that such a draft
resolution has been submitted. In that regard, we also
express our deep appreciation to the Member States that
have previously supported that resolution. My delegation
deems that support to be recognition of the historic
16-42551

08/12/2016

contribution of Kazakhstan to nuclear disarmament and
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Indeed, in 1991, for the first time in world history, the
huge nuclear test site in the Semipalatinsk region of
Kazakhstan was shut down by decree of the President
of our country, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev.
We have since worked closely with the United
States, the Russian Federation and the International
Atomic Energy Agency on institutional arrangements
for nuclear safety and security and worked with
Member States to implement the recommendations of
the four Nuclear Security Summits. Next year, we will
host on our territory the International Atomic Energy
Agency Low Enriched Uranium Bank as a measure to
strengthen the non-proliferation regime and thereby
reduce nuclear risks.
The General Assembly draft resolution on
Chernobyl is clear evidence of the recognition by the
international community that that issue remains a
matter of serious concern for the people of the planet.
We stand with all countries around the world that have
suffered from nuclear tests and disasters. It confirms
our deep conviction that such problems can be solved
only by the joint efforts of the international community.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now
call on the observer of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Senghore (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): On behalf of the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC), allow me to express my appreciation
for the opportunity to address this important debate.
This fall, Member States adopted the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (resolution
71/1) and the New Urban Agenda in Quito, adding to
the several multilateral agreements adopted during
the previous year, many of which have important
implications for humanitarian action. Each of those
agreements has, in one way or another, recognized the
importance of bridging humanitarian and development
action. That bridge in programmes, in finance and in
approaches is critical if we are to effectively respond
to the ever-growing humanitarian needs. Allow me to
make three points in that regard.
The principle of leaving no one behind, as enshrined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,

A/71/PV.57

cannot be realized without addressing the needs of
those caught in humanitarian crises. That includes
the many people affected by the biggest displacement
crisis of our time. With the adoption of the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants in September,
the international community recognized the need to act
urgently to stem the loss of lives, the suffering and the
needless indignities inflicted on those valuable people.
The current process leading towards a Global
Compact for safe, orderly and regular migration is
a welcome step. We are particularly interested in the
potential for the Compact to support a more effective
approach to the humanitarian and protection needs
of the most vulnerable migrants. We hope to see the
Compact lay out concrete goals and activities to reduce
the number of deaths and the privation and suffering of
migrants, and ensure that migrants have safe access to
essential services and accurate information that allows
them to make safer choices along their journey. We
also hope the process will strongly reaffirm the need
to counter xenophobia, discrimination and violence
against migrants.
The IFRC is working together with its national
societies with and for vulnerable migrants to help
them meet their immediate needs and integrate into the
societies that host them. We will be pleased to contribute
our expertise in the Global Compact consultations that
will be taking place next year. We commend the efforts
to design an inclusive, transparent and action-oriented
consultation process that includes various stakeholders
at a global, regional and subregional level. We would
also recommend holding national consultations, as
that would help to ensure a more context-specific and
inclusive process.
The important topic of localizing aid has been
extensively promoted on the international policy
agenda in 2016, including through the grand bargain
on humanitarian financing, which features specific
commitments to support local and national responders.
We think that greater support for local actors can make
an important difference in the timeliness, efficiency
and appropriateness of humanitarian aid.
In the short term, we are hopeful that the various
commitments of the grand bargain, including the goal
of channelling at least 25 per cent of humanitarian
funds as directly as possible to local and national actors
by 2020, will begin moving us in the right direction.
In the long term, humanitarian and development actors

16-425519/19

A/71/PV.57

need to invest in the pre-emption of future crises,
strengthening the functional and operational capacities
of local Governments and civil-society actors in order
to ensure that local actors are as ready and capable as
possible to step up to the needs in their communities.
It is also important to avoid overwhelming local actors
with a sudden influx of relief funds.
With regard to funding, the international
community has fallen short in identifying emergency
funding mechanisms that are adaptable to local action.
For its part, the IFRC Disaster Relief Emergency Fund
can quickly disburse funds, both for emergency relief
operations and for making preparations in the event of an
imminent disaster, to a national society within 24 hours
and with minimal bureaucracy, while still ensuring
proper accountability. However, we have recognized
that that is not enough, and we are currently working
with our partners in the International Committee of
the Red Cross and a number of donors to develop a
capacity-building fund with an eye towards developing
longer-term sustainability and flexibility.
The IFRC welcomes the recognition given to
Red Cross efforts in this year’s draft resolution on
international cooperation on humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters (A/71/L.33). We
acknowledge the usefulness of developing and
enhancing forecast-based preparedness systems,
making resources available for action in anticipation
of natural disasters and making ex ante investments in
order to mitigate disaster risks and build resilience. For
our part, we are in the process of piloting a forecastbased financing mechanism that enables the allocation
of funds for the timely implementation of early action
and preparedness for responses based on forecast
information before disasters happen. Using a forecastbased financing mechanism, investment is allocated
based not only on a certain forecast, but also on a clear
understanding of potential impacts and a cost-benefit
analysis of actions. It will facilitate decision-making
processes in scenarios of uncertainty.
The IFRC and its 190 national societies have been
working to assist vulnerable people for approximately
150 years. We will continue to mobilize the power
of humankind to provide life-saving assistance to
vulnerable people. We will also continue to work
with Governments in our auxiliary function to deliver
services at the last mile.
10/19

08/12/2016

The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 45/6, I now call on the observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
Ms. Duran (International Committee of the
Red Cross): The year 2016 has been a big year for
United Nations policy-making. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development came into force. The
New York Declaration on Migrants and Refugees
(resolution 71/1) and the Quito New Urban Agenda were
adopted by Member States. Each of those decisions
involves important humanitarian commitments. The
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
welcomes them and is ready to advise on humanitarian
aspects of the Compacts on migrants and refugees,
which States will start developing in 2017.
The World Humanitarian Summit in May brought
focus to several important areas of humanitarian policy,
such as protracted conflicts, internally displaced
persons, localization, the relief-to-development
nexus, cash transfers, education and the inclusion
of disabled people. This year also marks the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 46/182,
on strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
emergency assistance.
Our remarks will concentrate on respect for
international humanitarian law, the link between the
2030 Agenda and humanitarian action, the significance
today of resolution 46/182, and two particular groups of
vulnerable people, namely, internally displaced persons
and missing persons.
The need to generate greater respect for international
humanitarian law has rightly been an important priority
in United Nations policy-making during 2016. Countless
attacks on health-care facilities and health-care workers
led to the adoption of Security Council resolution 2286
(2016), which included a strong reaffirmation of the
importance and relevance of the laws protecting healthcare delivery in situations of armed conflict. More
broadly, violations of international humanitarian law
by State and non-State armed groups have continued
across many armed conflicts. Humanitarian access has
remained deeply problematic in several contexts. States’
efforts to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law need to be significantly improved.
The agreement on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is a major achievement by States,
but the Agenda must not obscure the distinct role
of humanitarian action. It is not the main purpose
16-42551

08/12/2016

of humanitarian action to meet the sustainable
development goals (SDGs), and the ICRC does not
pursue a particular ideology of political, economic
or social progress. Our action focuses on need alone.
However, principled humanitarian action may make a
special contribution to meeting the basic human needs
identified in the SDGs, especially for people left behind
in armed conflicts. Many of the basic human needs
prioritized in the SDGs — such safety, nutrition, health,
water, education, livelihoods and legal protection — are
also prioritized in international humanitarian law and
humanitarian action.
In protracted conflicts, humanitarian action can
hold together development infrastructure and services
at a basic level and even function as a safety net. Smart
collaboration between humanitarian actors, public
authorities, development institutions and businesses
can enable some continuity of the SDGs during and
after armed conflict, but humanitarian action is not
development or peacebuilding, which tend to have
political goals.
Resolution 46/182 remains important today.
It recognizes State sovereignty and prioritizes the
role and responsibility of States in the facilitation of
neutral and impartial humanitarian action. It also
recognizes the importance of respecting international
humanitarian law and the vital additional role of
principled humanitarian organizations in strengthening
humanitarian response.
Our operational experience is clear. This
combination of a responsible and actively engaged State
allowing and facilitating principled humanitarian action
works best to protect and assist the victims of armed
conflict. When States embrace their humanitarian
responsibilities, the ICRC is better able to reach people
and to support or provide the services they need. An
effective Government is often the difference between
humanitarian success and humanitarian failure.
Finally, our operations suggest that two groups
of people deserve significant attention in global
humanitarian policy today: urban internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and missing people and their families.
Urban IDPs form a growing category of people whose
conditions require a more coordinated response. The
majority of the world’s IDPs now live in urban areas,
usually alongside urban poor. IDPs and their host
communities share many similar needs. States should
focus more effort on integrating urban IDPs and their

A/71/PV.57

host communities into improved basic services and
livelihood opportunities. We welcome the commitment
of the World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme to partner with Governments, municipal
authorities and humanitarian organizations to support
State capacity to meet the needs of IDPs.
Missing people and their families also require
better coordination of humanitarian services. Here,
ICRC is facing increasing needs as missing migrants
are added to people missing in armed conflicts. The
emotional pain and socioeconomic impact felt by their
families is deep and lasting. People need a concerted
effort on the part of States to enable and link up the
search for missing people. ICRC stands ready to support
these greater efforts.
The year 2017 will be taken up with the important
work of rolling out new global policies agreed this year
and developing the compacts on migrants and refugees.
The humanitarian role and responsibilities of States
must remain central and in line with their obligations
under international and domestic law. The need to
clarify the relationship between humanitarian action
and Agenda 2030 will be key. But the needs of people,
like IDPs and the missing, must remain at the heart of
new humanitarian policies.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolutions A/71/L.28, A/71/L.31,
A/71/L.32, A/71/L.33 and A/71/L.34 and draft
amendments A/71/L.36 and A/71/L.37.
Before proceeding further, and in view of the desire
of members to dispose of this item expeditiously, I should
like to consult the Assembly with a view to proceeding
immediately to consider draft resolutions A/71/L.32,
A/71/L.33 and A/71/L.34 and draft amendments
A/71/L.36 and A/71/L.37. In this connection, since
the draft resolutions and draft amendments were not
circulated until this morning, it would be necessary
to waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, which reads
as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be
discussed or put to the vote at any meeting of the
General Assembly unless copies of it have been
circulated to all delegations not later than the day
preceding the meeting.”

16-4255111/19

A/71/PV.57

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with the earlier proposal that I made
to waive a provision of the rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote or position before the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Galbavý (Slovakia): I would like to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting on draft resolution
A/71/L.34, entitled “Safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and protection of United Nations personnel”.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States.
The United States facilitator of this humanitarian
draft resolution has made every possible effort to
ensure a transparent and inclusive process in which all
views were taken into account. During the month-long
negotiation process, all delegations had ample chance to
be involved. Unfortunately, after we reached consensus
on the draft text, as presented today, the delegation of
the Sudan proposed an amendment to the twenty-sixth
preambular paragraph and the deletion of operative
paragraph 7. After a new informal reading, all the other
delegations preferred to stick to the consensus reached
during the negotiations.
The references to the International Criminal Court
in the preambular and operative parts have existed
since 1999, when the first resolution on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and the protection
of United Nations personnel was adopted.
We ask all Member States to vote against the
proposed changes in agreed language from previous
years for the following reasons. First, the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court is the only standing
legal instrument in which attacks directed against
personnel involved in humanitarian assistance or
peacekeeping missions are explicitly recognized as a
war crime. That simple factual reference is as relevant
now as it was in 1999. Referring to an instrument is
stronger than referring in general to international law,
as suggested by the delegation of the Sudan.
Secondly, it is important that the present wording
recognize the role that the International Criminal
Court can play in the enforcement of that prohibition.
We consider the International Criminal Court to be
12/19

08/12/2016

an indispensable building block in the prevention of
impunity, including in the case of the war crime of
directing attacks against humanitarian assistance
personnel and peacekeepers. It is for that reason that
the 28 States members of the European Union will
vote against the amendments, and we urge all other
States and, in particular, the States parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court to also vote
against them.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
would like to reiterate that we support draft resolution
A/71/L.34, on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and protection of United Nations personnel.
We have voted in favour of the draft resolutions on that
subject since 1999, and our delegation will continue to
do so. As the draft resolution relates to humanitarian
assistance, it is particularly important for the text to
be acceptable to the international community. In that
regard, I would like to note that it is the responsibility
of the sponsors not to introduce controversial issues
that would require delegations to vote against
certain paragraphs.
(spoke in English)
Humanitarian assistance is premised on principles,
including the principles of independence and
impartiality. We, along with several other delegations,
consider that they are both absent from the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. Since
23 November, in all transparency and having broken
the silence, we have proposed different language in an
attempt to overcome this difference with our partners
and colleagues in the European Union. During those
15 days, we took every available opportunity to try to
arrive at agreed language. Unfortunately, the European
Union insisted on retaining the unamended wording
and overruled the silence procedure the moment we did
the opposite, thereby giving us no opportunity to put
forward our proposals.
Our first amendment (A/71/L.36) is to the twentysixth preambular paragraph and simply proposes
the deletion of the words “in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, and noting the role that
the Court can play in appropriate cases in bringing” and
their replacement by a general reference that reads “in
international law, and expressing resolve to bring”. The
remainder of the sentence can be left as is. That is our
first amendment. We are ready to consider any language
that could assist us in our endeavour. In the past few
16-42551

08/12/2016

days, we have submitted other improved language
that is more acceptable in an effort to overcome the
impasse on the twenty-sixth preambular paragraph.
Unfortunately, our repeated calls have gone unheeded.
In the second amendment (A/71/L.37), we propose
the deletion of paragraph 7, which reads “Also calls
upon all States to consider becoming parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court”.
We consider that this wording offers an opportunity to
advance in a controversial matter that conflicts with
the purpose of the draft resolution on humanitarian
assistance, because the Court has already proved,
during its short, 10-year lifespan, that it does not
respect the principles of independence and impartiality.
We have brought to the attention of all States Members
of the United Nations the reason we are calling for the
deletion of any reference to the International Criminal
Court in this draft resolution.
It should be noted that the Sudan is a party to
the four Geneva Conventions and the two Additional
Protocols. Paragraph 5 of article 6 of Protocol II, which
relates to internal conflicts, expressly refers to the
obligation of the States parties to the Protocol to resort
to amnesty as a measure that will bring peace to a
conflict situation in any given country. Unfortunately,
the Statute of the International Criminal Court negates
that principle of international law. When asked about
that irregularity and contradiction, the first President
of the Court described it as “constructive ambiguity”.
Constructive ambiguity can be a basis for any political
situation, but it cannot be the basis for a rule or a statute
governing the International Criminal Court.
In the note we circulated to all delegations, we said
that the references to the Court lacked relevance to the
subject matter of the draft resolution and that they were
therefore invalid. The only purpose of the references
is to try to promote a controversial issue, as we can
clearly see from paragraph 7. Serious concerns about
validity, usefulness, integrity, efficiency, corruption,
politicization and selectivity are being increasingly
voiced, even among the membership of the Court.
The General Assembly, the highest organ of the
Organization, is entrusted with the fulfilment of the
objectives and purposes of the United Nations, chief
among which are respect for and adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
It is noteworthy that the United States of America
and India pointedly affirmed the following in their

A/71/PV.57

joint statement on the eve of the adoption of the Rome
Statute in 1998:
“We are concerned about the international
criminal treaty with respect to the inadequacy of
checks and balances, the impact of the treaty on
national sovereignty and the potential for conflict
with the United Nations Charter”.
The Sudan, too, is concerned about any potential
conflict with the United Nations Charter, and, since
the Statute of the International Criminal Court is at
odds with the Charter, our amendments eliminate the
references to the Court.
Reference to the Court should not be forced into a
draft resolution on the protection of humanitarian and
United Nations personnel. It seems appropriate to cite
the Canadian/Irish human rights professor mentioned
in our circular. Mr. William Schabas stated that it is
a fact that many States seek to influence the direction
of international justice, and they resist efforts to
strengthen the independence and impartiality of the
judiciary because it threatens their ability to fulfil such
an agenda. The fact is that they do not want to do so
because they would lose control.
In sum, because of these arguments, I urge Member
States to vote in favour of our amendments to draft
resolution A/71/L.34, both as regards the wording of the
twenty-sixth preambular paragraph and the deletion of
operative paragraph 7. I seek guidance as to whether we
will vote separately on each of those two paragraphs.
The Acting President: Yes, we will conduct a
separate vote on each of the two amendments (A/71/L.
36 and A/71/L.37).
Mr. Nardi (Liechtenstein): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Australia, Canada, Iceland, New
Zealand, Norway, Switzerland and my own country,
Liechtenstein.
I would like to remind delegations that the wording
in question is the exact wording agreed on by consensus
in previous years. Concerning the first proposed
amendment (A/71/L.36), it is important to stress that
the twenty-sixth preambular paragraph merely reflects
the fact that the crimes in question are referred to in the
Rome Statute. We find it therefore deeply disturbing
that the established consensus is now being challenged.
This is even more distressing since we have been
witnessing an alarming erosion of the respect for
international humanitarian law in recent years, with

16-4255113/19

A/71/PV.57

08/12/2016

some of the most disturbing expressions being attacks
against humanitarian and medical personnel in conflict
situations, in violation of international humanitarian
law. Therefore, the relevance of the agreed text today is
even greater than in past years, and we strongly insist
on the retention of the agreed language.

paragraphs. We repeat that position once again today.
Our country’s decision to withdraw from the Rome
Statute prevents us from aligning ourselves with the
twenty-sixth preambular paragraph and paragraph 7 of
the draft resolution. In that connection, we support the
amendments proposed by the Sudan.

On the second proposed amendment (A/71/L.37),
we want to emphasize that paragraph 7 does not touch
upon each State’s own decision to choose whether to
join the Rome Statute system, and that therefore the
text should be kept. We hope that all delegations will
join us in opposing changes to the consensus language
from previous years.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position before
the voting.

Mr. Pronin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian Federation consistently advocates the
prosecution of individuals guilty of having perpetrated
grave international crimes. Our country was at the
origin of the establishment of the Nuremberg and Tokyo
war crimes tribunals. We took part in crafting their
Charters. For the same fundamental reasons, Russia
voted in favour of adopting the Rome Statute, and we
signed it on 13 September 2000.

I give the
the Secretariat.

The International Criminal Court (ICC), as the first
permanent body of international criminal justice, was
closely linked to the expectations of the international
community to combat impunity, to settle existing
conflicts and to prevent new hotbeds of tension from
arising. To our regret, the Court has failed to meet our
expectations. It has not become a genuinely independent
and authoritative body of international justice.
This is a matter of principle. In various forums,
including the General Assembly and the Security
Council, we have observed the ineffective and one-sided
work of the Court with respect to the cases on its docket.
That is borne out by the fact that, in the 14 years of
its work, the ICC has rendered only four judgments;
yet, it has expended more than $1 billion. We therefore
understand the initiative taken by the African Union
in deciding to formulate measures for a coordinated
withdrawal of African States from the Rome Statute.
We view in a similar light the position of the
Sudanese delegation in proposing amendments to the
twenty-sixth preambular paragraph (A/71/L.36) and
paragraph 7 (A/71/L.37) of draft resolution A/71/L.34,
which refer to the role of the International Criminal
Court and the Rome Statute. From the very outset
of the negotiations on draft resolution A/71/L.34,
our delegation clearly set forth its position on both
14/19

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.28, entitled “Persistent legacy of the
Chernobyl disaster”.
floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.28: Andorra, Argentina, Australia,
Chile, China, Colombia, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia,
Iceland, India, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Monaco,
Norway, Poland, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.28 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/71/L.28 was adopted (resolution
71/125).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.31, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.31: Albania, Andorra, Australia,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
16-42551

08/12/2016

A/71/PV.57

the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.31 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/71/L.31 was adopted (resolution
71/126).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.32, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.32: Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Marshall Islands, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.32 without a vote?

Draft resolution A/71/L.32 was adopted (resolution
71/127).
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.33,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”. I give the floor to the representative
of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.33: Albania, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and the
United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.33?
Draft resolution A/71/L.33 was adopted (resolution
71/128).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.34, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.34: Andorra, Argentina, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Chile, Guatemala, Guinea, Iceland,
Malawi, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
the Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Somalia, Turkey and Uruguay.
The Acting President: In accordance with rule 90
of the Assembly’s rules of procedure, the Assembly will
first take a decision on the proposed draft amendments

16-4255115/19

A/71/PV.57

to draft resolution A/71/L.34, issued as documents
A/71/L.36 and A/71/l.37, one by one.
We will first take action on the draft amendment
contained in A/71/L.36. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Bahrain, Belarus, Burundi, China, Cuba, Egypt,
Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South
Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab
Emirates
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian
Republic of)

08/12/2016

[Subsequently, the delegations of the Niger, Samoa
and Senegal informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft amendment contained in
A/71/L.37. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Burundi, China, Cuba, Egypt, Eritrea,
Iraq, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Abstaining:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Singapore, Somalia,
Turkey, Uganda, Viet Nam

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Papua
New Guinea, Qatar, Singapore, Somalia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam

The draft amendment contained in A/71/L.36 was
rejected by 22 votes to 80, with 23 abstentions.

The draft amendment contained in A/71/L.37 was
rejected by 16 votes to 84, with 26 abstentions.

16/19

16-42551

08/12/2016

[Subsequently, the delegations of the Niger and
Samoa informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.34?
Draft resolution A/71/L.34 was adopted (resolution
71/129).
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Lithuania, who wishes to speak on
the resolution just adopted. May I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Šorytė (Lithuania): I would like to present
my country’s explanation of vote on resolution 71/125,
entitled “Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster”.
Thirty years after the Chernobyl nuclear
disaster — one of the biggest disasters in human
history — we continue to witness the long-term impact
of Chernobyl, with its humanitarian, environmental,
social, economic and health consequences. We
appreciate the efforts of the international community
to mitigate the consequences of the accident. The
solidarity of regional and global partners in the face
of such accidents is crucial. However, solidarity must
be genuine and go well beyond mere declarations such
as the Minsk Declaration referred to in the resolution
adopted today.
Lithuania remains concerned about the construction
of a nuclear plant in very close proximity to my country,
without the provision of full, reliable and transparent
information on many aspects of the project, including
on how to ensure that provisions under international
conventions and nuclear-safety standards are respected
and implemented, the seismic evaluation of the site,
emergency-preparedness plans and various other
crucial safety aspects.
As we remember the tragedy of Chernobyl, we
must once again stress the urgency of doing everything
we can in order to avoid and prevent other nuclear
disaster. The lessons of the Chernobyl disaster force
us to develop nuclear technologies in conformity with
the spirit and letter of international nuclear-safety and
security requirements. We recognize and respect the
right of States to develop peaceful nuclear programmes.
However, this should be done while keeping in mind
the broader context of transboundary implications and

A/71/PV.57

in full compliance with the rules and requirements of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in
a Transboundary Context and other international and
regional bodies.
Confidence-building and ensuring maximum
safety are crucial for nuclear energy development.
Implementation of stress tests and IAEA safety
standards, adherence to the Convention on Nuclear
Safety, cooperation with specialized IAEA missions,
including Site and External Events Design review
missions for the entire nuclear cycle, should be integral
parts of each and every nuclear-power programme.
We call on all countries that develop nuclear energy to
implement the highest international nuclear-safety and
environmental requirements throughout the full nuclearfacility cycle in the most comprehensive manner, as it
is the only reliable way to avoid and prevent disasters
similar to Chernobyl in future.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
Several delegations have asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. May I remind Member States
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pronin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to begin with a general remark on
today’s meeting. Sub-item (a) of agenda item 69, which
is the topic of the meeting, focuses on the coordination
of humanitarian assistance. To be frank, we expected
the meeting to be an opportunity to exchange views on
the substantive content of the agenda for international
cooperation on humanitarian response. That is what we
based our statement on.
Regrettably, I must note that we have recently
seen a clear trend towards the politicization of the
humanitarian dossier, where matters of assistance
to those in need are put on the back burner and what
comes to the fore are political discussions, unjustified
accusations and exchanges of caustic remarks specific
to specialized committees and the Security Council.
Unfortunately, today’s meeting, which has taken up
the entire day, has hardly provided an opportunity for
a meaningful discussion on the possibility of building
cooperation for humanitarian assistance, which is a
great pity.

16-4255117/19

A/71/PV.57

I do not wish to delve into a political discussion or
respond in detail to the statement of the representative
of Ukraine, in which he made some remarks about my
country (see A/71/PV.56). However, we do indeed have
something to say about the de facto economic blockade
of populations in the Republic and the fact that they are
being punished for their unwillingness to acknowledge
the unconstitutional coup that occurred in the capital.
Members may refer to our statement on this topic, which
has been delivered in the Third Committee, the Sixth
Committee and in other General Assembly meetings.
I should like to call on everyone to focus the
discussion on the substantive content of humanitarian
cooperation and meaningful practical initiatives that
could improve the humanitarian situation in affected
countries, rather than open up yet another political
discussion in this Hall. As we see it, having the latter
discussion is not the reason we have come here today.
Mr. Amer (Israel) (spoke in Arabic): Today we have
heard numerous accusations levelled against the State
of Israel that ignore realities and distort facts. Attacking
Israel has become a hobby and pastime of some of our
neighbours that will ultimately prove futile. Attacking
Israel is a failed attempt to divert attention from the
brutal crimes perpetrated by the Syrian regime.
From this rostrum, the representative of Syria
spoke in a bizarre manner, distorting facts and giving
free rein to his imagination. The words he used had
little connection to reality. Tampering with the truth,
he uttered lies. His army continues to drop barrel
bombs upon its citizens, including the elderly, children
and women, while Israel has aided and provided health
services to many innocent injured Syrians. We say now
to the representative of Syria, “While you kill, we treat
the injured”. The situation has become very clear. Syria
is now mocked in the Arab street.
The representative of Syria mentioned the so-called
occupied Golan. No comparison can be made between
the situation in the Golan and the situation in Syria,
either before or after the tragic war. The situation in the
Golan is hundreds of thousands of times better than that
in Syria and other parts of the Arab world with respect
to the provision of services, including welfare, social
services, employment opportunities, pensions and the
economic situation.
We exhort the representative of Syria not to venture
any further down that path.
18/19

08/12/2016

Mr. Lisuchenko (Ukraine): For the sake of time, I
will be brief. It is obvious that there is a direct causal
link between Russian actions in Ukraine since February
2014 and the dire humanitarian situation in my country.
This has been confirmed on numerous occasions
by reports of various United Nations agencies, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, and during the
debates heard in the Third and Sixth Committees of the
General Assembly.
To become fully aware of the current humanitarian
situation in my country, I invite all the delegations
to attend the briefing that will be held by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs next week.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The representative of the Government of
Israeli occupation spoke disparagingly of the situation
in my country, and we have responded to him. However,
our response was not enough for him, so he persists in
misguiding Member States, believing that the crisis in
my country will make us forget our arch-enemy, Israel,
the occupying Power.
My country is the victim of organized terrorism,
which, recalling the actions of Israeli terrorist gangs, is
similar to the terrorism used by Israelis to build their
country. It is naive to believe in the veracity of the Israeli
representative’s claims that his Government is looking
out for people’s interests. Indeed, the situation reveals
that for six decades the occupying forces have deprived
the Arab population of their rights and freedoms. Those
who occupy the territories of others and who adopt
policies of starvation, occupation, confiscation of land,
assassinations and killings cannot claim to be listening
to the dictates of their conscience, much less talk about
humanitarian issues.
It is very ironic to see the representative of the
brutal Zionist regime shed crocodile tears over the
population of Aleppo and other Syrians, in the light
of the adoption moments ago of resolution 71/126, the
resolution on “Assistance to the Palestinian people”,
which addresses the practices of the Israeli regime in
Palestine and other occupied Arab territories.
At a time when the annals of the Organization
teem with condemnations of the bloody actions taken
by Israel, the occupying Power, against the defenceless
Palestinian people and against our people in the occupied
Syrian Golan and other Arab territories occupied
16-42551

08/12/2016

since 1967, we again recall the terrorist role played by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the area of separation,
where it is supporting the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other extremist terrorist organizations. The
current situation, which is clearly described in United
Nations reports on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, threatens the separation agreements
and undermines international peace and security in the
area.
Israel, the occupying Power, intermittently bombs
targets in my country to boost the morale of the terrorists
it supports. Those who transact with terrorists are
terrorists themselves, as is stated in numerous Security
Council resolutions.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 69 and its sub-items (a) to (d).
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Letter dated 7 December 2016 from the Chair
of the Committee on Conferences addressed
to the President of the General Assembly
(A/71/382/Add.1)
The Acting President: Members are aware that,
pursuant to section 1, paragraph 7, of resolution 40/243,
no subsidiary organ of the General Assembly should
be permitted to meet at United Nations Headquarters
during the main part of a regular session of the Assembly,
unless explicitly authorized by the Assembly.
Authorization is thus sought for the Open-ended
Working Group on Ageing to meet in New York from
12 to 15 December, during the main part of the seventyfirst session of the General Assembly, on the strict
understanding that all meetings would be allocated
conference services on an as-available basis, from
within existing resources, and in such a way that the
work of the General Assembly and its Main Committees
is not impeded.

A/71/PV.57

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to authorize the Open-ended Working Group
on Ageing to meet during the main part of the seventyfirst session of the General Assembly?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to make the
following announcement concerning the work of the
plenary. The consideration of agenda item 14, entitled
“Culture of peace”, and agenda item 127, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy”, originally scheduled
for tomorrow, Friday, 9 December, is postponed to
Thursday, 15 December.
Additionally, as indicated in a letter from the
President of the General Assembly to Member States
that was sent today, the Assembly will now consider
agenda item 31, entitled “Prevention of armed conflict”,
tomorrow, Friday, 9 December, at 10 a.m., to take action
on draft resolution A/71/L.39.
Lastly, the consideration of the following agenda
items, originally scheduled for Monday, 12 December,
is also postponed to a later date to be announced:
agenda item 32, entitled “Protracted conflicts in the
GUAM area and their implications for international
peace, security and development”; agenda item 33,
entitled “Zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic”; agenda item 37, entitled “The situation in
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”; sub-item (c)
of agenda item 114, entitled “Election of five members
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission”; sub-item (l) of agenda item 115, entitled
“Appointment of the judges of the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal”; and agenda item 128, entitled
“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

16-4255119/19
