General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

36

20. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assist
Namibian refugees and requests him to expand those
efforts in view ofthe substantial increase in the number of
Namibian refugees;
21. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa and the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa:
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia with the necessary resources for the performance
of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United
Nations Council for Namibia as the co-ordinating authority for the implementation of the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia, as well as other assistance programmes.
79th plenary meeting
1 December J983

38/37. Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/38 of 18 November 1981
and 37/8 of29 October 1982.
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, 65
Having heard the statement of the Secretary-General of
the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee 66 on the
continuing close and effective co-operation between the
two organizations,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;

2. Notes with deep satisfaction the ongoing close and
effective co-operation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee in the field
of progressive development and codification of international law and other areas of common interest;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
steps to strengthen the co-operation between the United
Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee in the field of progressive development and codification of international law and other areas of comrnon
interest;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a report on
co-operation between the United Nations and the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Committee:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Co-operation
between the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Committee".
82nd plenary meeting
5 December 1983
65 A/38/491.
66 Official Records of the General Assemh/y, Thirty-e1ghrh Sesswn, Plenarr

Meetings, 82nd meeting, paras. 88-104.
67 See also sect. l. footnote 7, and scct. X.B.3. decision 38/407.
68 Official Records ofthe General Assemhlv, Thirr1·-e1ghth Scssion. S11ppl<'ment No. 22 (A/38/22).
69 /bid., Supp/emem No . .?2A (A!38!2L Add.1 i

38/39.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 67
A
S1TUA []()!',; IN SOUTH AFRICA

The (icneral Assemb/_\'.
Recal/ing and rca/tim11ng its resolution 3 7/69 of 9
Decernber 1982.
Having considered the report of the Special Comrnittee
against Apartheid, 68 as well as its special report on recent
developrnents concerning relations between Israel and
South Africa, 69
Taking note of the declarations of conferences organized
or co-sponsored bj the Special Comrnittee, namely, the
International Conference of Trade Unions on Sanctions
and Other Actions against the Apartheid Régirne in South
Africa, held at Geneva on 1O and 11 June 1983. 70 the
lnternational Conference for Sanctions against Apartheid
in Sports. held in London from 27 to 29 June 1983, 71 the
lnternational Non-Governmental Organizations Conference on Action against Apartheid and Racism. held at
Geneva frorn 5 to 8 July 1983. 72 the International Conference on the Alliance between South Africa and Israel, held
at Vienna frorn 11 to 13 July 1983. 73 and the Latín American Regional Conference for Action against Apartheid,
held at Caracas frorn 16 to 18 September 1983. 74
Grave/y concerned over the threat to intemational peace
and security, and repeated breaches of the peace and acts
of aggression. caused by the policies and actions of the
racist rninority régirne of South Africa,
Condemning the racist minority régime of South Africa
for its repeated defiance ofthe United Nations, its oppression ofthe great majority ofthe people ofSouth Africa and
its ruthless repression of ali opponents of apartheid,
Strongly condemning the execution of Sirnon Mogoerane. Jerry Mosololi and Thabo Motaung, members of the
African National Congress of South Africa, in defiance of
appeals by the General Assernbly and the Security Council.
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity.
Strongly convinced that peace and stability in southern
Africa require the total eradication of apartheid and the
exercise of the right of self-determination by ali the people
of South Africa, irrcspective of race, colour or creed,
Convinced that the racist minority régime of South
Africa has been encouraged to perpetrate those criminal
acts by the protection accorded to it by major Western
Powers against international sanctions and by their continued collaboration with it,
Recogni::ing that the policies and actions of certain
Western Powers and Israel are the rnain obstacles that
have frustrated international efforts for the elimination of
apartheid.
Condemning, in particular, the increased collaboration
by the Government of the United States of America with
the racist régime of South Africa, in pursuance of its policy
of so-called "constructive engagement", which has
encouraged the racist régime to entrench apartheid, intensify repression and escalate aggression against and
destabilization of independent African States.
70 A/38/272-S/15832, annex.
7
1 A/38/310-S/ 15882. annex.
n A!38!309-S 1 15881. annex
7J A/381311-S/ 1588.l annex.
7 4 A/381451-S/16009. anncx

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Condemning the increasing collaboration by Israel with
the racist minority régime of South Africa. particularly in
the military and nuclear fields.
Rejecting the so-called '"constitutional proposals" by the
racist minority régime of South Africa as designed to
entrench apartheid,
Commendingthe unity ofthe oppressed people ofSouth
Africa in their opposition to the constitutional proposals
as well as in their struggle for the elimination of apartheid
and for the establishment of a democratic and non-racial
society in a non-fragmented South Africa.
Taking note ofthe advance ofthe armed struggle for liberation undertaken bv the national liberation movements
in the face of brutal ;epression of peaceful protest.
Recognizing that the legitimate struggle of the South
African people for liberation from apartheid is a contribution to the objectives of the United Nations.
Reaffirming that the elimination of apartheid constitutes
a majar objective of the United Nations,
Considering that ali the organizations of the United
Nations system have a duty to make a maximum contribution, within their mandates, to the international campaign against apartheid,
l. Endorses the annual report of the Special Committee against Apartheid and its special report on recent developments concerning relations between Israel and South
Africa;
2. Declares that the United Nations and the international community have a special responsibility towards
the oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movements in their legitimate struggle for the
elimination of apartheid and the establishment of a nonracial democratic society assuring human rights and fundamental freedoms to ali the people of the country, irrespective of race, colour or creed;
3. Again proclaims that the national liberation movements of South Africa are the authentic representatives of
the people ofSouth Africa in their just struggle for national
liberation;
4. Recognizes the right of the oppressed people and
their national liberation movements to resort to ali the
means at their disposal, including armed struggle, in their
resistance to the illegitimate racist minority régime of
South Africa;
5. Demands that the racist minority régime of South
Africa:
(a) Release persons imprisoned or restricted for their
opposition to apartheid:
(b) Allow those who have been exiled for their opposition to apartheid to return unconditionally to their country;
(e) Rescind bans on political and other organizations
and media opposed to apartheid;
(d) Termínate ali political trials and ali repressive
measures against opponents of apartheid;
6. Commends the people of South Africa and their
national liberation movements for the great advance in
their struggle for national liberation;
7. Commends the oppressed people of South Africa
and their national liberation movements, particularly the
African National Congress ofSouth Africa, for intensifying
the armed struggle against the racist régime of South
Africa;
8. Calls upan.ali States and organizations to provide
ali necessary moral, political and material assistance to the
75 A/32/144, annex l.
76 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. q70.973_

37

South African liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity at this crucial stage in their
struggle for liberation;
9. Reaf/irms that freedom fighters of South Africa
should be treated as prisoners of war in accordance with
Additional Protocol I 75 to the Geneva Conventions of 12
August 1949: 76
1O. Strongly condemns the apartheid régime of South
Africa for its brutal repression of ali opponents of
apartheid, its torture and killing of detainees. its execution
of freedom fighters and its repeated acts of aggression, subversion and terrorism against independent African States;
11. Condemns as an international crime the policy of
"bantustanization" designed to dispossess the African
majority of its inalienable rights and to deprive it of citizenship, as well as the continuing forced removal of black
people:
12. Condemns the policies of certain Western States,
especially the United States of America, and Israel, and of
their transnational corporations and financial institutions
that have increased politicai, economic and military collaboration with the racist minority régime of South Africa
despite repeated appeals by the General Assembly;
13. Again urges the Security Council to determine that
the situation in South Africa and in southem Africa as a
whole. resulting from the policies and actions of the
apartheid régime of South Africa, constitutes a grave and
growing threat to international peace and security, and to
irnpose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against
the racist minority régime under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations:
14. Urgently ca/Is upon the lnternational Monetary
Fund to termínate credits or other assistance to the racist
minority régime of South Africa:
15. Again request.1 the lntemational Atomic Energy
Agency to refrain from extending to South Africa any facilities which may assist it in its nuclear plans and, in particular. to exclude South Africa from ali its technical working
groups:
16. Ca/Is upan ali States that have not yet done so to
accede to the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 77
17. Decides to continue the authorization of adequate
financia! provision in the regular budget of the United
Nations to enable the South African liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity-namely,
the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania-to maintain offices in New
York in order to participate effectively in the deliberations
of the Special Committee and other appropriate bodies;
18. Commends the anti-apartheid and solidarity
movements, religious bodies, trade unions, youth and student organizations and other groups engaged in campaigns
for the isolation of the apartheid régime and assistance to
the South African liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity;
19. Urges ali Governments to lend ali appropriate
assistance. including financia! assistance, to such groups,
especially in countries which continue to collaborate with
the apartheid régime;
20. Appeals to journalists, writers, artists and other
professionals working in the mass media, as well as their
professional associations, to foster the role of the mass
media in the dissemination of information commensurable with the urgent need to eradicate apartheid;
77 Resolution 3068 (XXVIII), annex.

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

38

21.

Requests the Secretary-General:
To instruct ali relevant units of the Secretariat and
ali United Nations offices to promotc thc intcmational
campaign against apartheid in co-operation with thc Spccial Committee;
(b) To take ali necessary measures to deny any facilities to, and to refrain from any investment in, corporations
operating in South Africa;
(e) To enter into urgent consultations with thc lntemational Monetary Fund and thc lntemational Atomic
Energy Agency to secure thcir full co-operation in action
against apartheid, in accordance with the resolutions ofthe
General Assembly;
(d) To prepare, in consultation with the executive
heads of the organizations of the United Nations system.
proposals for conccrted action by ali the agencies in thc
intemational campaign against apartheid;
22. Requests the Special Committec:
(a) To prepare a report reviewing the implementation
of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council on thc problem of apartheid and the acts of
aggression by the racist régime of South Africa, and the
policies and actions of States which have failed to cooperate in intemational action:
(b) To review developments conceming collaboration
by the United States of America, Israel and other States
with the racist régime of South Africa. and to report from
time to time, as appropriate:
(e) To pay special attention to mobilizing public opinion and encouraging public action against collaboration
with South Africa.
(a)

83rd plenary meeting
5 Decemher 1983

B
PROGRAMME OF Acnol\ AGAINST Apartheid

The General Assemhly.
Seriously concerned over the grave situation in southem
Africa resulting from the policies and actions of the racist
régime of South Africa,
Anxious to promote more elfective action by the international community to secure the speedy cradication of
apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial democratic State in South Africa.
Recognizing the importance of concerted action by Govemments, as well as intergovemmental and nongovemmental organizations and individuals. for this purpose,
Taking note of the proclamation of the Second Decade
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, beginning
on 10 December 1983, 78
Having considered the Programme of Action against
Apartheid, adopted by the Special Committee against
Apartheid on 25 October 1983, 79
1. Commends the Programme of Action against
Apartheid to the attention of ali Govemments, intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations and individuals;
2. Invites ali Governments, organizations and individuals to take elfective action in the light of the Programme
78 See resolution 38/ l 4.
79 A/38/539-S/16I02, annex. For the printed text, see Ojjicia/ Records o/
the Securily Council, Thirty-eighth Year. Supp/emem fór October. Novemhcr
and December 1983, document S/16102, annex.

of Action. in close co-opcration with the Special Committec against Apartheid and the Centre against Apartheid of
thc Secrctariat;
3. Rcquests the Sccretary-General, through the Departmcnt of Public lnformation of the Secretariat, to cnsure
the widest publicity for the Programme of Action and to
instruct ali U nited Nations offices to take appropriate
action to promote its implementation.
83rd plcnary meeting
5 Decemhcr 1983

e
E!·FECTs 01- apartheid ON THE couNTRIEs OF
SOUTIIER:',; AFRICA

Thc General Assc111bly.
(iral'e/r conccrncd over the acts of aggression,
dcstabiliiation and subversion, as well as economic and
other pressurc, by the apartheid régime of South Africa
against indcpendent African Statcs in southern Africa,
( ·onrinccd of the danger of widcr conflict unless elfective
action is takcn by the intemational community,
Conccrned over the safety of South African refugees in
neighbouring countries.
Commcnding the front-line States for their sacrilices in
support of the struggle for freedom in South Africa and
Namibia,
Condcmning thc prcssurc exerted by South Africa to
force Lesotho to expcl South African rcfugecs in violation
of the principies of intcrnational law,
Again condcmning thc racist minority régime of South
Africa for its continucd occupation of parts of the territory
of Angola and its acts of aggrcssion, destabilization and
subversion against independent African States, particularly against Lesotho and MO?ambiquc,
<iravc/v concerncd about the cconomic blockade that
South Africa has imposcd against Lesotho,
Deploring the pressures exerted by the Government of
thc United Statcs of Amcrica against Angola to impose on
it the so-called issue of "linkage" or "parallelism" which
cncouragcs the racist minority régime of South Africa to
block thc negotiations for the independence of Namibia
and to continue its illcgal occupation of parts of the territory of Angola and escalatc its aggression against that
country,
l. ( ·ondemns the acts of aggression by the apartheid
régime of South Africa against Angola, Lesotho and
Mozambique and its threats against independent African
States in southern Africa:
2. Demands that ali troops of the apartheid régime of
South Africa be immediately and unconditionally withdrawn from Angola and that South Africa respect fully the
independence. sovereignty and territorial integrity of independent African States:
3. Ful/y supports the right of the Government of
Angola to take measures in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations in order to guarantee
and safeguard the territorial intcgrity and national sovereignty of Angola:
4. l:);prcsscs i1sfú// support for the people and Govemment of Mozambique in their struggle to preserve their

11.

Resolutions adopted wi!~o_ut_rl'.1'~rence to a Main Committee __________ _ _ _ _ _3_9

national independencc and sovcrcignty and urges ali Statcs
to provide political, diplomatic and material ~upport to
Mozambique:
5. Further stronglr condemns thc racist minority
régime of Pretoria for its acts of dcstabilintion. armcd
aggression and economic blockade against Lesotho and
strongly urges the international community to extcnd
maximum assistance to Lesotho to enable that country to
fulfil its international humanitarian obligations towards
refugees, and to use its influencc on the racist régimc to
dcsist from terrorist acts against Lesotho:
6. Demands that the racist régime of South Africa pay
full compensation to Angola, Lesotho and other independcnt African States for the damage to lifr and propcrty
caused by its acts of aggression:
7. Calls upon the international community to pro vide
assistance to indepcndent African States in the subregion
to enable them to defend their sovereignty and territorial
integrity, counter the hostile South African acts of aggression and rebuild their economies:
8. Urges the Security Council to consider. as a matter
of urgency, the means to ensurc pcace in southern A frica.

83rd p/cnan· meeting
5 Deccmlwr l 983

D
SANC'TIONS A(iAI:síST SOLITH AFRICA

The General Asscmbly,
Considering that the policies and actions of thc racist
régime of South Africa, its military buildup and its nuclear
plans constitute a grave threat to international pcace and
security,
Reafjirming its conviction that comprehensive and
mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council
under Chapter Vil of the Chartcr of the United Nations.
universally applied. are the most appropriate and eflectivc
means by which the international community can assist
the legitimate struggle of the oppressed people of South
Africa and discharge its responsibilities for thc maintenance of international peace and security.
Recalling the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa, 80
Considering that political, economic. military and an)
other collaboration with the apartheid régime of South
Africa encourages its persistent intransigencc and defiancc
of the international community and its escalating repression, aggression and destabilization.
Recognizing the urgent nccd for the termination of military, nuclear, economic and technological collaboration
with the racist régime of South A frica, as well as thc cessation of sports. cultural and othcr rclations with South
Africa,
Grave/y conccrncd that the racist régime of South A frica
has continued, despite the mandatory arms embargo
imposed by the Security Council in resolution 418 (1977)
of 4 November 1977, to obtain military cquipment and
ammunition. as well as technology and know-how to
develop its armaments industry. and to acquire nuclearweapon capability,
Deploring the attitude of thosc Western pcrmancnt
members of the Sccurity Council that have so far prevcnted the Council from adopting comprehcnsive sane80 Report of the lnternatwnal Conjl rencc on ,\'anctwm agwmr S'olllh
Africa, Paris, 20-27 May /98 / (A/CONF 10718). sect. X.A.
1

tions against South Afr,ca undcr Chapter VII of thc Chartcr.
!Jcp/onng a/so thc attitudc of those States, in particular
thc Unitcd Statcs of Amcrica and Israel. which havc continucd and incrcascd thcir political. cconomic and othcr
collaboration with South Africa.
Gral'c/r rnnccnwd O\ er thc activities of thosc transnational corporations that continue to collaborate with the
apartheid r~gimc and of thosc fi.nancial institutions that
ha\e continucd to providc loans and crcdits to South
A frica. and tn cr thc fail urc of thc Sta tes con cerned to take
ellective action to prncnt such collaboration,
1:·x¡¡rcssing sc1w11s u•nccrn ovcr the greatly increased
tradc with. 111vcstmcnts in, and loans to South Africa by
thc l lnitcd Kingdom or Grcat Britain and Northcrn lreland. thc llnited States of America, the Federal Republic
or Gcrmany and Swiltcrland.
( ·0111111c11ding all Sta tes that havc takcn elfective measurcs. 111 accordancc with rclnant rcsolutions. for thc climination of a¡Jarthrnf in South Africa.
l:".\prcssing grec/1 ap¡•rcáation to intcrgovernmental and
11011-govcrnmcntal organi1ations. in particular antiapar1hc1d and solidanty 11101,cmcnts. tradc unions and
rcligious bodics. as wcll a, cit) and other local authorities,
that ha\ e takcn action to isolatc thc racist régimc of South
Al"nca and to promotc support for comprchcnsivc sanction~ against that régimc.
( ·0111111c11di11g athlctcs. cntcrtaincrs and others who
dcmonstratcd solidaritY with thc oppresscd people of
South .-\frica b) rnmplying with thc boycotts of South
A frica.
e·011111w11ding thc Spccial Committce against Apartheid
for its acti vi tics, with thc assistance of the Centre against
Apartheid of thc Sccrctariat and the co-opcration of Governmcnts and organizations. in promoting thc widest possible support for sanct1ons against South Africa,
Tak111g note of the dccision of thc Assembly of Heads of
Statc and Govcrnmcnt of thc Organization of African
Unity at its ninctecnth ordinary session, held at Addis
Ababa from 6 to 12 Junc 1983, calling for an early convening of the Security Council for the purpose of strengthening thc arms embargo and imposing comprehensive and
mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter
VII of thc Chartcr. 81
1. . lgain rcquesr1 thc Security Council to consider
action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations towards comprt'hensive and mandatory sanctions
against South Africa and. in particular, to take mcasures:
(a) To monitor dfectivcly and to reinforcr thc
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa:
(h) To prohibit ali co-operation with South Africa in
thc military and nuclear fields by Governments. corporations. institutions and individuals:
(e) To prohibit imports of any military equipment or
componcnt parts from South Africa;
(d} To prevent anv co-operation or association with
South Africa by any military alliances;
(e) To imposc an effective embargo on the supply of oil
and oil products to South Africa and on ali assistancr to
the oil industry in South Africa:
(/) To prohibit financia! loans to and new investments
in South Africa. as wcll as ali promotion of trade with
South Africa:
-, Rcquests ali Statcs to take ali appropriate measurcs
to facilitatc such action by the Security CounciL
XI See 'l.·.,8 .11~. annex. re,olut,on AH(i:Res.112 (XIX). para.5.

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

3. Requests ali States concerned to takc action against
corporations and othcr interests that violate the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa or that are
involved in the illicit supply to South Africa of oil from
States that have imposed an embargo against South Africa;
4. Invites ali Ciovcrnments and organizations to assist,
in consultation with the national libcration movements of
South Africa and Namibia. persons compelled to leavc
South Africa becausc of thcir objection. on the grounds of
conscicnce, to scrving in thc military or poli ce force of the
apartheid régimc:
5. Encouragcs action by Governments. organi1ations
and individuals in support of sports. cultural. consumer
and othcr boycotts of South Africa:
6. Rcquests and autlwn:::es thc Special Committec
against Apartheid to intensif\ its activities for the total isolation of thc racist régime of South Africa and for promoting comprehensivc and mandatory sanctions against South
Africa.
83rd p/cnarr meeting
5 Dcce111hcr J9XJ

E
PRül,RAMMI: OF WORK OI· THI' SPFCIAL C'OMMITTEF
A<,AINST Apartheid

The General Assc111hl_¡'s
1/aving (unsidcred thc rcport or thc Special Committce
against Apartheid. 68
l. Congratula/es thc Special Committcc against
Apartheid for its dedicatcd efforts sincc its inception in
1963 in promoting the international campaign against
apartheid;
2. Commends the work ofthe Centre against Apartheid
of the Secretariat in assisting the Special Committee:
3. t:ndorses thc report of the Special Committce, in
particular its conclusions and recommendations on its
work and that of the Centre against Apartheid contained in
paragraphs 354 to 364 of thc report, and reques1s thc
Secretary-General to takc ali appropriatc steps to enable
the Centre to providc more effrctivc serviccs to thc Committcc;
4. Authori:::es thc Special Committee to organizc orcosponsor confercnces. seminars or other evcnts. to send
missions to Govcrnments, organizations and confcrcnccs
and to assist campaigns against apartheid as it mav deem
necessary in the dischargc of its responsibilities, within thc
financia] resourccs allocated under the present resolution.
and requcsts thc Secretary-Gencral to provide the neccssary staff and services for such activitics;
5. Decides to make a special allocation of $400,000 to
the Special Committec for 1984 from thc regular budget of
the. United Nations for the cost of spccial projccts to be
dec1dcd upon by the Committee in order to promote the
international campaign against apartheid;
6. Again rcqucsts Governments and organizations to
make voluntary contributions or provide other assistance
for the spccial projccts of the Special Committee.
83rd plenary meeting
5 lkcemhcr /98]
82 See Report of' the Sccond World Cm1/erence tu Comba/ Rac,.,m and
Rac,a{ D1scnminatwn. Cieneva. 1-12 August l'.183 (Unitcd Nations publicalIOn. Sales No. E.83.XIV.4 and corrigendum). chap. 11.

F
RH ATIOJ\S BETWEE'< IsRAEL A'<D SouTH AFRICA
The General .tsscmN,·.
Reaffirming its resolutions on relations between Israel
and South Africa.
llaving considered the special report ofthe Special Committee against Apartheid on recent developments concerning relations between Israel and South Africa, 69
Taking note of the Declaration of the lnternational Conference on the Alliance between South Africa and Israel 73
and the Declaration of the Second World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 82
1/armed at the increasing collaboration by Israel with
the racist régime of South Africa. especially in the military
and nuclear fields, in defiance ofresolutions ofthe General
Assembly and the Security Council.
Considcring that such collaboration is a serious hindrance to international action for the eradication of
ªfl:l_rthcid. an encouragement to the racist régime of South
Afnca to persist in its criminal policy of apartheid anda
hostile act against the oppressed people of South Africa
and the entire African continent. and constitutes a threat
to international peace and security.
1. . lga/11 stronglr <"ondcmns the continuing and
mcreasing_ collaboration by Israel with the racist régime of
South Afnca, cspecially in the military and nuclear fields:
1
Demands that Israel desist frorn and termínate
forthwith ali forms of collaboration with South Africa.
particularly in the military and nuclear fields, and abide
scrupulously by the relcvant rcsolutions of thc General
Assembly and the Security Council;
J. Ca/Is upon ali Governments and organizations to
exert their influence to persuade Israel to desist from such
collaboration and abidc by the resolutions of the General
Assembly:
4. Re_quests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to pubhc1ze, as w1dely as possible. information on the relations between Israel and South Africa and especially the
Declaratton of thc lnternational Conference on the Alliance between South Africa and Israel;
5. Requcsts the Secretary-General to render. through
the Department of Public Information and the Centre
against Apartheid of the Secretariat, ali possible assistance
to the Special Committee in disseminating information
rclating to the collaboration bctween Israel and South
Africa:
6. Further request.1· the Special Committee lo keep lhc
matter under constant review and to report lo thc General
Assembly and thc Security Council as appropriatc.
83rd plcnary meeting
5 Dccemlwr 1983

G
Mll.lTARY A'-1D NLCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH SouTH
AFRICA

The General Assemhl.r.
Rea.fjirming its resolutions on military and nuclear collaboration with South Africa. in particular its resolution
J7/69 D of9 December 1982,

________ n_._~_esolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee ________~--- ---------------~

Recalling its resolutions conccrning thc denuclearization
of the continent uf Africa.
Recafling a/so Security Council resolutions 418 ( 1977)
of4 November 1977. 421 (1977) of9 December 1977 and
4 73 (1980) of 13 June 1980.
Recal/ing that the Security Council determined in resolution 418 (1977). under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
U nited Nations. that the acquisition by South Africa of
arms and related mathicl constituted a threat to the maintenancc of international peacc and security.
llaring considcred the rcports of the Spccial Committee
against Apartheid, 68 the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa 83 and thc International Confercncc on the Alliance between South A frica and Israel. 84
Taking into account the Declarations of thc Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries. held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March
1983. 85 and the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its nineteenth urdinary scssion. held at
Addis Ababa from 6 to 12 June 1983. 86
(iravelr conccrned that, despite the arms embargo
imposect" by the Security Council. the racist régime of
South Africa has continued to obtain from certain Western
States and Israel military equipment and ammunition. as
well as technology and know-how to develop its armaments industry and nuclear-weapon capability.
Noting with grave mnccrn that military and nuclear collaboration by certain Western States and Israel with South
Africa has enabled the racist régime to devclop its arms
production and become an arms-exporting country.
Rccognizing that the stepped-up arms buildup and
nuclear-weapon capability, as well as escalating acts of
aggression by the racist régime of South Africa, constitute
a grave threat to international peace and security,
Expressing afarm at the growing violation of the arms
embargo, as well as the continued nuclear collaboration by
the United States of America and sorne other Western
States and Israel with thc apartheid régime.
Condemning the actions of those transnational corporations that continue. through their collaboration with the
racist régime of South Africa. to enhance its military and
nuclear capabilitics. as well as the failure of the Governments of the home countries of those corporations to take
effective action to prevent such collaboration in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Considcring the urgent need for mandatory decisions by
the Security Council, under Chapter VII of thc Charter. to
prohibit any military and nuclear collaboration with the
racist régime of South A frica,
1. Urges the Security Council to take mandatory decisions, under Chapter VII of the Chartcr of the United
Nations, to ensure the total cessation of ali military and
nuclear co-opcration with the racist régime ofSouth Africa
by Governments, corporations, institutions and individuals;
2. Strongly condemns the actions of certain Western
States and Israel which have provided the racist régime of
South Africa with an enormous arsenal of military equipment and technology. as well as assistance in its nuclear
plans, and which have allowed corporations under their
jurisdiction to invest in thc armaments industry in South
A frica:
83 Repor/ o{ the lnternatwna/ Cu,lference on Sanclions agwnsl South
A/rica, París, 20-27 Mav 198/ (A/CONFI07/8)
- 84 A/ AC. l l 5/L.595 .•
85 See A/381132-Sil 5675 and Corr. l and 2. annex_

3. .1/so mnde11111s thc reccnt dccision uf the United
States of America appro, ing the request from seven corporations to provide technological and maintenancc scrvicc
to thc nuclear installatiun of racist South A frica:
4. Further conde111111 am manocuvrcs to crcatc military pacts or arrangemcnts ·with thc participation of thc
racist régimc of South A frica:
5. ( a/Is 11pon ali Mcmbcr Statcs:
(a) To monitor etkctivcly and to reinforcc
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa:

the

(h) To prohibit ali military and nuclear co-opcration
with South Africa by Govcrnments. corporations. institutions and individuals:
6. Ca/Is 11po11 ali Ciovernmcnts that have not yet done
so to termínate ali militarv and nuclear collaboration with
South Africa and to take ali ncccssary measures for
preventing corporations and enterpriscs under their jurisdiction from engaging in any such collaboration.

83rd plc11ar_1· meeting
5 Deccmhcr /983

H
UNITED NATIONS TRUST Ful\o FOR Soun1 AFRICA

Fhe ( iencraf Asse111hl_,.

llaving considered thc report of thc Secretary-General
on the Unitcd Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, 87 to
which is annexed the rcport of thc Committee of Trustees
of thc llnited Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
(irarely concerned at the continued and increased
repression against opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination in South A frica and thc institution of numerous trials under arbitrary sccurity lcgislation. as wcll as
continued repression in Namibia.
Reaf/¡mung that incrcased humanitarian assistancc by
thc international community to thosc persecuted under
repressive and discriminatory lcgislation in South Africa
and Namibia is appropriatc and csscntial.
Rccognizing that increased contributions to the Trust
Fund and to thc voluntary agencies concerned are necessary to cnable them to mcct the increased needs for
humanitarian and legal assistancc.
1. ( ·ommends the Sccrctary-General and the Committee ofTrustees ofthe Uníted Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian and legal
assistance to persons persccuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and Namibia, as
well as assistancc to thcir families and to rcfugees from
South Africa:
2. Expresses its apprcciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to the
Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged in rendering humanitarian and legal assistance to the victims of
apartheid and racial discrimination:
3. .-lppeafs for generous and incrcased contributions to
the Trust Fund:
4. .-liso appeafs for direct contributions to the voluntary agencies engaged in assistance to thc victims of
86 A/J81J 12. anne,
87 A 1g 455_

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

42

apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa and
Namibia.
83rd plenarv meeting
5 IJcccmhcr J983

hiVISTMFNTS ll's Soti'JII AI·R](,\

The General Assemhly,
Recafling its resolution 37/69 H of9 December 1982.
Taking note of thc rcport uf thc Spccial Committce
against Apartheid, 68
Convinced that a ccssation of ali ncw foreign investments in, and financia! loans to, South Africa would constitute an important step in international action for the
climination of apartheid, as such investments and loans
abet and cncourage thc apartheid policics of that country,
Welcoming thc actions of thosc Govcrnmcnts that havc
taken legislative and other mcasurcs towards that cnd.
Noting with rcgret that the Security Council has not yet
taken stcps towards that cnd. as rcqucstcd hy the General
Asscmblv in its rcsolutions 31/6 K of 9 Novcmbcr 1976.
32/105 Ó of 16 Deccmbcr 1977, 33/183 O of 24 January
1979, 34/93 Q of 12 Decembcr 1979. 35/206 Q of 16
December 1980. 36/1 72 O of 17 Dcccmber 1981 and 37 /
69 H of 9 December 1982.
Again urges the Security ( 'ouncil to consider thc matter
at an early date with a vicw to taking cffective steps to
achicve the cessation of furthcr foreign investmcnts in.
and financia! loans to. South Africa.
83rd plenarv meet111g
5 Dccemher /983

J

Noting the need for further consultations among oilproducing and oil-cxporting countries comrnitted to the oil
embargo against South Africa on national and international arrangements to ensure the effective implementation of the oil embargo against South Africa and on an
intcrnational confercncc far that purpose,

1. Rcatfirms it1 rccomnwndation to the Security CounL·il to cons1der urgcntly a mandatory embargo on the suppl) of oil and oil products to South Africa under Chapter
Vil of thc Chartcr uf the United Nations:
2. Urges ali States that have not yet done so to take
cffective legislative and other measures to ensure the
1mplenwntation of an oil embargo against South Africa:
3. Requests ali States concerned to take eftective action
against corporations and tanker companies in volved in the
illicit supply of oil to South Africa:
4. Requcsts allll authori::es the Special Committee
against Apartheid to continue its efforts, including the
undertaking of missions. the holding of seminars and the
publication of studies. to promote an effective oil embargo
against South Africa:
5. lnl'ites Govcrnrnents, international and nongovernmental organizations, trade unions and other
appropriate bodies to lend their ful! support to the oil
embargo against South Africa:
b. Renews its authori:::ation to the Secretary-General.
in consultation with the Special Committee and in the
light of the conclusions reached at the meetings of permanent representativcs to the United Nations of the oilproducing and oil-exporting countries committed to the oil
embargo against South Africa, to organize an lnternational
Conference on an Oil Embargo against South Africa for
thc purpose of considering national and international
arrangements to ensure the implementation of embargoes
imposed or policies declared by oil-producing and oilcxporting countries with regard to the supply of oil and oil
products to South Arrica.

ÜIL EMBARGO A(iAINST Soun, AFRICA

The General Assembl_r,
Recalling and reajfim1111g its resolutions 36/172 G of 17
Decembcr 1981 and 3 7/69 J of 9 December 1982,
Recalling further the Paris Dcclaration on Sanctions
against South Africa, 80
Convinced of the nced to cnsure the effective implementation of embargoes imposed or policies dcclared by most
oil-producing and oil-exporting countries with regard to
the supply of their oil and oil products to South Africa,
and to secure a mandatory oil embargo against South
Africa under Chaptcr VII of thc Charter of the United
Nations.
Convinced further that such action has becomc imperative because of incrcasing repression and acts of aggrcssion
by South Africa.
Commending ali Governmcnts that have imposed an oil
embargo against South Africa,
Commending the Special Committee against Apartheid
for its efforts, in co-operation with Governments and
intergovernmental and 11011-governmental organizations.
to promote an effective oil embargo against South Africa.
Condemning thc activities of corporations and other
interests engaged in the clandestine supply to South Africa
of oil from countries which have imposed an oil embargo.
88 Olficia/ Record, of thc General .bsnnhl.1-. Thir11·-e1ghth Sesswn, Su¡>¡>lc
mcnt No. 36 (A/38116 and Corr. 1).

83rd plenary meeting
5 Dcccmhcr /983

K
Apartheid IN SPORTS
Fhe General . tsscmh/y.
llal'ing considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Drafting of an lnternational Convention against
. lpart hcid in Sports. 88
l. Authori:::es the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting
of an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports
to continue consultations, as required, with representatives
of Governments and organizations conccrned and experts
on apartheid in sports:

2. Requests thc Ad Hoc Committee to continue its
work with a view to submitting the draft Convention to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
83rd plenary meeting
5 Decemher 1983
