S/PV.7443

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7443rd meeting

Thursday, 14 May 2015, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Sixth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2015/298)
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169
(2014) (S/2015/305)

15-14086 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1514086*

S/PV.7443

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Sixth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013) (S/2015/298)
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014)
(S/2015/305)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, and Ms. Valerie Amos, and Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/298, which contains the sixth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), and to
document S/2015/305, which contains the third report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2169 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Since I arrived in Baghdad at the end
of March, I have endeavoured to meet as broad a range
of Iraq’s political, community and religious leaders
as possible, to hear their views on how Iraq and its
different components can overcome the challenges and
threats the country faces, and to set a steady course
towards unity, cooperation, reconciliation, stability and
development. While major differences of opinion and
approaches exist, there is a general consensus that in
order to successfully counter Iraq’s common enemy,
the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), unity and cooperation among all components of
the Iraq society are needed, and that the way forward is

2/8

14/05/2015

to accelerate the implementation of the Government’s
ministerial programme and the national political
agreement to start a process of national reconciliation.
The Iraqi security forces, together with the
Peshmerga, patriots of the popular mobilization
forces and Sunni tribal volunteers, supported by the
international coalition and countries of the region, are
making advances and liberating territory from ISIL. I
salute their bravery and commitment. They are saviours
of Iraq. However, ISIL is far from being defeated and
Government gains remain at times fragile. The ability
to liberate a city or a territory does not necessarily
mean an ability to hold it.
Vast areas of Iraq and millions of Iraqis remain
under the control and influence of ISIL, which
continues to perpetrate horrendous crimes and human
rights violations against the Iraqi people, in particular
women, children and minorities. ISIL recently added
to its crimes the barbaric destruction of Iraq’s cultural
and historical heritage in another attempt to destroy its
national identity. Many areas not under ISIL control,
including Baghdad, have been rocked by violence,
terrorist and sectarian. Particularly appalling is
violence against internally displaced persons (IDPs),
who are increasingly targeted and criminalized.
It is important that local fighters and authorities
be properly empowered to take their share of
responsibility for the liberation from ISIL and for
holding and governing their areas. The Government’s
efforts to provide the necessary financial and material
support to tribesmen and local authorities need to be
expedited. All of that, and notably military supplies and
assistance, must be coordinated with and sanctioned by
the respective authorities of the State. In that regard,
I welcome the recent establishment of a Government
committee to oversee the implementation of support.
I also welcome the determination of the Government
of Iraq to exert firm control over all elements taking
part in liberation operations across Iraq and to hold to
account those who have committed crimes, as indeed
some opportunistic and criminal elements continue
to engage in atrocities, revenge killings, looting,
expropriation and the destruction of property of the
local population and returning of IDPs. I applaud both
Prime Minister Al Abadi and His Eminence Grand
Ayatollah al-Sistani, who have taken a firm stance
against such transgressions.
In the majority of my meetings with Iraq’s political
representatives, I have heard one message — a military
15-14086

14/05/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

solution alone will not be enough to defeat ISIL. If any
military gains are to be sustainable, the Government
of Iraq must also restore the confidence of disaffected
communities that they will assume a share in governing
their own affairs and in the State’s ability to ensure
their protection from violence, deliver justice and
create conditions for their fair participation in society.
Until the majority of IDPs conclude that conditions for
the safe and sustainable return of civilians have been
created, such returns will not happen. And one of the
consequences might be the continuation of involuntary
demographic changes, including in the disputed
territories between Baghdad and Erbil.
As a priority, the Government needs to urgently
continue taking measures to restore civilian
responsibility for security and the rule of law in the
liberated areas. In addition, the Government needs, in
coordination with the local authorities, to restore public
services and rebuild basic infrastructure as soon as
possible so as to facilitate the return of the displaced.
Worryingly, however, Prime Minister Al Abadi has
underscored to me his Government’s great difficulties
in responding to these urgent stabilization needs, in
addition to meeting the massive humanitarian needs.
The Government faces serious constraints in terms of
funds and material for stabilization and rehabilitation.
The liberated areas are in urgent need of clearance from
explosive remnants of war. I hope in particular to see
the United Nations Mine Action Service return in force
to Iraq, and that cannot happen without donors’ support.
Withdrawing resources from other areas of the country
to meet these stabilization needs would put additional
pressure on the already heavily impacted areas from
the IDPs’ influx and beyond.
I strongly urge Security Council members and the
whole international community to support the Iraqi
Government’s efforts and to provide funding for the
multitude of needs. Despite being a middle-income
country, Iraq is temporarily unable to cope alone
with the challenges of the security and humanitarian
crisis and the stabilization and rehabilitation efforts.
Unfortunately, however critical the urgency of
continuous and massive support for Iraq may be, the
international community’s response has been grossly
insufficient, as if the existence of other old and new
crises were enough to excuse a waning attention to the
plight of Iraq and its people. Lack of support, however,
might eventually mar the existing opportunities to make
Iraq successful in its fight against terrorism and to make
it an example for other parts of the region and beyond,

S/PV.7443

contrary to some trends prevailing elsewhere. Without
such support, this fragile chance might disappear.
Political processes and national reconciliation
efforts are essential to overcoming the underlying
challenges facing Iraq and its unity, and to creating
sustainable solutions for the peaceful coexistence,
cooperation and development of Iraq’s diverse
components. As such, more vigorous and productive
efforts on the part of the Government and the political
forces to adopt priority legislation that will aid national
reconciliation efforts are needed. A draft amnesty law
is with the Prime Minister. Parliament is finalizing
legislation to restore balanced representation in Iraq’s
institutions. The national guard law is under discussion.
I urge Iraq’s political leaders to work together to find
consensus, while the Government and Parliament of
Iraq need to take the steps necessary to accelerate
the adoption and enactment of these laws. I therefore
welcome the extension of Parliament’s session.
These efforts towards political dialogue must also
be accompanied by efforts to promote reconciliation
at the community level. Religious leaders, scholars
and community, tribal and political leaders alike
must promote the principles of non-violence, religious
tolerance, inclusiveness and forgiveness, as well as
accountability for crimes committed. All of these
messages were echoed in my meetings with the
leadership of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. As the
implementation of the December 2014 joint agreement
on energy exports and revenue-sharing takes hold, so the
relations between both sides strengthen. Prime Minister
Al Abadi’s visit to Erbil on 6 April was a clear expression
of this goodwill to cooperate. I encourage both sides
to continue working together towards resolving open
issues and towards the enactment of the legislation that
will be necessary to secure the sustainable management
and fair distribution of Iraq’s natural resources. And
let us not forget that the Kurdistan Region of Iraq also
needs international support. Currently, it contributes in
a major way to the fight against ISIL and hosts over
1 million IDPs within its own estimated population of
above 5 million people.
Prime Minister Al Abadi’s determination to
strengthen Iraq’s regional ties with its regional partners
in mobilizing their support for Iraq and in the promotion
of a common regional approach to the regional and
global threat of ISIL has been received positively by
Iraq’s neighbours. During my recent visit to Kuwait and
Jordan, I heard a clear message that a united, peaceful

15-140863/8

S/PV.7443

The situation concerning Iraq

and stable Iraq would make for a stable and prosperous
region — a message of support for the Government of
Iraq and of readiness to coordinate closely with it in all
areas.
The unpredictable and unstable security situation
and violence continue to take a terrible toll on the men,
women and children of all Iraq’s communities. From
June last year until the end of April 2015, over 44,000
civilian casualties have been reported, including at
least 15,219 killed and 29,493 wounded. The United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) was
also affected when, on 26 April, a UNAMI national
staff member was abducted by unidentified gunmen in
Baquba, in Diyala governorate. The United Nations is
increasingly concerned by the lack of progress on this
issue, and strongly urges the respective authorities of
Iraq to ensure his swift release.
The humanitarian consequences of the conflict are
enormous. The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Valerie
Amos, will speak on this matter, and I fully support her
analysis and appeal, while commending the work of the
humanitarian community.
Allow me to turn to the sixth report of the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107
(2013) (S/2015/298), on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
and third-party persons and property. On 26 April, I
visited Kuwait on my first regional visit, and I had to
conclude that we run the risk that future generations will
continue to carry this burden unless progress is made
after so many years without tangible results, notably
on missing persons. The respective Iraqi authorities are
called upon to urgently take practical steps that will
move this caseload forward. UNAMI will continue to
assist.
With regard to the question of missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives, Iraq has
found and turned over some objects such as books and
artefacts belonging to Kuwait, a move that is sincerely
appreciated. However, the issue of the archives remains
one that is difficult to understand. Again, Government
commitment must be urgently translated into action.
To sum up, my first impressions after just several
weeks in Iraq are mixed, but with a positive perspective.
The complexities and complications are enormous, as
are the constraints and risks. Progress is slow, regardless
of a clear vision on the part of the Government and
the political resolve of the Prime Minister. The plight

4/8

14/05/2015

of Iraq and its people is unjustly and unjustifiably
overshadowed by other developments in the region,
at a time when more support is needed to counter and
degrade the terrorist group Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and to work for the unity of Iraq based on
balancing the rights and interests of its components. Yet
opportunities exist as well. Continuous, long-term and
adequate political, financial and material support for
Iraq, its Government and its people by the international
community, and notably by the countries of the region,
is needed to turn those opportunities into reality for the
benefit of Iraq, the region and beyond.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: I would like to compliment the political
report (S/2015/298) presented by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš, along with a more
specific report (S/2015/305) on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq.
Since my previous briefing to the Security Council,
in November 2014 (see S/PV.7314), the number of
Iraqis requiring humanitarian assistance has grown
to over 8.2 million people, an increase of 3 million
in 5 months. That includes the 2.8 million people
who have been internally displaced since the conflict
began in the Anbar governorate in January 2014. Half
of the displaced are children. All 18 governorates in
Iraq have been affected. Iraq also continues to host
approximately 250,000 refugees from Syria. Conflict,
targeted attacks on civilians and intimidation — often
along ethnic and sectarian lines — continue to plague
the country. New displacement continues unabated,
with the displacement of an estimated 120,000 people
from Ramadi last month, which is a stark example of
the fragile situation in Iraq.
As the duration and scale of the Iraq crisis increases,
so does its urgency. Families can no longer afford to
sustain themselves. The resources of host communities
have been drained. Public services and infrastructure
are overloaded. Poverty and unemployment have
increased, and the cost of living has soared. Newly
displaced families are finding it increasingly difficult
to find safe areas of the country where people can host
them in their time of need.
I am also extremely concerned about the wellbeing of the millions of Iraqis who live in areas outside
Government control, including under the control of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Next
15-14086

14/05/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

month will mark one year since the attack on Mosul
and the spread of ISIL in the country. Reports indicate
deteriorating conditions in those areas, including
diminishing access to clean water, medical care and
food. Most of those areas, however, remain largely out
of the reach of humanitarian organizations. People are
becoming more and more cut off from the rest of the
country, with reports that many are now not allowed to
freely leave those areas or to communicate with those
on the outside.
I have reported to the Council on many occasions
about the flagrant violations of human rights that
persist in conflict situations. Iraq is no different.
Women and girls continue to experience horrific acts of
sexual violence, physical abuse and enslavement. Many
of the estimated 1,500 women and children who were
abducted by ISIL last year remain under the group’s
control. The few women and girls who managed to
escape in the past few months tell appalling stories of
systematic rape, physical abuse, forced marriage and
human trafficking. Communities have welcomed those
women and girls upon their return, but are struggling to
cope with the magnitude of suffering that their mothers,
sisters and daughters have endured.
An entire generation of Iraqi children has been
put at risk by the conflict. They have been forcibly
recruited into armed groups, used as suicide bombers
and exposed to profound levels of violence, which will
affect them for the rest of their lives.
I am also concerned by reports that other parties to
the conflict are violating international law. Restrictions
on the freedom of movement of civilians by security
forces and armed groups are growing worse, thereby
limiting the ability of civilians to flee conflict and
enter safer territory or to return home after areas have
been retaken. In April, security or civilian authorities
in seven governorates restricted the entry of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) fleeing conflict in Ramadi.
Those acts are fuelling tensions between communities
and deepening fissures that will require significant
mediation over time to overcome.
The crisis in Iraq has also had a significant
impact on the availability of basic services, food and
shelter. Nearly 7 million people — or 20 per cent of
the population — are unable to access essential health
services and water and sanitation services due to the
conflict. At least half of them are estimated to be
women, and 18 per cent are children under the age of 5.
Dozens of hospitals and pharmacies have been damaged

S/PV.7443

or are closed. The Fallujah General Hospital has been
damaged over 30 times. Maternal and neonatal services
are nearly non-existent in the worst-hit areas. Water
and sanitation needs are particularly acute in non-camp
situations, where over 90 per cent of IDPs live. The risk
of disease due to poor sanitation and limited access
to health services is a major concern, particularly as
cholera is endemic and measles is present.
Food insecurity has increased by 60 per cent in six
months; 4.4 million people now require food assistance.
The Government’s public food distribution system is
operating, but the coverage is uneven. Reduced planting
and limited access to agricultural areas still under ISIL
control means that the prospects for future harvests are
bleak.
Over 1 million displaced Iraqis need shelter,
particularly in the central and southern areas of the
country, with more than 28 per cent of all IDPs living
in public institutions, including schools and mosques,
and some in unsafe buildings.
The United Nations and its partners have continued
to further scale up their operations to respond to needs.
Nearly 1 million displaced people have been provided
with non-food items, such as blankets, plastic sheeting
and jerry cans. Some 368,000 people have received
help with shelter, including though the 30 camps built
by the Government, the United Nations and other
partners since July 2014. Another 13 camps are under
construction.
On 7 April, Iraq celebrated one year of being poliofree. The United Nations continues to support the
Iraq Ministry of Health in maintaining its polio-free
status through regular vaccination campaigns targeting
over 5 million children under the age five. The United
Nations is also 3 million people through the provision
of essential drugs and medical equipment.
Despite that support, we face immense challenges
in providing assistance in Iraq. Access remains a key
challenge. On 28 April, the Iraqi Government sent
a request to the United Nations asking for urgent
humanitarian assistance to be sent to areas in Haditha
district, in the Anbar governorate, which is cut off
by ISIL forces. People are short of food, water and
medicines. Due to insecurity, a United Nations convoy
meant to has not been able to reach the 26,400 people
trapped in the area.
We are working to expand humanitarian access,
and now have a team of access and negotiation experts

15-140865/8

S/PV.7443

The situation concerning Iraq

on the ground. With the support of key Member States
and other influential actors inside and outside Iraq, we
hope to increase our reach to those areas.
Other challenges are emerging in areas of return.
Those who wish to return home are afraid for their
safety, so the number of returnees remains limited.
Ongoing security operations, the widespread presence
of improvised explosive devices and the lack of public
services have also dissuaded return. Returns must
continue to be voluntary, when conditions are right.
Funding shortfalls are also restricting our ability to
scale up even further. Increasing needs have exhausted
the generous contributions to last year’s appeal. This
year, only 11 per cent of the $1.2 billion required for the
year has been received. Last week, health services in the
Arbat IDP camp in Sulaimaniyah were interrupted due
to alack of funding. In April, food distributions were
scaled back in the Dohuk governorate — the area with
the highest number of IDPs — to half-rations for those
living outside of the camps. The food pipeline is due
to break fully in June. A new humanitarian response
plan will be released in Brussels on 4 June, and I hope
donors will give generously.
The humanitarian outlook in Iraq remains deeply
worrying. The number of people in need of assistance
has grown seven-fold in just under a year. This number
is likely to increase further before the end of the year
as the conflict continues and as fear of sectarianmotivated retaliation spreads through newly accessible
areas. We must do more to protect Iraqi civilians from
these rising levels of violence. We must work to expand
the assistance provided to affected people in all parts
of the country.
Addressing the humanitarian needs in Iraq requires
collective action. However, humanitarian assistance
alone will not bring about a solution to the crisis in
Iraq. The ongoing political and security conflicts must
be resolved in order to end the displacement and the
suffering of one quarter of the country’s people.
The President: I thank Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by congratulating Lithuania on its accession to
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
on its sterling work in that role so far. We pay tribute
to the Jordanian delegation for its skilful efforts in
leading the Council last month. We welcome Mr. Ján

6/8

14/05/2015

Kubiš, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, and thank him for his first briefing. We would also
like to thank Ms. Amos for her very touching briefing.
Iraq is facing unprecedented challenges, be they
in relation to terrorism or other crimes. Addressing
those challenges requires collective efforts by the
international community. We have to step up and
strengthen coordination. As the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari said during his most
recent visit in New York:
“We are faced with a problem of terrorism, which is
a multinational problem. We are not facing an IraqiIraqi problem, or even an Iraqi-Arab problem — we
are facing a globalized problem. All States of the
world, regardless of the continent where they find
themselves, have had citizens come to Iraq. Indeed,
there are terrorists from 62 different other countries
present in Iraq right now.”
We welcome the international support given to
Iraq through resolutions on the fight against terrorism,
especially from the Security Council, including
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2199 (2015). However, these
resolutions have not been fully implemented by all
Member States and, despite the efforts undertaken by
Iraq and its partners at the international level to fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
and despite the rout of thousands of its soldiers, the
flow of terrorist fighters continues. I ask the Security
Council to reiterate the need for all Member States
to respect the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2178 (2014), which
calls upon all States to take the necessary measures at
the national level to put an end to this flow of foreign
fighters, including those attempting to join ISIL in
Iraq and Syria, as well as other groups and entities
associated with it.
We would like to reiterate the fact that the fight
against terrorism can take place only through a
comprehensive, regular and serious approach aimed at
facing up to the terrorist threat, isolating it, neutralizing
it, choking it off — in which all Member States would
participate, especially our neighbours. Whether it is
in Iraq or Syria, we have to prevent the proliferation
and spread of terrorism to other States. It is simply
unrealistic to hope to destroy ISIL in Iraq alone.
ISIL today still possesses freedom of movement
in Syria, which is clear from what has happened over

15-14086

14/05/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

the last couple of years. The Iraq position remains
unchanged when it comes to the need to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Syria and to fight ISIL and
affiliated groups, including those associated with
Al-Qaida, if we are to see a return to peace, security
and stability in both States.
While Iraq has been facing ISIL’s terrorism,
savagery and violence within its borders, it has also
been confronted with a humanitarian catastrophe as a
result of the capture of Iraqi cities by terrorists. This
situation has led to major flows of civilian exiles from
their homes to safer regions. Close to 2 million Iraqis
have been displaced and are suffering immensely. In
that regard, I would like to recall that, last August,
the United Nations declared the situation in Iraq a
level-3 emergency, the highest level when it comes to
emergencies. The situation since then has continued
to deteriorate and it is now an extremely heavy burden
for the Iraqi Government and the United Nations active
in Iraq to bear, working as they are to contain the
constantly worsening humanitarian crisis.
This situation will only increase the threats and
dangers throughout the different regions in Iraq. The
Iraqi Government is working to come up with a plan
that would tackle the humanitarian dimensions of the
problem and set up aid, sanitation, water provision,
medical and psychological care for the benefit of local
communities. Yet despite the significant response
from the international community, both financially
and logistically — assistance we have enjoyed from an
number of countries — the level of the emergency and
our inability to forecast what the situation in Iraq will be,
compounded by the problem of access to humanitarian
assistance to regions under ISIL’s control, leaves us
with very few choices in dealing with the crisis.
The cities and regions that are welcoming the
displaced in Iraq are now suffering from a great deal
of tension — tension that transcends their ability
to tackle the problems. All this does is increase the
pressure on the Iraq Government, which finds itself
unable to adequately respond to cover all the needs.
The only solution to the human tragedy of the millions
of displaced people is to liberate the cities from ISIL
control as rapidly as possible. One also has to guarantee
a safe return for displaced persons to their homes and
ensure that they are rebuilt. We ask the international
community and our partners in the fight against
terrorism to mobilize resources and step up efforts

S/PV.7443

to increase international assistance with a view to
stopping international terrorism today.
ISIL’s crimes against Iraqi civilians were referred
to in the report of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights published on 28 March 2015 as crimes against
humanity, war crimes and even crimes of genocide.
Those crimes have been directed against all sectors
of Iraqi society: Kurds, Arabs, Sunnis, Shiites and all
others. That savage organization has destroyed and
pillaged the Iraqi cultural heritage, an integral part of the
global cultural heritage, in a very organized, deliberate
way. It has targeted cultural and religious sites, libraries
and museums to simply cleanse the country of its
cultural diversity and to finance its activities. It intends
to destroy cultural diversity and the collective memory
of Iraq and to destabilize social harmony by threatening
the diversity of the country’s cultural identity, thereby
hindering the Iraqi Government’s efforts to restore
stability, national reconciliation and understanding.
To confront that challenge, we are working in
partnership with the German federal Government
and UNESCO to draft and adopt a new General
Assembly resolution that would complement Security
Council resolution 2199 (2015) and reiterate the need
for Member States to preserve Iraqi historical assets
and civilizational heritage as part of the civilizational
heritage of humankind. The destruction of cultural
heritage is a crime that cannot go unpunished. We call
on all Member States to support the draft resolution
when it comes before the General Assembly.
Destroying Daesh is a primary and essential
objective. We must succeed, and not only for reasons
of security and stability along our borders or indeed
for the preservation of the territorial integrity of the
State or a number of States faced with the danger that
entity represents. This is not solely about confronting
the savage acts and crimes of a terrorist organization
that seeks to foment chaos and destruction in the States
where it is active. Our struggle also about achieving
what is in essence a humanitarian objective and
addressing the problem of millions of impoverished
civilians. We are facing a humanitarian disaster; we
must protect civilians, end the cycle of destruction, and
meet the fundamental basic needs of displaced persons,
especially children and women. We must also protect
religious sites and preserve our millennial intellectual
diversity.

15-140867/8

S/PV.7443

The situation concerning Iraq

Faced with those challenges, my Government is
working at the local level, in particular to safeguard
the democratic achievements enshrined in our
Constitution. We hope to accelerate the adoption of
laws on generalized amnesty, the establishment of
a national guard, and the federal high court, and to
forge an agreement with the federal Government of the
Kurdistan Region to foster national reconciliation and
maintain national interests.
In the same framework, my Government is working
to promote relations with neighbouring States. There
has been progress and positive developments in our
relations with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
has announced that it will soon send an Ambassador
to Baghdad. In addition, we thank the State of Kuwait
for its announced cancellation or delay of our debt
repayment. Those actions clearly highlight the success
of Iraq’s efforts to restore friendly relations with our
neighbours. The Iraqi Government also has a legal and
humanitarian commitment to working to resolve issues
related to the disappeared and to the archives. We are
exploiting modern technology to accelerate the process
related to the Kuwaiti disappeared.

8/8

14/05/2015

Finally, Iraq is facing immense security challenges
and economic conditions that it will not be able to
tackle alone. We welcome and thank our international
and regional partners for their role and the United
Nations for its efforts, particularly through its Mission
in Iraq, in providing assistance and advice to the
Iraqi Government. We pay tribute to the courage they
have shown in their ongoing work and the provision
of humanitarian assistance in extremely difficult
conditions in our country. We wish Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, every possible success in his endeavours. We
reiterate the Iraqi Government’s readiness to lend its
assistance to all his efforts and to the country team to
ensure success.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.

15-14086
